




















































Hansard: December 07, 2011


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 3A  WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 7, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 65 

 December 7, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce to you, and through 

you to the rest of the Assembly, three individuals that are seated 

in your gallery. First of all, Cindy Seidl who is the manager of 

nursing for Saskatchewan air ambulance, as well as Chris 

Oleson who is the executive director of air services with 

Government Services, and Ron Dufresne who is medical 

service consultant with the Ministry of Health. 

 

These three are in the gallery today, and I won’t go into the 

details because they’re going to hear for about 90 seconds the 

details of the air ambulance service in Saskatchewan and the 

great work that it has performed in the province for many, 

many years. 

 

And we’ll hear more about that in a little bit, but I’d like all 

members of the Assembly please to join me in welcoming these 

three guests to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I would 

like to introduce a campaign team that is second to none, 

despite what my colleagues say. My mom, Marian Froess, 

whose life was forever changed when I, her first-born, arrived 

on the scene followed two hours later by my twin. She enjoyed 

children so much she went on to have eight more. My campaign 

manager, Allan Jurgens. Allan is my husband of 37 years, the 

father of our adult children, father-in-law to our 

daughter-in-law, and grandfather to a very special 

granddaughter who is two years old. 

 

My e-day [election day] and e-week [election week] Chair, 

Troy Metz, the precision and organization that he brought to 

our strategic plan is second to none. My volunteer Chair, door 

knocking Chair, and president of Northcote constituency, Alana 

Ross, we met just under two years ago and yet it seems like 

we’ve known each other forever. 

 

Ladies and gentlemen, this is the core of my campaign team, a 

team that had so much fun together. It often felt like a party, not 

a battle. Please join me in welcoming them to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Post-Secondary 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce 58 grade 7 students from the Greystone Heights 

School right in the heart of the Saskatoon Greystone riding. 

They’re accompanied today by three teachers, Deanna Fast, 

Jason Kimberley, and Ian Barss, as well as a couple of 

chaperones, Rhea Moat and Barb Philips. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m delighted that the students, their teachers, and 

chaperones are here to observe the proceedings today in their 

Assembly. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that they’ll have plenty 

of questions afterwards because we know there are a number of 

young leaders representing countries from right around the 

world that are increasingly important to our population here in 

Saskatchewan. And so I ask all members to join me in 

welcoming these students from Saskatoon Greystone School to 

their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I ask permission for an 

extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Cypress Hills has asked for 

leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. The member for Cypress Hills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure today to introduce a number of very special guests 

who are visiting us at their legislature. First I would like to 

introduce Mr. Paul Heppelle, the president of the Assemblée 

communautaire fransaskoise, known as the ACF. Mr. Heppelle 

is a true leader within our province’s francophone community 

and is an individual who has worked tirelessly to build and 

strengthen French language and French culture in 

Saskatchewan. And for that, I thank him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s also my pleasure to introduce to all members 

of the Legislative Assembly Madame Sylvie Fletcher and Lynn 

Grégoire and their classes from Monseigneur de Laval, and 

Madame Heather Leask and her students from École Massey. 

Would you give us an indication of where you are? There we 

go. 

 

These students are here today to help us make a very special 

announcement celebrating francophone culture and all that our 

Fransaskois contribute to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Charles-Henri Warren. He is the 

executive director of the francophone affairs branch, has joined 

us in the gallery today. Mr. Speaker, I would like to invite all 

members of the Legislative Assembly to join with me in 

welcoming these fine people to their legislature. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Merci, monsieur le Président. [Translation: 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker.] 

 

I want to join with the member opposite in welcoming the 

representatives from the Assemblée communautaire 



66 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2011 

fransaskoise to their Legislative Assembly, in particular 

President Heppelle; Executive Director Denis Simard, et tous 

les fransaskois et fransaskoises à l’assemblée législative. 

[Translation: and all the Fransaskois and Fransaskoises to the 

Legislative Assembly.] 

 

As well to join with welcoming the students from Monseigneur 

de Laval et École Massey aussi, monsieur le Président. 

[Translation: and Massey School too, Mr. Speaker.] 

 

This is a very special year for the ACF and for the province of 

Saskatchewan. That 100 years of working for francophone 

community, for the Fransaskois, I think Florent Bilodeau put in 

possibly . . . I’m not sure if it was 100 years exactly of those 

years, but certainly there have been a lot of people that worked 

very hard over the years to not just reinforce the French fact in 

Saskatchewan but to expand and to build on the tremendous 

pride and strength that this community has and which it brings 

to this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s an exemplar of what is our provincial motto, “from many 

peoples, strength.” And that strength and the pride we draw 

from the Fransaskois is certainly something that we in the 

official opposition congratulate you on, and we certainly join in 

the celebrations for the year to come. So bienvenue, 

félicitations, et bonne fête. [Translation: welcome, 

congratulations, and happy birthday.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for First Nations and 

Métis Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It is indeed a pleasure to introduce to you and through 

to all members of the legislature a couple of individuals that 

participated in a very exciting announcement this morning, 

John Graham and Ken Wood. If you would give us a wave, 

gentlemen. 

 

Now John comes to us from Toronto. He is the president of On 

Ice Management Group, but he’s been in Saskatchewan so 

much that the Premier and I have talked about making him an 

honorary Saskatchewanian. I think that’s something that he 

would enjoy. But John announced this morning that the 

Edmonton Oilers and the New York Islanders will be coming to 

play in Regina in September of 2012. John is someone who 

understands Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan story and has 

had the opportunity to tell that story to the NHL [National 

Hockey League] board of governors. So John, we’d like to 

thank you for all the work that you’re doing. 

 

Joining him here is no stranger to Saskatchewan residents, Ken 

Wood, who is the former general manager of Credit Union 

Centre in Saskatoon, and he is helping On Ice Management 

Group as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if we could welcome Ken to his Legislative 

Assembly and John, a big thank you for all the work that he’s 

doing bringing the NHL to Saskatchewan. And he is noticing 

first-hand what’s happening in Saskatchewan. Population is 

increasing. Young people are prevalent. They’re everywhere, 

and we welcome that. And I bet there’s a few hockey fans, 

John, that are just passing across your path as we speak. Mr. 

Speaker. Gentlemen. 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

International Day of Persons with Disabilities 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Merci, monsieur le Président. [Translation: 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker.] 

 

On the 3rd of December, Saskatchewan joined with peoples and 

governments across Canada and the world to observe 

International Day of Persons with Disabilities. This important 

day helps raise the visibility of people with disabilities in our 

communities and promotes a better understanding of disability 

issues among all Saskatchewan people. 

 

Our government looks forward to continuing to work with our 

partners in the disability community to ensure the rights of 

people with disabilities and help integrate people with 

disabilities into every aspect of the social, political, economic, 

and cultural life of our province. 

 

The theme for this year’s observance, chosen by the United 

Nations, was “Together for a better world for all.” The 2011 

theme resonates very well in Saskatchewan with the ongoing 

development of the Saskatchewan assured income for 

disability, or SAID program. Mr. Speaker, SAID has been a 

truly collaborative process between the disability community 

and government from day one. This new, dignified, and 

separate income support program will potentially benefit up to 

10,000 people with disabilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like this Assembly to join me in 

recognizing the hard-working people in this province who do 

their part in aiding those in our communities who are not quite 

as fortunate. Merci. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Awards for Teaching Excellence 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is blessed 

by exceptional teachers. Four of them were recent recipients of 

the 2011 Prime Minister’s Awards for Teaching Excellence. It 

is my honour to recognize them provincially. 

 

Certificates of Achievement were received by Mr. Randy 

McLeod of Campbell Collegiate in Regina, Mr. Dean 

Vendramin of O’Neill High School in Regina, and Ms. Rhonda 

Exner of Canora’s Junior Elementary School. 

 

One Saskatchewan educator was awarded the prestigious 

Certificate of Excellence. The recipient was Madame Joanna 

Sanders Bobiash of Wilfred Walker School in Regina. Madame 

Sanders Bobiash utilizes technology to deliver innovative 

education in her classroom, and it is reported that students are 

not only engaged but that they’re thriving. She finds resourceful 

ways to incorporate blogging, Skyping, webquesting, and 

Googling into her lessons. It is my understanding that students 

have become extremely resourceful, critical thinkers, confident 

presenters, and creative artists. And it is argued that they are not 



December 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 67 

only just ready for high school, but for the world itself. 

 

These educators are but an example of the leadership and 

excellence provided by Saskatchewan’s educators. I ask all 

members of this Assembly to join with me in extending our 

thanks and recognition to these exceptional educators and 

deserving award recipients. And to all Saskatchewan’s teachers 

I simply say, your province is proud and thankful. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Community Initiative Reaches Semifinals 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I take this 

opportunity to highlight to this Assembly and the people of 

Saskatchewan a great Yorkton-based community initiative that 

is currently in the semifinal voting stage of the 2011 Aviva 

Community Fund competition sponsored by Aviva Insurance. 

 

Yorkton’s Aviva idea, a downtown skateboard plaza and 

walking park, is one of the few left in the competition of over 

900 applicants Canada wide. This competition aims to help 

make a positive impact in Canadian communities by funding 

$150,000 to local and national initiatives for change. 

 

The rationale for the Brodie Avenue Redevelopment Project 

came about as the city of Yorkton attempted to rebuild its 

worst-impacted areas after the disastrous flooding that occurred 

last year. The proposal being put forth aims to redevelop some 

previously flooded land into a flood water catch basin that 

doubles as a multi-use recreational park, including green space, 

bike and walking trails, and a permanent concrete skate park. 

 

The proposal has been spearheaded by Yorkton businessman 

Dave Nussbaumer and local youth, Tucker Chornomud and 

Nathan Grayston. It is graciously endorsed and supported by 

the mayor of Yorkton, James Wilson; the NHL’s Jarret Stoll; 

Olympic gold medal curler Joan McCusker; Alberta MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] and two-time Mount 

Everest summiteer Dave Rodney; as well as the Premier of this 

province and myself. 

 

I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in thanking these 

individuals for their dedication to this cause, and ask the people 

to cast their vote to this project at avivacommunityfund.org. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

New Women’s Clothing Store Opens in Regina 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, today I rise to recognize Nicolette 

Yeung, a Saskatchewan small-business owner. She’s no 

stranger to this building’s rotunda or the press gallery. Nicolette 

worked for us as a communications staff member and, luckily 

for me, she’s also a constituent of Regina Lakeview. 

 

A few months back, Nicolette informed us that she would be 

leaving to pursue her dream of opening her own business, a 

clothing store in Regina. A university of McGill political 

science graduate, Nicolette worked passionately here in the 

legislature. However she has chosen a different course for her 

life, and we couldn’t be happier for her. As Nicolette says, she 

always preferred stilettos to hiking boots. 

 

After graduating from McGill University, Nicolette lived in 

New York City and worked for Marc Jacobs collection. It was 

during her time in New York that she observed and learned to 

appreciate many different interpretations of style. Her store, 

named Nico, opened on October 1st, 2011 in the heart of 

downtown Regina in the old city hall mall. Nico offers 

contemporary women’s clothing, footwear, and accessories 

with a focus on Canadian, American, and French designers. The 

store offers seasonal must-have items and classic accessories 

pieces for women. 

 

I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 

accomplishments of this Saskatchewan businesswoman. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Air Ambulance Service Celebrates Anniversary 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. December 7th marks 

the anniversary of the world’s oldest non-military air medical 

transport program, the Saskatchewan air ambulance. 

Saskatchewan’s air ambulance service, or Lifeguard, as it is 

known, was established in 1946 and has provided exceptional 

service to the province for 65 years. 

 

Lifeguard, which operates out of Saskatoon’s John G. 

Diefenbaker International Airport, provides 24-hour service and 

can be dispatched to an emergency within 30 minutes. 

Lifeguard’s dedicated staff provides emergency transport 

services to thousands of patients and saves many lives. The 

exceptional air ambulance medical crew that regularly staff 

Lifeguard are supported by a specialty team of physicians, 

respiratory therapists, neonatal and pediatric nurses which are 

available, if required, to the patient en route. 

 

The Saskatchewan air ambulance program is a vital part of our 

province’s health care system, helping to respond to the 

medical needs of the province’s rural and northern 

communities. The air ambulance fleet conducts almost 2,000 

flights per year, both within and outside of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that the air ambulance staff members 

are able to join us in the gallery today. It takes special people, 

great dedication, and teamwork to provide this type of service, 

and we sincerely thank these representatives and all staff at 

Lifeguard and their partners for their contributions to the people 

of this province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 

 

2012 Year of the Fransaskois 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today I 

had the pleasure of officially proclaiming the year 2012 as the 

Year of the Fransaskois, and I must say it was enthusiastically 

welcomed, Mr. Speaker. This is an important opportunity to 

recognize the historic and social importance the francophone 



68 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2011 

community has played in shaping Saskatchewan’s identity. 

 

The history of the Fransaskois is rich with challenges and 

successes. It’s a story of a proud and vibrant community that 

built itself a place in the history of our province and at the same 

time a place in the province’s future. 

 

The year 2012 also marks the centennial of the Assemblée 

communautaire fransaskoise, Saskatchewan’s principal 

francophone organization. Today more than 16,000 

francophones still use French and more than 50,000 residents of 

Saskatchewan are able to communicate in French. Our 

government wants to highlight the ongoing efforts of the 

francophone community towards the preservation of its 

heritage, culture, and language, contributing to Saskatchewan’s 

well-being and growth. We want to continue to strengthen and 

effectively participate in the relationship with the community 

that promotes the Fransaskois throughout Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are proud to have diversity in our province and 

want to continue to ensure it lives on through generations to 

come. I would ask that all members join me in the upcoming 

year to help celebrate this very important proclamation. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Saskatchewan’s Small Businesses Strong 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to inform the Assembly of the November CFIB 

[Canadian Federation of Independent Business] business 

barometer released today, indicating another strong economic 

forecast for the province. 

 

Titled “Saskatchewan’s small-business owners heading into 

holiday season in upbeat mood, most optimistic in Canada,” the 

report reveals optimism for the year ahead among 

small-business owners in Saskatchewan, which has improved 

month to month and currently sits at an index of 74.2 — 10.5 

points ahead of the national index. Sixty-two per cent of 

Saskatchewan’s small-business owners also rated their overall 

state of business as good — again the highest in Canada, 

compared to 41 per cent nationally. 

 

One of many provincial highlights of note is 18 per cent of 

Saskatchewan businesses plan to increase full-time employment 

in the next three to four months. The number is 14 per cent 

nationally. These stats indicate that Saskatchewan’s small 

businesses are taking full advantage of our province’s vibrant 

and growing economy. 

 

I ask that all members of this Assembly join me in recognizing 

the hard work of Saskatchewan’s small businesses and their 

overall importance to economic prosperity. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

 

Provision of Surgical Care 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here’s what we know 

about the minister’s chosen path of for-profit surgical clinics: 

the medical director for the Surgical Centres Inc., the new 

private surgery centre in Saskatchewan, has resigned. There’s a 

lawsuit launched by Omni Surgery Centre over the RFP 

[request for proposal] and the awarding of the new contract to 

Surgical Centres Inc. This lawsuit could possibly cost the 

people of Saskatchewan over $10 million, dollars that are 

vitally important to Saskatchewan’s health care system. My 

question to the minister: how many surgeries could be 

performed in the public system with $10 million? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what we know 

about surgical wait times in Saskatchewan: four years ago — 

2006, early 2007 — the longest wait-lists in Canada under the 

former NDP [New Democratic Party] government, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what we know about wait-lists in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

What we have been working on over the last four years under 

the surgical care initiative is to reduce those longest waiters, 

Mr. Speaker. And I think we’ve done not a bad work, Mr. 

Speaker, but we’ve got more work to do. I will tell you that 

third party deliverers, Mr. Speaker, in this province, have 

performed over 1,600 surgeries, Mr. Speaker. That’s a 

complement to the surgeries that are done in the public system. 

It’s not an either-or, Mr. Speaker, it’s a combination of all the 

capacities properly utilized in the province to see the surgical 

wait times come down. Certainly a far cry from what would 

have ever happened under the NDP where they let people 

languish on long waiting lists. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people want to 

know that their health care dollars are being spent wisely. 

They’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, how this minister has bungled his 

approach with the for-profit surgical clinics as evidenced, Mr. 

Speaker, by the lawsuit that is now under way. There’s 

legitimate concern, Mr. Speaker, that the minister’s approach is 

having an adverse effect on the public health care system in the 

province. My question to the minister: will he recognize that his 

approach for for-profit clinics is hurting the public health care 

system in the province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, over the last four years 

of this Sask Party government under the leadership of the 

Premier, we have seen an increase in health care professionals 

right across the piece — 800 nurses promised; 900 nurses 

delivered, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen an increase in the number of 

physicians in this province by over 200. We’ve seen an increase 

in the medical seats by up to 100; increase in residency 

positions to 120, Mr. Speaker. And what that has done to the 

surgical wait times in Saskatchewan: 99 per cent of all surgeries 



December 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 69 

are done within 18 months here in the province; 96 per cent are 

done within 12 months; and 76 per cent are done within three 

months, Mr. Speaker. A far cry from what we ever saw under 

the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we know that the minister’s 

preference for for-profit surgical clinics is taking resources, 

draining resources from the public system. This makes life 

more difficult for the physicians practising in the public system. 

And it also, Mr. Speaker, hurts patient care in the public 

system. 

 

Recently there was a, quote, extraordinary meeting of the 

Regina Qu’Appelle Regional Medical Association. The topic of 

the meeting, Mr. Speaker, was to discuss problems in the 

operating rooms in Regina. 

 

My question to the minister: will he admit that his preference 

for for-profit, private surgical centres is hurting the public 

health care system for surgery delivery here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve looked at the 

whole surgical stream. We had an expert group from around the 

province, Mr. Speaker, made up of all the health care 

professionals, that looked at our surgical care initiative and put 

together a game plan for us to reach a very aggressive goal: no 

one should wait longer than three months by the year 2014. The 

most aggressive goal of any province in Canada, Mr. Speaker, 

from a government that isn’t scared to set targets — what that 

opposition, when they were in government, never would do, 

Mr. Speaker. We’re setting targets, and we’re working hard to 

get to those targets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is third party delivery within the health care 

system in a number of areas, Mr. Speaker. In fact I think it was 

the NDP that put in third party delivery for laboratory results 

and X-rays, Mr. Speaker. But for some reason, it’s okay if the 

NDP introduce it, but if any other party does it, there’s some 

sort of problem with that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the information that we have been 

provided is that the extraordinary meeting of the regional 

medical association was to discuss physicians’ concerns about 

the operating room here in Regina, concerns, Mr. Speaker, 

about limitations on O.R. [operating room] time because of 

budgetary clawbacks. These physicians, Mr. Speaker, are also 

concerned that procedures, surgeries normally done in the 

public system, Mr. Speaker, are being redirected, channelled to 

the private, for-profit surgical clinics. 

 

My question to the minister: will he admit that his preference 

for for-profit surgical clinics is putting ideology first and 

patients last? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that 

patients across this province are certainly thankful that we have 

a third option. Another option, Mr. Speaker, not only the public 

system but a private system. No paying out of pocket, no 

queue-jumping, Mr. Speaker. I’d ask the member opposite to go 

visit 1,600 people that visited those private clinics in the last 

year or so and see whether they were too upset to have the 

surgery done within a third party. People want access to care. 

That was identified in the Patient First Review, Mr. Speaker, 

and our government is moving on it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he wants to talk ideology. Maybe he should go 

back to the 1970s under the NDP when they would never look 

at third party delivery within a public system. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Support for Northern Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party’s 

opinion on northern Saskatchewan is pretty clear from 

Monday’s Throne Speech. The only mention of the North in the 

speech was about northern drug and gang unit, which was first 

announced in September of 2009. 

 

To the minister: why does the Sask Party have nothing else to 

say about the North other than an announcement it made two 

years ago? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for First Nations and 

Métis affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Indeed northern Saskatchewan continues to play an 

important part in this government’s priorities as far as the 

economy goes, as far as job creation goes. Northern 

Saskatchewan provides us with many opportunities, and we 

continue to support them in each and every way. This past 

budget was an historic occasion, Mr. Speaker, when $167 

million was dedicated to First Nations and Métis individuals, 

many of whom live in northern Saskatchewan. This government 

is very proud of our record in northern Saskatchewan and with 

First Nations and Métis people across the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, poverty is a big problem in 

northern Saskatchewan. Northern Saskatchewan is one of five 

of the poorest regions in all of Canada. 

 

To the minister: is the level of poverty acceptable to the Sask 

Party government, and if not, then what will their plan be? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for First Nations and 

Métis affairs.  

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, poverty is not 

acceptable to this government anywhere in our province. 

Certainly it’s a priority for us to address poverty and to address 

issues and do it through ensuring that we have the fastest 

growing economy in the country, ensuring that royalty revenues 

are shared amongst all people in Saskatchewan so they can be 

used to increase their quality of life. Mr. Speaker, that’s what 



70 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2011 

this government has done. This is what this government will do 

for the long-term. And what we say today in the House will be 

true in the future as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the housing needs in northern 

Saskatchewan are especially great. Far too many families live 

in homes that are overcrowded and in such poor condition. Our 

young people are losing hope. The youth talk about the boom 

and they hear about it, but in northern Saskatchewan our leaders 

are trying to fight and come up with plans how to address some 

of the issues. But they need help of a government. The 

government has an opportunity to treat all Saskatchewan 

residents equal to make sure that we are a part of the boom. 

 

To the minister: what will it take for the Sask Party to make the 

unique needs of northern Saskatchewan a priority? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

to the members opposite, thank you for that question because 

northern residents are a very important part of our mandate 

when it comes to housing and going forward as a province. 

 

We have invested, since November of 2007, over $21 million 

for 205 new or rejuvenated homes in northern Saskatchewan. 

We know that that’s very important and there’s more work to 

be done. We’ve also spent $3 million to help 226 low-income 

homeowners rejuvenate their homes as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we own at Sask Housing over 1,400 social . . . 

affordable housing in the North. We know there’s more work to 

be done, and I’ll be the first one to admit, as my government 

does, there’s more work to be done. But working with partners 

in the North, like the mayors and the people in the friendship 

centre, is an important part of our job. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

First Nations and Métis Issues 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We’ll 

return to the Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations for a 

question of the Throne Speech. In the Throne Speech, the First 

Nations and Métis people and First Nations and Métis issues 

rated three scant lines. Why is it that the First Nations and 

Métis issues received such scant mention in the Throne Speech? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for First Nations and 

Métis affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, make no mistake 

about it, First Nations and Métis individuals rate as a high 

priority with this government and continue to do so. They did 

so, as I mentioned earlier in an earlier question, with $167 

million, an 8.5 year over year per cent increase to ensure that 

their quality of life increases. Mr. Speaker, yes indeed, First 

Nations and Métis were mentioned in the Throne Speech. They 

continue to be a priority. 

 

Last May we had bilateral meetings with First Nations and 

Métis individuals. At that time, FSIN [Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations] Chief Guy Lonechild said that 

relationships have never been better between First Nations 

individuals and this Government of Saskatchewan. We’re proud 

of that. That’s the way it’s going to continue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Very interesting, Mr. Speaker, that when 

upwards of 1,000 First Nations people showed up at their 

legislature this fall, the minister sent his chief of staff out to 

greet the people who came to see him.  

 

But I guess here’s something of the reality in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. About 45 per cent of all First Nations and Métis 

children in our province live in poverty. About 44 per cent of 

First Nations and Métis young people aged 20 to 24 have not 

completed high school. The Métis unemployment rate is 200 

per cent higher than the non-Aboriginal unemployment rate, 

and the First Nations unemployment rate is 527 per cent higher. 

 

The challenges are huge, yet First Nations and Métis people 

warranted only a passing mention by this government in the 

Throne Speech. Is this status quo acceptable to this government 

or have they got a plan that they’re simply not telling us about? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for First 

Nations and Métis affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, what Professor Eric 

Howe says in his paper and his review of child welfare in 

Saskatchewan about the economic opportunities, he says that 

we have a significant economic challenge in this province. 

Indeed we do. But he also says we have the greatest economic 

opportunity, and that’s the way this government approaches it. 

 

Yes we have, yes we have challenges ahead of us. Yes we have 

a gap that we have to decrease. That’s why this government is 

focusing on education, on child welfare review, Mr. Speaker. 

And it is working, Mr. Speaker. Off-reserve Aboriginal 

employment year over year increased some 4,400 jobs, a 12.2 

per cent increase. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s more work to do. This government is 

doing it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. When 

Eric Howe says, in his report last month, that “bridging the 

Aboriginal education gap is the most significant economic 

challenge confronting Saskatchewan. It is also our greatest 

economic opportunity,” this opposition agrees with him. 

 

But that government put forward a Throne Speech where First 

Nations and Métis issues rated three lines, Mr. Speaker. A task 

force and the work that this government is doing is fine and 

good, but we’ve seen not the results that are needed if we’re 



December 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 71 

going to succeed as a province. This is our biggest challenge. 

Why was it so glaringly absent in the Throne Speech, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for First Nations and 

Métis affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Again, Mr. Speaker, First Nations 

and Métis individuals are a priority for this government. This 

government works for the betterment of all people in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

When we shortened wait times, Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of 

Health has indicated, we do that for all people of Saskatchewan 

and First Nations and Métis benefit. When we fix our 

highways, when we build a children’s hospital, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s for the quality of life of all of those involved. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, today in Saskatchewan what are First Nation 

leaders asking? What question are they asking? Mr. Speaker, 

they know where the government stands, but they don’t know 

who speaks for the NDP. Is it the Leader of the Opposition that 

speaks for the NDP? Is it the critic that speaks for the NDP on 

First Nations and Métis relations? Or is it the member for 

Regina Rosemont, Mr. Speaker? That’s the questions that First 

Nations leaders are asking today. They deserve an answer. I 

hope members opposite are prepared to give them one today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Well I’ll tell you something that’s clear, Mr. 

Speaker. When upwards of 1,000 First Nations people came to 

their legislature last fall, this past, you know, a few short 

months ago, where was the minister? He was missing in action. 

He sent his chief of staff out to speak for the government. 

That’s where that government is on First Nations issues, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

One of the things that’s very important in the study of Dr. Eric 

Howe, he says the following, “The total social benefit of 

closing the aboriginal education gap in Saskatchewan measured 

in 2011 dollars is $90 billion.” 

 

There is a huge economic gain to this province if we get this 

problem solved and if we get this challenge taken on. This 

government hasn’t done it. It had three lines in their Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker. Two years ago at this time, we saw them 

tear up, or make the decision to tear up 111-plus Aboriginal 

employment development program agreements. They’ve got a 

task force ongoing right now where they’re already behind the 

timelines they had set out in the spring. When is this 

government going to get serious about closing the gap for First 

Nations and Métis people in this province so all Saskatchewan 

people can succeed and live up to their potential? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for First 

Nations and Métis affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I can assure the member opposite that this government 

takes this topic very, very serious. I have Mr. Howe’s report in 

my hands. He’s invited me to sit down to discuss that. I’ve 

accepted that invitation, Mr. Speaker. And again, we’ll be 

working towards the betterment for First Nations and Métis 

people across the province, Mr. Speaker.  

 

You know, words are easy to say, Mr. Speaker, but I can tell 

you on June the 8th of this year, this cabinet and all members of 

this cabinet that were present had the opportunity to meet with 

each chief in the province. Every chief across Saskatchewan 

was invited. It was a historic meeting, and we had an 

opportunity to discuss things face to face. And we share many, 

many of the same goals — increasing education opportunities, 

increasing the quality of lives for First Nations individuals. 

When good work like Mr. Howe has done, Professor Howe has 

done, we will take that serious and we will use this as a guiding 

principle as we move Saskatchewan forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Again thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s interesting 

listening to the words of the member opposite in terms of what 

they regard as historic. The MOU [memorandum of 

understanding] that they signed with the FSIN in May of this 

year, they also held it as historic and stated as such in their 

Throne Speech not a few short days ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On page 12 of that memorandum of understanding, it states that 

the public appointment of the task force would be completed in 

summer of 2011. This is the only thing they’ve got in the 

Throne Speech that addresses First Nations issues, let alone 

Métis who want their own task force for this, Mr. Speaker. But 

we’ll leave that aside for the moment. The public appointment 

of the task force was supposed to have taken place this summer. 

They haven’t even gotten that right. When is this government 

going to get serious about First Nations and Métis issues? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for First 

Nations and Métis affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, if the member 

opposite wants to talk about historic things that are happening 

with First Nations and Métis individuals across the province, 

we can talk about the First Nations power agreement that this 

government signed, Mr. Speaker, one that we were getting 

requests for copies of from across the province because they . . . 

or across the country because they consider it as a best practice, 

something that Saskatchewan has led the way on and we 

continue to lead the way on. 

 

When we talk about forest management agreements, FMAs, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s this government who sat down and negotiated 

those through the minister and others, Mr. Speaker. We’re very 

proud of that. Our record with First Nations and Métis 

individuals is something that we can be very proud of. We sit 

down. We talk. We consult. We get results done, Mr. Speaker, 

and that is indeed the way that we will continue to do it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Funding for Education 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, in 2009 this government 



72 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2011 

tore up the funding model for education of Saskatchewan 

students and promised one in the near future. That was three 

years ago. Commitments were made and promised. Timelines 

came and went. And to this day we still have no new funding 

model. 

 

How does the minister expect our school boards to plan and 

deliver excellence in education without an adequate funding 

model? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What the 

school boards do not want to go back to, and what they asked 

for to have the change, was to get rid of the fall grant which 

created huge inequities among the school divisions across the 

province. So they do want the new funding formula. The 

technical briefing that outlined the methodology to the school 

divisions took place before the election. And I met with the 

school boards last week and we’re setting out a timeline that 

they’re going to see, actually be able to put their numbers into 

the new funding formula for their school divisions before the 

provincial budget in March. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, a lot of uncertainty exists 

for school boards on this front, and having spoken with many of 

them . . . And the Saskatchewan classroom is undergoing many 

changes related to demographics and needs of students. As but 

one example, families from all over our globe have chosen to 

build their lives in Saskatchewan. Our classrooms have become 

more diverse with thousands of new Canadians. This is exciting 

and important, not only for those students and for their families, 

but also for our province, now and well into the future. 

 

However students learning English as a second or an additional 

language require supports in the classroom to ensure we 

maximize the potential of these students and all students, Mr. 

Speaker. However our province fails to provide the resources 

needed to do that without having a funding model in place. To 

the minister: how is it fair or in our best interests not to do so? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I find it very interesting that the NDP 

in the past, when they were government and had the ability to 

make the changes, told the ratepayers within our province that 

the status quo was not on but didn’t make any changes. And the 

Education minister said that amalgamation of school divisions 

would take away the inequities, and they still don’t understand. 

 

We’re talking about a distribution model that will talk about 

dividing the pie, not the size of the pie, because what this 

government has done year over year is increased funding to the 

school divisions each and every year that we have been in 

power. With the new teachers’ contracts, school divisions have 

received over 18 per cent increase over the last four years. That 

far exceeds inflation and it far exceeds the increases in 

enrolment. We recognize there’s pressures. We recognize that 

the school divisions are extremely important. We need to work 

with them, but we have given them increased funding each and 

every year. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Those increases do not cover inflation 

and certainly do not cover the increases to enrolment and the 

increasing demands, Mr. Speaker. But for over three years 

school boards have been without with a funding model, 

impeding boards from planning in the short-, medium-, and 

long-term. This has impacted staffing, programs, and students. 

 

Currently schools are being reviewed for closure with the 

potential of impacting students and communities. These 

difficult decisions should be made based on facts. How does the 

minister believe it to be fair to cause school boards and 

communities to meaningfully review school closures in the 

absence of a funding model? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I wonder if the member opposite 

thought that it was stable funding to underfund school divisions 

year over year so that they had to go back to the tax base each 

and every year with an average of a 5 per cent increase to the 

taxpayers to get funding in order to operate. Is that stable? 

Because that’s what the NDP did to the school divisions in this 

province. And you know what happened, Mr. Speaker? Well 

there was tax revolts across our province. That was hardly 

stable funding across our province for school divisions. 

 

And so then what did the NDP do? Did they fix the problem? 

Not at all. They just ignored it, even though they said the status 

quo was not on. And so they did ad hoc little rebates to the 

taxpayers in order to fund education. Was that stable, Mr. 

Speaker? None of that was stable funding, and yet somehow 

now the NDP think they have a solution. They didn’t 

understand it then, and they don’t understand it now. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Standing Committee on House Services 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by 

the Standing Committee on House Services to report that the 

committee has convened pursuant to rule 138 and is presenting 

its first report. I move: 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on House 

Services now be concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — Moved by the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre: 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on House 

Services now be concurred in. 

 



December 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 73 

Is the motion agreed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to make a 

resolution regarding lobbyists. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has asked leave to 

move a motion regarding lobbyists. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The Minister of Justice. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Lobbyist Registry 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of 

my comments, I will be moving a resolution to refer a matter to 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice for an inquiry in accordance with rule 147(1) of the 

Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members will be aware that with the large 

increase in economic activity in Saskatchewan over the past 

several years, there is an increase in the role that paid lobbyists 

may seek to play in our province. The Premier has noted that 

Saskatchewan is one of the few provinces in Canada without a 

lobbyist registry already in place. It is our view, and a view 

which we feel will be shared by all of the members of this 

Assembly, that new lobbyist rules should be introduced in 

Saskatchewan similar to those in other jurisdictions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, free and open access to government decision 

makers is an important matter of public interest. Lobbying 

public office holders is a legitimate activity when it is 

conducted appropriately. It is desirable that public office 

holders and the public know who is attempting to influence 

government decision making. They should be able to determine 

this in a manner that would not necessarily impede access to 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the rules of this Assembly, matters such as 

these may be referred to our existing standing committees to 

inquire into the matter. Mr. Speaker, in our view, an all-party 

process which will guarantee input from the political parties as 

well as members of the public is the preferred method to 

develop a solution. In this case, the committee will undoubtedly 

review how lobbying is addressed in other provinces and by the 

federal government, and how best to provide a Saskatchewan 

solution that will achieve the goals of openness and access in a 

cost-effective manner that does not deter legitimate lobbyist 

activities. A balance is required, and it will fall to the 

committee to inquire into and report to this Assembly on how 

best to strike this balance. 

 

Accordingly, I move, seconded by the Leader of the 

Opposition: 

 

That the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice, in accordance with rule 147(1) of the 

Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan, shall conduct an inquiry and make 

recommendations to the Assembly respecting a legislative 

model for new legislation regarding lobbying in 

Saskatchewan to ensure that the public is informed and 

aware of who is lobbying public office-holders in 

Saskatchewan, while ensuring that free and open access to 

government decision makers is not unduly impeded; and 

 

That the said committee shall conduct public hearings to 

receive representations from interested individuals and 

groups. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved: 

 

That the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice, in accordance with rule 147(1) of the 

Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan, shall conduct an inquiry and make 

recommendations to the Assembly respecting the 

legislative model for new legislation regarding lobbying in 

Saskatchewan to ensure that the public is informed and 

aware of who is lobbying public office-holders in 

Saskatchewan, while ensuring that free and open access to 

government decision makers is not unduly impeded; and 

 

That the said committee shall conduct public hearings to 

receive representations from interested individuals and 

groups. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 

of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to make it absolutely 

clear that the Leader of the Opposition did not second that 

motion as stated by the hon. member. There wasn’t a necessity 

for a seconder of the motion, but I want to make it absolutely 

clear that that did not happen. 

 

The Speaker: — Are the members ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the motion agreed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Marchuk, seconded by Ms. 



74 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2011 

Campeau, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Belanger.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Mr. Speaker and member of Cannington, 

congratulations on being elected as Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker and member of Last Mountain-Touchwood, 

congratulations on being elected as Deputy Speaker. 

Congratulations to all the MLAs in this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert Northcote is a vibrant gathering 

ground of people, voices, and ideas. We are a microcosm of 

Saskatchewan. Just as Saskatchewan was overlooked, ignored, 

and many times in the past dismissed, so too was Northcote. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Northcote is now following the rest of 

Saskatchewan’s lead into the future. On November 7th, 

Northcote said, we are ready to lead, ready to be part of our 

future, ready to be ignored no longer. 

 

On that day, election day, when every person is exactly equal, 

where each one has one vote and one vote only, each person 

took that power of one and added it to their family’s votes, their 

neighbours’ votes, and their friends’ votes until that power of 

one multiplied to create a new Northcote, a Saskatchewan Party 

Northcote. With our positive attitude, all of us have taken our 

power of one and are using it to create a better future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with this great privilege of speaking in the 

Chamber and before I tell you about what I think is the best 

constituency there is in all of Saskatchewan, my constituency of 

Prince Albert Northcote, I have a few thank yous I want to 

make. 

 

Thank you to the people of Prince Albert Northcote. This 

position of MLA that the people of Northcote and indeed 

Saskatchewan have elected me to, this position is not taken 

lightly. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, some of the people in this 

Chamber witnessed the deep emotion that came with being 

sworn in and then given the symbol, the mace, of the great 

commitment I have made and the trust the people have given 

me. This trust and this commitment are not taken lightly. I will 

work hard every day with every bit of energy I have to continue 

to earn that trust so that the voices and the ideas of the people 

of Prince Albert Northcote are heard right here where real 

decisions are made. 

 

First I thank each and every one of my constituents for taking 

the right to vote very seriously. People have fought and died for 

us to have this right — this right to live and vote in a 

democratic society. 

 

I want to thank every single person that put herself or himself 

forward to run for public office. I admire people who do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is simply no way for me to name the 

200-plus people — family, friends, volunteers, colleagues, and 

others — that brought me here, so I will name just two. The 

first one, Mr. Speaker, is my husband, Al. Mr. Speaker, I know 

that 38 years ago when we first met, Allan had no idea that 

connecting with me would land him in all kinds of trials and 

tribulations and then politics. Mr. Speaker, Al and I thought 

long and hard about Allan being my campaign manager. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, that has proven to be one of the wisest decisions 

we have ever made. Now here in this Chamber, I want to 

publicly express my deep appreciation for Allan’s unwavering 

commitment to me. 

 

I want to thank our three adult children, one daughter-in-law, 

and granddaughter for their support. On Sunday, November 6th, 

our granddaughter phoned up . . . well with the help of her dad 

as she turned two on election day. She said, good luck, 

Grandma. 

 

I want to thank my nine siblings and their families, my five 

siblings-in-law and their families for all the well wishes and 

cheering me on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as all of the MLAs and teams know, this position 

is accomplished through the work of many people. I will now 

share with you the one aspect that I asked of everyone when 

they joined or wanted to help our team. The one thing that I 

asked was that everyone believe as strongly as I did that 

Northcote would be and now is a Saskatchewan Party seat as of 

November 7th, 2011. 

 

Everyone, absolutely everyone, Mr. Speaker, that spent five 

minutes or more with our team used and continues to use the 

power of a positive attitude. Mr. Speaker, so very many thanks 

go to the team members who had more time than money and 

then shared that time and their talents of strategizing, talking, 

scribing, phoning, writing, driving, scrutineering, organizing, 

accounting, preparing food, cleaning, entering data and entering 

data, picture taking to picture making, screening, and helping 

people to get to where they needed to go, and to the team 

members who had more money than time and donated 

generously. 

 

Thank you to those that gave advice such as, you will lead as 

long as the people want you to lead and no longer. And, Mr. 

Speaker, to those that thought, well God love you, but only ever 

said, keep working, Victoria, I thank you. To those that said no 

and that articulated their fears and concerns, to those that said 

yes and then shared their hopes and dreams for a better 

community and a better future for their families and their 

children’s families, I thank you. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, a very deep and heartfelt thanks goes to my team 

of door knockers who went out through sun and snow, ice, 

slush, mud, sand, asphalt, and gravel, through late summer, fall, 

winter, spring, summer, and fall again — my door knocking 

team who endured a clock upside the head and tumbles onto 

broken pavement, whose fingers nearly froze as they wrote the 

words, the voices, and the ideas that thousands and thousands 

of people shared with us. There are simply no words adequate 

enough to express my feelings, so I will say thank you. 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the people of Northcote 

to continue with their generosity of time and ideas to help me 

be the best MLA there is for Northcote. These duties, Mr. 

Speaker, are an honour for me to accept, and I am humbled — 

humbled that our people, the people of Prince Albert Northcote, 

have elected me to be keeper of the voice of Northcote. 



December 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 75 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is one other person that I promised to 

name, and that is my mother. There is no one on earth that I 

know that works harder than she does. My mom, Marian 

Froess, came to help me during the writ. Nearly every day I 

would hear her say, I don’t know why Victoria wants to be a 

politician. And yet every single day of the writ, Mr. Speaker, 

my mom helped me from 8 in the morning to 10 at night. Then 

when I said, thank you, mom, for all your help, she said, I 

didn’t do anything; that little bit isn’t much. Mr. Speaker, 

please tell my mom she did more than she will ever know. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I promised to tell you about Prince Albert 

Northcote. We have a very large number of very wise people. 

Some call them seniors. We have an equally large number of 

exuberant people. Some call them youth. We have every level 

of education there is, from pre-K [pre-kindergarten] to high 

school, from technical institutes such as the Saskatchewan 

Indian Institute of Technologies to Gabriel Dumont Institute to 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology] Woodland Campus, plus we have all three 

universities represented in some fashion. There are classes from 

the U of R [University of Regina], first and second years from 

the U of S [University of Saskatchewan], and there is the 

Northern Campus of the First Nations University. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with all this knowledge infrastructure that 

Northcote has, we welcome the additional Saskatchewan 

advantage scholarships and Saskatchewan advantage grant for 

education savings that this government is providing. The First 

Peoples here in Prince Albert Northcote welcomed the signing 

of an historic agreement establishing a joint task force on 

improving employment and education outcomes so that more 

First Nations and Métis young people become active 

participants in our workforce. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Northcote is part of the largest small city in 

Saskatchewan. Northcote has the only one-way street in Prince 

Albert, which is part of Central Avenue, the oldest street in 

Prince Albert, and quite possibly one of the most historic in 

Saskatchewan. We have the downtown core where over 3,000 

people come to work every day. And we have Sakaw Askiy 

Management. This first-of-its-kind company in Saskatchewan 

has eight shareholders, including two First Nations and six 

forest companies that took over the Prince Albert Forest 

Management Agreement. 

 

When you look at Northcote you will see that we have the only 

hospital, the only airport, the only women’s correction centre, 

the only river, and Prince Albert’s only bridge. We have 

industry and innovation and culture. We have the only green 

industrial park. We have Prince Albert Pulp Inc., the exhibition 

grounds, the culture centre, E.A. Rawlinson Centre for the Arts, 

Innovation Place Prince Albert, better known as the Forest 

Centre, and we have city hall. 

 

The Hon. Walter Scott, first premier of the province of 

Saskatchewan, said, “Prince Albert is destined to be one of the 

greatest commercial centres on the American continent.” A 

century ago, the city fathers of Prince Albert said, “You 

sacrifice nothing when you come here; there is the keenest joys 

of living.” Some will say, yes, that is an idealistic notion of a 

different era and look what happened. Yes, look what 

happened. We will not downplay the hardships of a city having 

to pay off a debt that threatened to bankrupt it, but did not. 

They paid it off in the ’60s. Yes, we will acknowledge the 

hardships of a city that has had to struggle to find its way. Yes, 

we know there are challenges in the current era, but there is so 

much more. 

 

We are a resilient, determined people, and we are a 

constituency ready to take the lead. The Saskatchewan Party 

Northcote is a vibrant gathering ground rich with people, 

voices, and ideas. This gathering ground, a microcosm of 

Saskatchewan, have shown ourselves, the city, this province, 

and the nation that the power of one is valuable, that the power 

of one with a positive attitude can, will, and does create a better 

future for each of us, for our children’s children, and for 

generations to come. 

 

Once our most precious resource, Mr. Speaker, our people and 

our positive attitude was set free, set free to move ahead, our 

community, our Prince Albert Northcote decided we are leaders 

and we will continue to be a leader, a leader ready to take our 

place in Saskatchewan, a leader ready to be part of the new 

Saskatchewan. 

 

As an exciting, vibrant gathering ground of people, voices, and 

ideas, we are ready, willing, and able to take our attitude, our 

enthusiasm, and our richest resource, our people — people in 

innovation, people in sense of community, people in our voice, 

people in our ideas — to take all of this to make the tomorrow 

Northcote better than the today of Northcote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to share with you and the people of this 

province how our community has taken the lead. I will keep 

this short, Mr. Speaker, to just three examples that highlight 

how our richest resource, our people, have moved ahead and 

are continuing to move ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I heard it once, I heard it a thousand times: the 

people of Northcote want a safer community. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, we have the community mobilization partnership, the 

first of its kind in all of Canada. This community mobilization 

partnership, a result of innovation and new ideas, is leveraging 

the strong sense of community our Northcote has. This 

partnership did not wait. Rather, this partnership took that sense 

of optimism, that sense that we are ready, willing, and able to 

make the tomorrow of Northcote better than the today of 

Northcote and created a new way of making our community 

safer. This community mobilization partnership is getting at the 

root causes of crime and helping to prevent so many young 

people from going down a dangerous path of crime. It is 

helping our youth to be part of a thriving, safe community we 

all so much want. This government, the Government of 

Saskatchewan, heard the voice of our community and are now 

supporting this highly successful Prince Albert community 

mobilization partnership with additional funding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I heard it once, I heard it many times: we need 

jobs and a strong economy. Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Northcote and indeed Saskatchewan thank this government for 

creating a business-friendly climate. Business creates jobs, jobs 

that help people enjoy life and to raise a family right here in the 

best place in all of Canada. 

 

It is only since this government was mandated in 2007 to lead 



76 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2011 

this province into a better future that the largest forest business 

in Saskatchewan decided to create a dissolving pulp mill right 

in Prince Albert Northcote. This mill and Prince Albert Pulp 

Inc. is creating the core for an industry that utilizes one of our 

largest renewable resources — Saskatchewan’s forest. There 

are hundreds of millions of dollars worth of assets being 

recommissioned by thousands of hours of work by hundreds of 

people so that wood fibre can be dissolved to create rayon, a 

fibre that is highly valued in Asian countries. Prince Albert 

Pulp Inc. will also use the waste wood to create clean biomass 

energy to operate their facility. Any excess energy will be 

purchased by SaskPower. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the start-up of this facility will support the hub 

needed to kick-start our forest industry in the central and 

eastern parts of our province. This hub will create jobs and 

strengthen our economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another thing I heard many times on the doorsteps 

is that people want something to do. Well, Mr. Speaker, this 

government, the Government of Saskatchewan, has recognized 

that culture and business go hand in hand. People want to live, 

work, and raise a family in a place that is vibrant, rich with 

culture, rich with things to do, rich with creativity and beauty. 

The artsVest program is an innovative program in which public, 

private, and culture organizations partner in ways that benefits 

cultural institutions and the community, that partners in ways to 

create beauty and an active community. After all when we think 

of places to visit we think of beautiful historical buildings and 

streetscapes, and we think of going somewhere that has 

something to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when artsVest launched in Prince Albert 

Northcote in the E.A. Rawlinson Centre, which is one of our 

beautiful buildings — has a very relaxing and peaceful view of 

the riverbank — this launch was the first province-wide launch 

under this program. In this way, Mr. Speaker, we will grow our 

creative sector and make Saskatchewan even stronger. 

 

And that is what, Mr. Speaker, makes me so proud of Prince 

Albert Northcote. And that is why I think that Prince Albert 

Northcote is the best constituency in all of Saskatchewan. And 

that is how I know we are going to make the tomorrow of 

Northcote better than the today of Northcote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not support the amendment to the Throne 

Speech. And, Mr. Speaker, I support the motion to move the 

Throne Speech. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. 

 

[14:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you to the 

people of Saskatoon Eastview for your trust in me. Mr. 

Speaker, I will work every day to be worthy of that trust. Thank 

you to our Premier for leading the new Saskatchewan in such 

an exciting and important time for our province. Mr. Speaker, 

there are dark clouds in many parts of the world, but we are so 

blessed to call Saskatchewan home. 

 

I’d also like to congratulate all the new and returning members 

to this Chamber. I would also like to, Mr. Speaker, congratulate 

yourself on winning the election to become Speaker. I’d also 

like to, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate the Deputy Speaker from 

Last Mountain-Touchwood in being appointed to the Deputy 

Speaker position. 

 

I too have visited this grand building as a schoolboy and 

marvelled at the sheer size and beauty and remember that 

feeling very, remember that feeling well, and humbled. I was 

also lucky enough to sit in this Chamber during the 

Saskatchewan Youth Parliament in high school, and even 

during those days I could not imagine or even dream of 

becoming an elected MLA. 

 

For the longest time I believed that being a MLA, one needed to 

be special. Mr. Speaker, the work we do here is special. But my 

fellow MLAs are some of the most humble, down-to-earth 

people I’ve ever met. I’m so lucky to have colleagues and 

friends that have helped me along this path to this Chamber. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my first time in this building as an elected MLA 

was only a few weeks ago. As I walked up to this beautiful 

building, my palms were sweaty, and I was once again in awe 

of this amazing tall building. Then as I left this building only a 

few hours later that day, I turned back, and this building was 

still amazing. But the building did not seem as tall and was not 

as daunting . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Thank you. 

 

So as I was leaving this building, it did not seem as tall and as 

daunting. And mostly the reason why it wasn’t so daunting and 

as tall is because the people in this building, the staff and my 

colleagues, have welcomed me in such a warm and caring 

manner. And I’d like to thank you. 

 

Like many in the Chamber, I started this journey years ago. 

And there has always been one person there for me, and that 

was my wife, Danielle. I need to thank Danielle, that without 

her, this would not be possible. We did 90 per cent of our door 

knocking with each other. Danielle has been very involved in 

the communities, so she shared many connections with the 

people of Saskatoon Eastview. It was also an extended 

honeymoon, Mr. Speaker, for us as we just got married in May. 

So it was a chance to spend . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. 

Mr. Speaker, it gave us a chance to spend more hours every day 

growing our relationship even stronger. 

 

I had the best campaign team in Saskatchewan, from my 

campaign manager to our office manager to our door knockers 

and everyone that helped out. Thank you. It was very humbling 

to write over 140 thank you cards to all the people that have 

spent their precious time helping me get elected. As I sat there, 

Mr. Speaker, and reviewed the cards, I was taken aback by how 

many good friends I met on this journey. I was so blessed with 

the people that made this possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s no big secret on how to win campaigns. 

It’s hard work. I can’t say enough of how hard my volunteers 

worked. In this province, hard work is what gets rewarded. We 

worked every day talking about the record of this government 

and that let the voters decide if our plan for the new 

Saskatchewan warranted a second term. 

 

Not only did we have a good campaign team, but we also had 



December 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 77 

the best food on our campaign. We’re very lucky our office 

manager cooked home-cooked meals every night. I had a 

couple of university students that may have came out to help 

me or may have just came out for the food. Mr. Speaker, I’m so 

humbled to take my chair in your Chamber. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I grew up in Esterhazy, Saskatchewan, son of a 

plumber. Mom was a teacher. And I need to thank my parents 

for all they have done for me. I believe the way I was raised had 

a direct impact on who I am today. One of the values I’ve 

learned from my parents was living within one’s means. Mr. 

Speaker, I also share the importance of living within our means 

in government. The budget is balanced, and we have reduced 

the provincial debt by 44 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am so humbled to take on the great 

responsibility of representing the good people of Saskatoon 

Eastview. I am lucky to be elected at the age of 34. I believe 

I’m old enough to know that there is more to learn but also the 

energy to continue to move this province forward. 

 

I got involved in politics because of a few events in the early 

2000s. I lost a brother and sister to Alberta, along with 80 per 

cent of my university class. I didn’t blame them. The old 

Saskatchewan just didn’t have the opportunities that we have 

here today. In the old Saskatchewan, the population, along with 

its tax base, kept moving away. And during the early 2000s, we 

also had a health scare in the family. Everyone is healthy now, 

but it got me really concerned about the future of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I was concerned for my parents. As they grew older, what 

if they needed to access our health care system? What we had 

in the old Saskatchewan was a deteriorating health system with 

the longest wait times in the country. As families moved away, 

we also lost our ability to provide high-quality health care. So 

with that realization, I got politically active because I did not 

like the direction of the old Saskatchewan.  

 

Mr. Speaker, today in Saskatchewan wait times are getting 

better. There is more work to do, and in our second term in 

government, we will bring our surgical wait times down to 90 

days. Today in Saskatchewan, our economy is leading the 

nation and is predicted to lead the nation again next year. 

During the last four years, over 24,000 new jobs have been 

created. Mr. Speaker, the people of this province like the new 

Saskatchewan, and we’re not going back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in many ways Saskatoon Eastview is spoken 

about in the Throne Speech. Seniors in Eastview will be 

receiving help with affordability, benefiting from the tripling of 

the seniors’ income plan along with the introduction of the 

seniors’ personal care home benefit. This benefit will make up 

the difference in one’s monthly income and the cost of their 

personal care home space up to a threshold of $1,800 in 2012 

and then growing over to $4,000 by 2015. 

 

Mr. Speaker, new families in Eastview will also benefit with 

our new $10,000 tax credit for new homeowners. This credit 

will help with the cost of home ownership and ensure 

Saskatchewan stays affordable. New families in Eastview will 

also receive the active families benefit, helping with the cost of 

children’s activities.  

Mr. Speaker, the students living in Eastview and across this 

province will also benefit with the Saskatchewan advantage 

scholarship. This program will help provide up to $2,000 credit 

towards tuition over a four-year period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of the government’s record on 

helping the lives of people with disabilities. Danielle and I have 

met two people that live in special needs Elmwood Residence 

in Saskatoon. Every month we take Susan and Dolores out for a 

few hours. This Saturday we are taking them out to dinner and 

then to a Blades game. These outings ground Danielle and I and 

teach us the valuable lessons of what life is about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you outline in your speech, we want to make 

Saskatchewan the best province in the country and strive for 

this. We give the people and businesses a chance to grow. Mr. 

Speaker, I support the motion to move this Speech of the 

Throne and reject the amendment from the opposition. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask for leave to 

make a short comment. 

 

The Speaker: — I wonder if the Leader of the Opposition 

could elaborate a little more on what the short comment is 

about. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — It relates to my previous statement about the 

motion that the member from Saskatoon made. 

 

The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has asked to 

make a small comment on the previous motion on lobbyists. Is 

the Assembly in agreement? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

Lobbyist Registry Motion 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. I just want to thank the member for 

apologizing for a small administrative error in how the speech 

was prepared, and I appreciate the fact that he’s done that. And 

we actually were able to present that to the press together, so 

that worked out very well for us. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Marchuk, seconded by Ms. 

Campeau, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 



78 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2011 

moved by Mr. Belanger.] 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker. I am honoured 

to rise before you this afternoon to give my first address to this 

historical and venerable Assembly. And I too would like to 

share some of my stories of my first two times in the 

legislature. The first time I was here was as a Girl Guide, and I 

received my Canada cord right over there somewhere. It was 

many years ago. 

 

The second time I was here was as an extra in the Tommy 

Douglas movie, and I got to play an MLA, a female MLA from 

the 1960s, in the scene where Tommy Douglas resigned as 

premier. And I was sitting right where Mr. . . . I forget people’s 

places, but the House Leader was sitting, and I was all set to 

have my big moment. And then they looked at me, and they 

made me become a backbencher because my hair was wrong. 

So anyways, it was a good feeling at that time, and I thought 

maybe someday I might like to actually try and be here for real. 

So here I am. 

 

To begin, I would like to acknowledge that we are in Treaty 4 

territory. The banner on the Clerk’s Table tells us the story of 

the relationship our European ancestors established with the 

First Nations people who have been here since time 

immemorial. The promise of the treaties is that as long as the 

rivers flow and the sun shines, which you can see on the 

banner, the treaty relationship will remain alive and strong. 

That hasn’t always been the case in Saskatchewan. In my 17 

years of practice as an Aboriginal law lawyer for the 

Government of Canada, I often encountered fundamental 

misunderstandings of this special constitutional relationship. 

 

When Treaty 4 was signed in Fort Qu’Appelle in 1874, there 

were promises made in exchange for surrender of land. That 

promise did not mean that the First Nations surrendered their 

sovereignty or their nationhood. They are the First Nations, and 

that’s exactly what that means. They were here first and they 

still have nationhood. What that means in the democratic 

society we’ve now established in this country is still unfolding, 

but it means that the treaty relationship is important both 

federally and provincially. 

 

We inherited these promises from our dominion government 

when Saskatchewan became a province in 1905, and it is this 

government’s duty to act honourably in all aspects of our 

relationship with the First Nations of this territory we now call 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Because of the numbered treaties, my grandfather, Fenton 

Sproule, was able to come here in 1909 from Nova Scotia to 

take up farming near Lafleche, my hometown. The promise of 

farming his own farm was one that was alluring for a young 

man of his day. He came out here with his brother, and they 

built themselves a sod shack, lived in it while they broke the 

soil and got their homestead patent. Then he built a proper 

house, went back east, brought my grandmother back, and 

together they raised a family of 10 children. 

 

My grandfather was a great believer in the power of people 

working together. He was outraged by the unfair trade practices 

of the grain monopolies who were buying grain from these new 

farmers. He worked tirelessly as one of the founding members 

of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool to get the 50,000 signatures 

needed to get the right to trade their own wheat. 

 

My dad, as a young boy, often travelled with him to the many 

Pool picnics where people would gather and Grandpa Sproule 

would speak to them about why they should support the Wheat 

Pool. There was no television or Internet in those days. There 

are some infamous tales of his ability to effectively deal with 

hecklers. I can only hope I inherited some of that. I think I’m 

going to need it. 

 

He often spoke about the evils of capitalism and the importance 

of working co-operatively. I think he would be disappointed to 

know that people are still struggling to make ends meet while 

the corporations and banks are making record profits. Sadly the 

disparity between the rich and the poor continues to grow. 

 

He believed strongly that to succeed we had to work together 

and to look out for each other. He, along with many other 

farmers and small-business men, worked to build the 

co-operative movement in this province, and today we are still 

known throughout the world for our credit unions, co-ops, and 

the many socialist programs introduced in this Assembly to 

profit the common good, like the Crowns, SGI [Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance], Crop Insurance, the Arts Board, and of 

course medicare, our greatest achievement as a province. 

 

[15:00] 

 

I know that he would also be disappointed to see the federal 

government’s current destruction of the single desk for wheat 

marketing, which was so aptly managed by the Canadian Wheat 

Board for so many decades and, to top it all off, to hear a 

Throne Speech in this Assembly which makes no provision for 

the transition our Saskatchewan farmers will be facing in the 

brave new world of no single desk. What a disappointment, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The values of my grandparents and my parents, the values of 

social democrats in Saskatchewan, are deeply instilled in me 

and my siblings. They’re pretty basic — have fun, work hard, 

care for others, respect diversity, and always, always shop at the 

co-op. 

 

Ma mère est fransaskoise et je suis très fière de mon héritage 

français et Acadien. J’ai beaucoup d’histoires de mes ancêtres, 

et je vais vous raconter une des plus intéressantes.  

 

[Translation: My mother is Fransaskois, and I am very proud of 

my French and Acadian heritage. I have many stories from my 

ancestors, and I am going to tell you one of the more interesting 

ones.] 

 

My mother is fransaskoise, and I am very proud of my 

Canadian and French heritage. And I would like to share just 

one story from the French side of the family. In the 1840s — 

what’s that? — 170 years ago, my great-great-uncle, Father 

Belcourt, in his role as parish priest, advised the Red River 

Métis people in their struggle to end the Hudson Bay 

Company’s fur monopoly. His reward? Well after the company 

complained to the bishop about him, the bishop exiled him to a 

remote Acadian parish in Prince Edward Island. But ever the 

activist, he then founded the Farmers’ Bank of Rustico, 



December 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 79 

Canada’s first community bank. And that bank is still standing 

in Rustico, Prince Edward Island, and it was the precursor to 

the credit union movement in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the world that my grandfather lived in as he toiled 

to break the prairie sod was much different than today’s world. 

Indeed the degradation of the environment that is continuing to 

accelerate throughout the developed world is something that he 

could have never foreseen. Nor could have the First Nations 

when they signed the treaties for that matter. It’s 

unprecedented, amplifying daily, and it is of grave and serious 

concern throughout the entire planet. 

 

We need strong leadership to change this path, a brave 

government and a bold one to initiate positive measures to stop 

the destruction particularly in the area of greenhouse gases. Our 

track record is shameful. Instead of meeting any targets 

established by the international community, we have gone in 

the opposite direction. It seems like a race to the bottom as we 

continue to boast of economic growth due to the production of 

the very resources that are the worst offenders of carbon 

dioxide. 

 

There’s no reason for this government to not take steps to 

ensure that development, innovation, progress, and 

consumption take into account environmental costs. We are 

taking non-renewable resources out of the earth at an 

unprecedented rate. It’s the main source of much of the wealth 

and prosperity in Saskatchewan these days, as everyone knows. 

But any economic analysis that does not include the 

environmental impact as part of the cost is simply short-sighted. 

Maybe in some ways it will be seen as wilful blindness by 

future generations who will suffer the impacts far more greatly 

than we do now. 

 

There are many things that could have been in the Throne 

Speech that would have shown vision and leadership in the 

environmental arena. The courage to introduce legislation to 

protect wetlands, whose destruction has led to serious flooding 

in this province. Legislations to encourage communities to 

recycle; we are so behind other provinces in this aspect. 

Legislation to prohibit the transportation of nuclear waste 

across our province, following the lead of our neighbouring 

province to the east. 

 

Sadly this Throne Speech completely ignores the reality of 

today’s environment. And it appears that this government is 

living in a surreal bubble of suspended belief that if we only 

accelerate production of non-renewable resources, that we will 

somehow be a winner. Of what, I don’t know. Our children and 

grandchildren will be the ultimate losers, and only history will 

hold us to account. From the windswept prairies where I grew 

up on the freedom of our family farm, to our incredibly diverse 

and rich urban communities, to the awesome beauty of the 

boreal forest in the North, all the riches that we have at our 

disposal as a result of the treaty relationship, this government 

will be judged on what it leaves for future generations. And 

there’s little in this Throne Speech to allay the concerns I heard 

from young people on the doorsteps and in the coffee house 

during the recent campaign. Where is the courage and vision 

needed to take us forward? 

 

This government speaks of innovation as the vanguard of our 

brave new world. True innovation, particularly in the energy 

sector, would focus on renewable sources of energy, of 

lessening human impact on the planet, particularly because of 

the growing global population. To believe that we can make the 

problem go away simply by launching a Global Institute for 

Food Security is just not enough, Mr. Speaker. Woefully 

inadequate — that’s the best one can say about the shallow 

approach we find in the Speech from the Throne. 

 

The Gabriel Dumont Institute recently released a study by 

economist Eric Howe. His report clearly indicates that we are 

sitting on a resource here in Saskatchewan that is woefully 

undeveloped. The economic potential of raising the level of 

education of our Aboriginal youth, according to Mr. Howe, is 

20 times greater than that of potash. And it is a renewable 

resource. The potential is there, but we need a government with 

vision and courage to realize that potential. 

 

Although I congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on your new role in 

this Assembly as the elected Speaker, I must say I am 

somewhat disappointed to be referring to the person occupying 

your chair as Mr. and not Ms. The same can be said for the 

position of Premier and Leader of the Opposition — sorry, 

John. I’m disappointed that after this last election there are even 

fewer women in this Assembly, representing half of our 

population. The voice of women is important. It brings a 

different perspective to any deliberations and determinations of 

public policy. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Sproule: — That’s our caucus. 

 

As part of my work in the next few years, I will encourage as 

many women as I can to participate in this area, and engaging 

in public policy in this fashion to ensure that women have an 

equal voice in the decisions that affect them regardless of their 

political persuasion. And I encourage everyone in this 

Assembly to do the same. It’s a bit of a mystery to me why 

women aren’t more inclined to try this out. Maybe I will change 

my tune after a few years of this, but at this point I’m so 

anxious to roll up my sleeves and get at it. I can’t imagine being 

anywhere better, except maybe playing a few fiddle tunes at a 

kitchen party with my friends and family. I am very proud to be 

here representing the people of Saskatoon Nutana as their 

newly elected representative. 

 

At this moment I would like to pay tribute to the former MLA, 

Pat Atkinson, who is now enjoying a well-deserved retirement, 

although I’m pretty sure she is watching the proceedings here 

today and will be tweeting from home on a regular basis as we 

go about our business. Pat was an excellent representative of 

Saskatoon Nutana for as long as I have lived there and leaves 

big shoes to fill. I want to thank her for her leadership and her 

mentoring. I am very fortunate to have her available to consult 

with as I get my sea legs in this new job. 

 

I’m always amazed and impressed at the skills and dedication 

and devotion the people that are my neighbours to the causes 

that they are passionate about. I often see that Saskatoon 

Nutana is a triple-A constituency — and by that I am referring 

to the many artists, academics, and activists that live in our 

constituency. There are people involved in all sorts of social 



80 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2011 

issues: defending the homeless; supporting projects like Station 

20 West; supporting inner-city initiatives to help people that are 

struggling with mental illness, addictions, abuse, and poverty. 

 

There are many leading academics and award-winning writers, 

many of whom teach in the schools and institutions of higher 

learning in our city. There are people who are incredibly gifted 

artists who continue to enrich my life and others with their 

creativity. They continue to inspire and ignite the imaginations 

of those who are exposed to their creative genius. 

 

My riding is also home to the Broadway business district, one 

of the most vibrant commercial areas in the city of Saskatoon, 

perhaps in the entire province if not the whole country. You 

will find stores like Turning the Tide, the best alternative 

bookstore around; The Better Good, which sells sustainable 

products for the home; and Brainsport, a community and health 

minded footwear store. These owners live and raise their 

families in our community, not far away in some tower in New 

York. We also have the Broadway Theatre which is a 

non-profit, volunteer, community owned and run theatre that 

has become a class act performance space, as well as a venue 

for alternative cinema. 

 

And right down the street from the Broadway Theatre we have 

the home of the Saskatchewan Craft Council, another 

non-governmental organization that works very hard and 

creatively to support and promote many talented artisans and 

craftspeople who use the raw mediums of wood, clay, metals, 

gems and fabric to create beautiful art. 

 

Sadly many of the artists who show their work in the gallery of 

the Craft Council are not able to afford to live in Saskatoon 

Nutana since the incredible increases in property values and 

rents and shortage of housing when the boom economy hit. 

Many university students can also no longer afford to find 

suitable lodging in our riding, a sad but true result of the same 

housing shortage. This government needs to do much, much 

more to reverse this trend and the accompanying trend of 

homelessness. If this government would only use their serious 

case of Alberta envy to copy the Alberta government’s Housing 

First plan to set a target to end homelessness, Mr. Speaker, 

perhaps we could stay ahead of the homelessness curve that 

accompanies all boom economies. But no, there’s nothing in 

this Throne Speech which speaks to that. 

 

There are a number of local establishments in Saskatoon 

Nutana which present great, live, homegrown Saskatchewan 

music as well some of the best up-and-coming musicians from 

across Canada almost any night of the week. These venues are 

an important part of the music scene in our country, and they 

are locally owned as well — venues like Amigos, Vangelis, 

The Roxy, and Lydia’s. 

 

There are also a number of fine musical organizations in our 

riding including the Ness Creek Cultural & Recreational 

Society which has its head office in Nutana. The Ness Creek 

Society presents the Ness Creek Music Festival which is held 

every year in the heart of the boreal forest near Big River, 

Saskatchewan. I’m proud to say that I’ve been involved as a 

volunteer with the festival since it began in 1991. 

 

I’ve also been involved with another cultural non-profit 

organization which is going into its seventh year of operations, 

the Northern Lights Bluegrass and Old Tyme Music Society. 

We’ve started a successful music camp and festival held 

annually in August also at Ness Creek. I’m most involved in the 

school programming that we started a few years ago, which 

brings top-notch, incredibly talented Canadian musicians who 

play traditional dance music — the music that my grandparents 

played and danced to — to schools and small communities 

across this province. 

 

This music not only builds communities but it connects us to 

our roots. It’s the music that our ancestors brought with them to 

Saskatchewan, music that came from the old country, from 

Scotland and Ireland and other European countries, and from 

Métis communities. There is nothing more joyful than seeing a 

whole school of children dancing their hearts out to the Virginia 

reel or the schottische or even the good old butterfly. I’m sure 

many members present remember that dance. We are keeping 

this tradition alive and well, along with many other folks in the 

province who host similar camps and school programs. 

 

It’s that joy that is so important to the process of learning that 

I’m afraid is now being overlooked in some of the 

neo-liberalization methods that are being introduced into the 

academic world, particularly in the school system and in the 

universities where we see continuing corporatization of 

learning, both through corporate investment in the academic 

agenda and through imposing business models on the creative 

act of learning. 

 

The rising cost of a university education is another area of 

concern. It has become so expensive now. To be able to study 

in university without worrying about whether a well-paying job 

is waiting at the other end is a luxury that only the very 

wealthy, the 1 per cent, can now afford to do. This is not higher 

learning, Mr. Speaker. This will have a chilling effect on new 

ideas and innovations for our young people, and there’s little in 

this Throne Speech to reverse that trend. 

 

Another boom by-product that I heard about on the doorstep 

during election campaign is the heavier loads many educators 

are facing because of increasing demands on programs like 

English as an Additional Language. The support systems for 

schools have not been able to keep up to the increasing 

demands on these sorts of programs. Is there any long-term plan 

in the Throne Speech to give those professionals and their 

students relief? None. 

 

And what about the long waiting list the French community in 

our province has? They have demands for more spaces in 

schools and pre-kindergarten spaces in French. The government 

announced that the next year is the year of the Fransaskois, but 

I don’t see anything in the Throne Speech to support those 

programs. 

 

Words are important, Mr. Speaker. Words change people’s 

lives, and it’s our job here to make sure the right words are put 

out there in law to benefit the people of Saskatchewan in the 

most meaningful way — not the corporations or the 

multinationals or the 1 per cent, but the 99 per cent, the regular 

folks of this province. This loyal opposition will continue to 

speak for those people and will hold this government to 

account. 



December 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 81 

Before I conclude I would like to take a minute to say my 

thanks to my campaign team led by my campaign manager, the 

intrepid Trevor McKenzie-Smith, and the Saskatoon Nutana 

NDP constituency executive and the people of Saskatoon 

Nutana for expressing their confidence in me to represent them. 

Finally I say thank you to my friends who stood by me 

throughout this journey. They know who they are. And my 

family, especially my two sons for putting up with me, from the 

bottom of my heart, my thanks to them for being there for me. 

And now it’s their job to keep me real. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to be one of the nimble nine who make 

up this loyal opposition in the current legislature. We have a lot 

of support out there and we know that they’re covering our 

backs. We are well positioned to take on this task. 

 

I will not be supporting this empty Throne Speech. I look 

forward to the challenge of the next four years. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I get an 

opportunity to respond to the Throne Speech and before I do 

that I would like to congratulate you on your new position. 

Wish you well. 

 

To the new members that were elected to this House, to the 

Legislative Assembly, what an honour. What a privilege you’ve 

been given. There’s lots to learn. I wish you well. Fight for the 

people that have asked you to come here to represent them. I 

send you a message. They need your support in this province. 

You will be asked to do that and I wish you well in your 

endeavours on doing that. There’s been a lot requested of you, 

but I think the people have spoken. And at this time, you’re 

here. As the Premier said, the seat is on loan. Do your job. We 

all do that. The people can ask no more of us than that. So I 

wish you well and congratulations to all of you. 

 

To the older members, men and women, congratulations and I 

wish you well. I hope at the end of the day we can work 

together for the betterment of Saskatchewan people — First 

Nations, Métis, northern people, all of our Saskatchewan 

residents. 

 

[15:15] 

 

I’d like to, Mr. Speaker, acknowledge my campaign team, and I 

don’t want to forget about that. Of course my wife and my 

family, very supportive, and the team. I think we all know the 

hard work that goes in. Whether we win, whether we lose, 

we’ve done our best and the team has done their best. The 

people speak and the people ask which one and decide which 

one of us men and women will be here to fight the battles to 

deal with the issues that we have to deal. And sometimes it’s 

very challenging. 

 

But I just want to go into why, I guess, I will not be supporting 

the Throne Speech. I’m not going to take a lot of time but I 

want to be very clear. There’s a lot missing from the Throne 

Speech. There’s a lot of expectation. There’s a lot of hope out 

there and, I’ve said this before, a booming economy. There’s so 

much, Mr. Speaker, that’s going on in this province. Many 

people see that. But truly, Mr. Speaker, I think there was a lot 

of our population that are not seeing the benefits. You know, 

yes there’s a boom. You can say what you want. Things are 

doing well. Some people are doing quite well. But I guess the 

gap between the rich and poor is looking at us in the eye and 

will continue to do that. 

 

And I refer to some of the questions that were raised in this 

House today about the concerns of northern Saskatchewan and 

the people that I have been fortunate to represent. And I say 

this: it’s an honour to represent them to bring the issues that 

northern people are facing, the issues that individuals in the 

Cumberland constituency are facing whether they’re First 

Nations, Métis, non-Aboriginal. The issues that they are facing 

are real to them. 

 

And as you talk to them on the doorstep, many of them, I had 

an opportunity to hear the concerns, the frustration. More action 

needs to be done. And we can have a Throne Speech and the 

vision and a plan. And the government presented that and they 

tried to make sure that, you know, we hear that. And you know, 

it’s the nice brochures and, you know, you look at the different 

pieces of information they provide to us and it talks about 

vision, action, growth, affordability — they’re all nice words — 

quality of life. 

 

But there’s a lot of people out there, Mr. Speaker, that are not 

experiencing the type of vision that’s in the information that 

we’ve been provided from the Throne Speech. They’re 

struggling to make ends meet. And, you know, Mr. Speaker, 

there was a lot of issues that were not raised in the Throne 

Speech, and I think that’s unfortunate for a lot of Saskatchewan 

residents. The affordability is huge, issues that face 

communities and a leadership. 

 

And I just want to kind of focus a little bit on the leadership. 

And I know that the mayors, the chief and councils, our Métis 

leaders in the Cumberland constituency in the North work hard 

and try to present the issues that they hear of their residents that 

they have been elected to represent. And they try to share that. 

And I believe over the last four years they have shared that with 

the government. The government can’t say they’re not aware of 

the issues. As the official opposition, we have raised those 

issues. 

 

So we thought there would be a lot more in the Throne Speech 

to show a plan, the vision. And unfortunately we don’t see that. 

Like I said earlier, there was little mentioned about northern 

Saskatchewan, little mentioned about First Nations and Métis, 

and a lot of other areas of concern that were not raised in the 

Throne Speech, and the plan and a vision, where this 

government’s going. 

 

And I say they have a large caucus. They have a lot of work to 

do and I hope at the end of the day, as official opposition, we 

will hold them to account. We’ve been given that honour. And I 

will always show respect. But sometimes, you know, the 

compassion that we feel for the people that we represent and the 

stories and the challenges, they are so many and great. 

 

And sometimes you feel like the government, with its resource 

revenue that’s unprecedented, you see the times and the booms 

and you hear about all the prosperity, and everything is going 

good. But there are so many challenges with our young people. 



82 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2011 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s challenges that you see people 

living with: poverty, the issues of suicide, addictions. There’s 

so many challenges within the Cumberland constituency in 

northern Saskatchewan and within our province. And they ask 

their government to take care of those issues. And this 

government’s been given a clear mandate. I understand that. 

We will hold you to account and the people will, Mr. Speaker, 

hold the members to account. 

 

There are so many challenges facing northern Saskatchewan, 

but I have to be honest. There are individuals who are seeing an 

economic boom and some have shared with me that they’re 

doing quite well and their business is doing well, that their 

family is doing well. And I’m glad for them. That’s good. 

 

But I’ve talked to a lot of people who are not doing so well. The 

living conditions, the quality of life, they do not see. When I see 

our young people lose hope for the future and maybe because of 

the social issues they’re faced with, because of where they were 

placed or what conditions they were put into — not of their 

choice — but I see some of them break away. And I see some 

young people and I encourage them, stay in school; encourage 

them, you need to fight; there is hope. But sometimes, you 

know, that battle is lost. 

 

This government has an opportunity to reach out, and I thought 

in the Throne Speech they might have a vision for the North, 

how they’ll address some of the issues the young people are 

asking them. And whether it’s suicide, whether it’s the 

economics, the challenges that northern people face, housing, 

infrastructure, roads, the quality of life, a level playing field. A 

lot of people are just asking for a level playing field. Give us 

the opportunity to have a level playing field and you will see 

what they can do. But they have to be given that opportunity. 

And this Throne Speech did not give a lot of people the 

opportunity, a level playing field. And it’s unfortunate. 

 

We’ll monitor everything. We will raise the questions in this 

House to the members, to the ministers, to the ministries, and 

those issues that are brought forward. There’s many challenges. 

 

But I also have to say it is an honour to be here and I will do all 

I can for the people I represent with the compassion to represent 

them. My grandfather, as a war veteran, was very proud and 

instilled in us, you have to fight for the individuals that give 

you that opportunity when they ask you to do that. And I say 

that with respect. The fight is there. And sometimes we use 

those words. And it sounds like, you know, why would you use 

words like that? But you know what? Sometimes it feels like 

that. 

 

But at the end of the day, I hope that the individuals that are 

over there on the government side who hear some of the 

challenges that Saskatchewan are facing, and you would do 

your part as you’ve been asked to be here, Mr. Speaker. I leave 

that with them. They have many challenges as well because 

they too will be judged. And for now, they are the government, 

and I always tell people, work with the government, with the 

ministries. But at the end of the day, judgment day will come 

for all of us. And I know that elections will come. People will 

seek re-election. 

 

I am very happy and honoured that the people in the 

Cumberland constituency have chose to ask and to honour me 

with one more term representing them. And I will do all I can to 

raise the issues, whether it’s the trappers, the fishermen, 

whether it’s the leadership, whether it’s our students, our young 

people with their challenges, whether it’s housing, affordability, 

roads, health care, long-term care, I will do all I can to work 

with them. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at this point I would just like to finish up with, 

I guess, a few more comments. There’s a lot of work to be done 

and there’s, I guess, a plan, and the government has its plan. 

We’ll monitor that plan. And I’ll see at the end of the day how 

much is truly in this plan and how it benefits the people we all 

represent. And at the end of the day, they’ll determine how 

successful this government’s plan was. It won’t be the 

government deciding that; it will be the people, the quality of 

life they have. They want a good life, and people want us to do 

good. And I hope our province does good. We live in a 

beautiful province. Yes, things are going good. Let’s hope they 

continue. Let’s hope all people have a good quality of life, a 

fair quality of life. And I just ask all members to remember that 

we’re here to serve the province and everyone in it. 

 

And at this point, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased and honoured, 

but I will not be supporting the Speech . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . I will be supporting the amendment. I like that 

one. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and may I say how 

proud I am to join my colleagues in this Assembly. In my first 

address I want to acknowledge those who have supported and 

assisted me in my journey to be the MLA for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford constituency. 

 

First and foremost, first and foremost, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

say a special thank you to my wife, Valerie. Over the past 18 

months she has attended meetings and events and met many 

new people. Her encouragement and advice have been a major 

source of strength for me. I could not have done this job 

without her. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my journey began 18 months ago. It began when 

some of the residents in my constituency approached me to 

seek the Sask Party nomination. I decided I would, Mr. 

Speaker, and the work began. I pledged that I would work hard 

and I would reach out to others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, please let me acknowledge the work done by 

Michael Chisholm. I got to know Michael in my capacity of a 

councillor for my home community of the resort village of 

Metinota. I was asked to oversee a Canada infrastructure 

program to construct a new lagoon for Meota, the RM of 

Meota, and the resort village of Metinota. I approached both 

Michael and our federal Member of Parliament. They 

encouraged us to make an application for funding, and today we 

are proud to have the lagoon built and in operation. The people 

of Cut Knife-Turtleford constituency are grateful for the work 

done by Michael Chisholm, and on their behalf I would like to 

thank him. 

 



December 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 83 

In seeking nomination, Mr. Speaker, I was pleased when over 

600 people attended the nomination meetings. It was at this 

nomination where I made a commitment that if elected, I will 

meet on a regular basis with each of the communities. I will 

take their issues to our government. And I was honoured and 

humbled to be selected as a Saskatchewan Party candidate for 

the Cut Knife-Turtleford constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the candidate for the Saskatchewan Party, the 

work began the next day after my nomination. I approached all 

of the villages, towns, RM councils, and the seven First Nations 

chief and councils to ask if I could attend their meetings. We 

were successful in attending 60 per cent of the council meetings 

and will visit the remaining 40 per cent in the new year. 

 

I have an understanding of local government, having served as 

a councillor for four years in the city of North Battleford and 12 

years as a councillor in the resort village of Metinota. I truly 

appreciated, Mr. Speaker, the leadership of our Premier. Our 

Premier’s record of a promise made is a promise kept was what 

I believe why I was welcomed in my meetings. 

 

I listened to the people, Mr. Speaker, and I do have a better 

understanding of the issues that our local governments and 

chiefs and councils have. We will need to continue to address 

the issues of safe communities, infrastructure support, and First 

Nations people need to see improvement in education and 

living conditions. Mr. Speaker, I welcome the challenge. 

 

[15:30] 

 

With the writ coming down for the election, we were organized. 

And with our Premier making the election date announcement, 

we were ready to go. 

 

In the first two days, over 200 signs were put in place. And this 

is a big achievement as it’s such a vast area, and I thank the 

people for doing it. The constituency team made a pledge that 

they would contact the 9,259 eligible voters in our constituency, 

asking for their support. It was gratifying, Mr. Speaker, when 

on election day we could say that we had reached 90 per cent of 

our voting residents. Our team was made up of some 160 

volunteers, many who worked tirelessly on the campaign. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I was hospitalized after the first 

week of the campaign. I was in ICU [intensive care unit] for 

one week and then ordered to bed rest for another week. Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank all the 

doctors and nurses and hospital staff at the Battlefords Union 

Hospital for their caring, compassion, and professionalism that 

I received — a true testament to our health system. It’s hard to 

believe that a finely tuned body like this could actually break 

down. 

 

I would like to say thank you to my family for their support and 

a special thanks to my wife, Valerie, once again and the 

campaign team who never missed a beat to keep the campaign 

moving on as planned. It was gratifying, Mr. Speaker, that on 

election day I was elected as the MLA for Cut Knife-Turtleford, 

obtaining 64 per cent of the vote. 

 

When I was declared elected, I felt overwhelmed and very 

humbled to be the MLA. The people had put their trust in the 

Saskatchewan Party and for me to represent them in 

government. I look forward to representing them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would now like to speak about the uniqueness of the Cut 

Knife-Turtleford constituency. The constituency was 

established in 2003. Located in northwest Saskatchewan, our 

constituency consists of seven First Nations, four towns, 10 

villages, three resort villages, and 14 RMs that include three 

organized hamlets and 11 resort hamlets. We are fortunate to 

have one provincial park and many regional parks. We have a 

strong agricultural community with successful grain and cattle 

farmers. The area is renowned for its purebred cattle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while agriculture is number one, there is a strong 

oil and gas investment with over 14,000 oil and gas wells, with 

5,000 wells producing in any given month with continued 

growth. These oil and gas investments have seen major changes 

in many of the communities with many of the communities 

having new businesses to support this sector. 

 

The future looks bright, Mr. Speaker, with companies talking 

about continued growth. While this House will be celebrating 

100 years of history in 2012, so will the communities of Cut 

Knife and Edam. They are planning celebrations on the July 1st 

weekend and everything is moving along fine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I said our constituency is unique. Uniqueness is 

our diversity. We have seven First Nation reserves: Mosquito 

reserve which includes Grizzly Bear’s Head and Lean Man, 

Red Pheasant, Sweetgrass, Little Pine, Poundmaker, 

Moosomin, and Saulteaux reserves. 

 

It was the leaders of these First Nations people, Mr. Speaker, 

who negotiated Treaty 6. One of these leaders was Chief 

Poundmaker, the great orator. The white people in the area 

were very much impressed with his wit and his passion. As a 

negotiator for his people, Poundmaker sought a good treaty and 

wanted food to be included in case of famine since the buffalo 

had been killed off. 

 

Under the terms of the treaty the First Nations people were 

encouraged to be farmers. However things turned bad as dry 

land at that time did not lend itself to being successfully 

farmed. At this time the Métis under Louis Riel also felt their 

issues were not being recognized in Ottawa. The Riel uprising 

saw some of the First Nations people rebel against the Canadian 

government. Colonel Otter was ordered to put down the 

uprising and to punish those involved. It became apparent to 

Chief Poundmaker that the Otter force would suffer heavy 

casualties, and he persuaded the First Nations people to 

discontinue battle. Poundmaker was later arrested and was 

sentenced to three years in prison. Chief Poundmaker only 

served seven months in prison and died shortly after being 

released.  

 

Mr. Speaker, today Chief Poundmaker’s attempt to make a life 

better for his people is remembered. I congratulate the First 

Nations people who continue to want to make their life better 

for their people. I’m also pleased to know that our schools are 

now teaching students about treaties and the culture of First 

Nations people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another well-known person that I want to include 



84 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2011 

in my address is one of Chief Poundmaker’s descendants, Allen 

Sapp. Allen Sapp was born on the Red Pheasant First Nation, 

January 2nd, 1928. His art and his story have become 

well-known throughout Canada and internationally. His 

paintings tell an important story of his people and their culture. 

Allen was raised by his grandparents, Albert and Maggie 

Soonias, after his mother died of tuberculosis. His grandmother 

nurtured him and encouraged his love of drawings and taught 

him the Cree ways. 

 

In 1986 he was made an Officer of the Order of Canada, and in 

1985 he was awarded the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. In 

1975 he was elected to the Royal Academy of Arts. In 2003 he 

received the Governor General’s Award for English language 

children’s illustration for the book, The Song within my Heart. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, many pieces of the work of Allen Sapp 

can be seen at the Allen Sapp Gallery in North Battleford. First 

Nations people and the citizens in our constituency are proud of 

his work and are pleased that thousands of people visit the 

gallery. Many school children are brought to the gallery each 

year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to conclude by expressing my feelings of 

being a member of this Assembly. The swearing-in ceremony 

was an experience that’ll affect my life forever. When the door 

to the Chamber opened, the overwhelming feeling of gratitude 

to my constituents overcame me. I felt very humbled with the 

job I have been asked to perform, and I will continually try to 

be a public servant that the constituents of Cut Knife-Turtleford 

can be proud of. When signing the record book, I recall the 

many very important and upstanding citizens of our great 

province who have signed this book before me. The experience 

was further honoured by being greeted by the Lieutenant 

Governor and Speaker of the House and our Premier. 

Overwhelmed, honoured, and humbled are the words that 

express my feeling, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The citizens of Cut Knife-Turtleford constituency have voiced 

their support of this government. This government’s initiatives 

to build a strong, caring, fiscally responsible province is clearly 

what the people want in this new Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion to pass the Throne 

Speech, and I will not be supporting the amendment. Mr. 

Speaker, I have adopted the quote “listen to learn, not to 

respond” in my business career and everyday life. I will bring 

this quality to the House and to the constituency of Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege 

again now for my third time to wade into a debate on the 

Throne Speech. Today I’m going to briefly mention some gaps 

in the government’s speech, which my colleagues . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — To introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Yorkton has requested 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all the members of the Assembly I’d like to 

introduce four very special people in your gallery. Firstly, Mr. 

Bruce MacDonald, president and CEO [chief executive officer] 

of Big Brothers Big Sisters of Canada. Just give us a wave 

there, Bruce. Secondly, Joelle Lewis, director of government 

relations of Big Brothers Big Sisters of Canada. Thirdly, Wayne 

Wiens, the executive director of Big Brothers Big Sisters of 

Saskatoon and area — Wayne. And last but certainly not least, 

someone I know very well, Ms. Irma Van De Bon, the 

executive director of Big Brothers Big Sisters of Yorkton and 

area, as well as the area rep for Big Brothers and Big Sisters of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

They’re in the city today. They’re hosting us, all of the 

members of the Assembly at a reception shortly after 5 o’clock, 

I believe, and informing us as to — those that don’t know what 

Big Brothers and Big Sisters are about — what they do and 

their new initiative. So I would ask all members to welcome 

them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Marchuk, seconded by Ms. 

Campeau, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Belanger.] 

 

Ms. Chartier: — One more time, Mr. Speaker. So today I’m 

going to cover or I’ll briefly mention some gaps in the 

government’s speech which my colleagues, I think, have 

spoken to very well. But my focus today is going to be on one 

key area, supporting families in their caregiving needs, one area 

in which this government, I think, is squandering a prime 

opportunity to put the infrastructure in place to ensure 

employees have access to the workforce they need . . . 

employers have access to the workforce they need to maintain 

and grow their operations. Our youngest citizens have the 

opportunity to be in the best possible loving, enriching, and 

supportive care when their parents cannot be there, and most 

importantly, enhance the lives of all our citizens. 

 

But first, I have to dispense with some thank yous. And I also 

actually want to congratulate all the members on both sides of 

the House on their successful elections in their respective 

communities. And a big thank you to all the candidates who let 

their name stand. It isn’t an easy feat, I think we all know, to 

put your name out there and put your name on a ballot. And I 



December 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 85 

think we all have different philosophies or our differences are 

philosophical in here, but ultimately those who put their names 

forward, we all want to see a better Saskatchewan. We don’t 

always have the same means to get there, but I think we all 

have the best intentions. So I just say thank you to all the 

candidates who let their names stand. 

 

I want to give the biggest congratulations to all the new 

members. I was only there myself two years ago and I know 

that you’ll all be trying to figure out the lay of the land and how 

this all works. But trust me, you’ll figure it out pretty fast and it 

gets easier. 

 

I want to say thank you to the good folks of Saskatoon 

Riversdale for trusting me for yet another term to bring their 

concerns to this Legislative Assembly. I’ll continue to work 

hard and do my very best to ensure your voices are heard in this 

legislature and your issues are addressed by this government. 

 

I want to say thank you to my fabulous campaign team and all 

our wonderful volunteers who helped get me here. We chose, in 

Saskatoon Riversdale, to go with a less experienced and a 

greener team. Our goal was to bring some youthful voices to 

our campaign team and to build some capacity for the future. 

So everyone in our campaign was new to their respective roles 

and did such a fine job. So I want to say thank you to Tracey, 

Ferron, Mark, and Vanessa. 

 

On the volunteer side of things, we had a nice blending of 

long-time Saskatoon Riversdale workers, some great folks who 

came aboard in the by-election in 2009, and some brand new 

volunteers who joined us for the first time. So again, I just want 

to say thank you to the staff and volunteers for their 

commitment to social democratic values and their desire to 

fight for social, economic, and environmental justice. 

 

For many of us, I think for all of us, family plays a big role in 

helping us to be able to do this job. But as a mom of two 

children, one of them who happens to be a freshly minted 

four-year-old as of Saturday, having a strong support network 

isn’t just nice, it’s absolutely imperative. 

 

So part of that support network is my husband Blair who two 

years ago stepped back from his own full-time employment 

when I was first elected and stepped into the role of parent at 

home. As many of us who have been that parent at home, it’s 

not an easy job. It’s pretty wonderful, but it’s not easy. So I 

really appreciate that Blair has done that for our family. 

 

I want to say thank you to my girls, Hennessey and Ophelia, 

who are both amazing troopers. And they do put up with the 

downside of this job, having a mom who is not always around 

when they need me. Whenever I talk about my kids, I get a little 

sensitive. This happens to be the first time my husband and my 

youngest haven’t joined me here in Regina. So it’s been a bit of 

a long week, and we’ll see how next week goes. Ophelia has a 

life of her own now. She’s in pre-K, a francophone pre-K, five 

afternoons a week and starting to have her own life. And I 

didn’t think she was keen on hanging out in Regina waiting to 

see Mom whenever I might have a little bit of free time. So I 

will see how the rest of this week and next week go. 

 

But I do have a wonderful support network, as I said, which 

includes my husband, but it also includes my sister, Michelle, 

and my parents, who go above and beyond the call of duty to be 

helpful and to be able to put my mind at ease. So I want to say 

thank you to them for making it possible for me to be able to do 

this job. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the Throne Speech, where are 

some of the gaps I mentioned earlier? This one particular one 

doesn’t go to the specific contents of the government agenda, 

but there was something in the conclusion that jumped out at 

me on Throne Speech day and speaks volumes about this 

government’s approach to some of its citizens. 

 

We were reminded, we were reminded that our seats in this 

legislature are on loan and purchased with the blood of our 

soldiers and the toil of our settlers. Indeed this is true. But I 

would like to add that our First Nations and Métis citizens are a 

big part of this picture too, Mr. Speaker, an important part of 

our shared history of our fine province and need to be 

acknowledged for this. They also need to be included in our 

shared future and as active and full partners. I don’t believe this 

government or this Throne Speech fully recognizes this. 

 

The word homelessness was also a word absent from the 

Throne Speech, but it is a real and pressing issue here in our 

province. Some of my colleagues and I had the opportunity last 

week to hear a presentation about Housing First, an approach to 

housing that ensures people have an adequate roof over their 

heads so they can begin to address some of the issues that led to 

their homelessness in the first place: addictions, abuse, mental 

health issues. In fact the presenter, Tim Richter, made very well 

the point that a boom town economy accelerates homelessness 

more than anything else, and Saskatchewan should be primed to 

tackle this growing problem that costs us all, both economically 

and socially. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Housing First has worked elsewhere. It’s worked very well in 

fact in Calgary in decreasing homelessness, and everyone there 

has gotten on board — the business community, municipalities, 

the provincial government, community organizations. They all 

recognize it’s cheaper to address homelessness than to ignore it. 

I would argue, Mr. Speaker, that we can’t say we have a 

comprehensive housing plan unless we have a plan to address 

homelessness. Currently this government has no such plan. 

 

There are indeed other gaps in this government’s approach, Mr. 

Speaker, and in this Throne Speech. But I do want to take a few 

minutes to address the lack of support for families when it 

comes to their caregiving needs. I think I’m particularly well 

positioned to do this as a mom of that four-year-old, who 

happens to have many friends and acquaintances who are in the 

thick of raising children and trying to figure out how you 

combine parenting with school or parenting with education. As 

I said, I’m in the middle of it myself, but I have many friends 

who’ve got young children too. I’ve been an at-home parent, 

and I have a husband who’s currently an at-home dad with our 

children. I’m a big believer in finding ways to help families 

have time at home for sure. So that’s another perspective that I 

bring. 

 

And I happen to have worked in the area of work/family 



86 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2011 

balance, had the privilege of working with employers like Tim 

Hortons and airline hotels and resorts. I’ve had the privilege of 

working with well-paid professional employees, and I’ve had 

the privilege of working with lower waged employees who are 

struggling to get by and trying to figure out their work/family 

balance picture. It is not pretty, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Right now, I don’t have the most recent stats, but just a few 

years ago, about 70 per cent of women with children under six 

were in the paid labour force here in Saskatchewan. So the 

reality is we have about 70 per cent. This is a huge number of 

people who need care for their children. This is a reality today, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again I just want to emphasize. As I said, I’ve been an 

at-home parent, and I am a big believer in trying to find ways to 

support parents to be at home, and that includes looking at 

leaves and different methods. But the reality is child care is a 

necessity here for our economy to succeed as well. We need 

people, women included, in paid employment to fill all the jobs 

that this government talks about. 

 

So yesterday I had the opportunity to ask the Minister of 

Education some questions about child care. The first thing she 

said to me, Mr. Speaker, is I should talk to my past colleagues 

about why previous government hadn’t done the work that 

she’s suggesting should have been done. And you know what? I 

believe that my colleagues did at the time the best that they 

could with limited resources. 

 

Governing, as I am sure this government is learning, is not 

easy, and we make choices with limited resources. But I have to 

remind the members opposite that there are only . . . There are 

more of us who are new to the Assembly than who served in 

that government. So it’s time for this government to fly on their 

own. I’ve spent two years listening to 16 years. Well you know 

what? You have to start looking at your last four years and what 

you’ve had the opportunity to do or haven’t done. 

 

So with respect to that, I think the minister also yesterday said 

she mentioned Manitoba — our neighbour to the east — and 

she said how much better that neighbour had done than we have 

been doing under an NDP government. Well I want to remind 

the minister and ask her, well how the heck did Manitoba get to 

the place that they are with close to 30,000 child care spots? 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they have a plan. They’ve had a plan since 

2002. In fact they’re in the middle of their second five-year 

plan. 

 

So how do you get someplace? How do you get 30,000 child 

care spots? You have a plan. And it doesn’t just involve saying, 

I’m going to create spaces. So what they did in their first 

five-year plan, Mr. Speaker, they did in fact create over 5,000 

more child care spaces. They enhanced . . . This is the Manitoba 

government. This is the Manitoba government, Mr. Speaker. So 

I’m glad he’s applauding an NDP administration and the fine 

work that they’re doing. 

 

They enhanced nursery school initiatives supporting at-home 

parents who didn’t tap into full-time child care but wanted the 

opportunity to provide their kids with some socialization and an 

opportunity to connect with other kids. They increased child 

care subsidy levels, making it more affordable for low- and 

middle-income families. They added 450 new early childhood 

education . . . or they trained 450 new child care education 

graduates. They increased early childhood educator salaries by 

15 per cent and the revenues to family child care providers 

increased by 12 per cent, Mr. Speaker. This was in the first of 

their five-year plan — 2002 to 2007. 

 

So what are they currently doing, Mr. Speaker? So why do I say 

that this government, why do I say this government doesn’t 

have a plan? Well because they don’t have a plan, Mr. Speaker. 

This is a plan. And again I encourage the minister to keep 

looking east. Look east, Mr. Speaker, and Ms. Minister. 

 

So what’s missing in our plan? I just want to talk a little bit 

more about what’s in this Manitoba plan. They’re going to 

increase their child care spaces by 6,500 by 2013. They’re 

going to increase their nursery school enrolment. They’re going 

to support capital funding of child care. They’re going to put in 

place a child care safety charter. They’re going to develop 

age-appropriate curricula and enhance program quality, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re going to create centralized online wait-lists 

for anybody who’s tried to find child care. 

 

What you end up doing now here in Saskatchewan, you might 

apply to one child care, two child cares, three child cares. 

You’re just waiting to get a call back. There are places, the 

Ottawa Capital Region, Manitoba, Quebec, and actually now 

Prince Edward Island of all places, has developed a centralized 

online wait-list to have one-stop shopping for child care. 

Manitoba has committed to having the lowest child care fees 

outside of Quebec. 

 

What else is part of their plan? Greater inclusion, Mr. Speaker. 

Not every family has the same needs, child care needs, and not 

every child who comes into care needs the same supports. So 

they’ve tried very hard to ensure that children, perhaps with 

disabilities, are receiving a kind of appropriate child care. 

 

They’ve developed more flexible hours, Mr. Speaker. The 

reality is we live in a world that is 24-7. There is the need, Mr. 

Speaker, to look at non-standard child care outside of the 

Monday to Friday, 9 to 5 day. The reality is there are many 

families who would be eligible for licensed child care but the 

reality is there are few spaces offered at this time. So you have 

a family, someone who is working at Tim Hortons, that starts at 

6 in the morning, can’t get licensed child care. They work on a 

Saturday morning or work at 9 o’clock on a Friday night; they 

can’t get licensed child care, Mr. Speaker. This is a huge gap 

we need to address. 

 

Instead you’ve got someone leaving their child, not because 

they want to, but they need to work. The rising cost of living 

has been a reality for many people and the option of staying 

home isn’t the reality for many people. So there are people 

forced into lower waged employment who need to work, Mr. 

Speaker, and unfortunately the child care isn’t there. So they’re 

leaving their little Johnny or little Sue with Uncle Harry down 

the street who might have a little bit too much to drink 

sometimes but they don’t have . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

This is a reality. The member opposite says, “Oh, please.” This 

is a reality. People cannot find appropriate child care, Mr. 

Speaker, especially outside of the non-standard Monday to 

Friday, 9 to 5 hours. 



December 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 87 

You look around. What else is Manitoba doing? It’s part of 

their plan, Mr. Speaker, a stronger workforce. They’re creating 

incentives for Aboriginal students, efforts to recruit more new 

Manitobans to their child care workforce, upgrading assistance 

for existing early childhood educators who wish to enhance 

their credentials. Right now, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan 

there is very little incentive for child care workers to move from 

one year to a two-year training. So you might get your first 

year, but the wage difference is so marginal when you get your 

second year that there is very little incentive to put yourself 

through that second year of schooling. 

 

They are offering scholarships to create a stronger workforce. 

They’re looking to try to recruit more men to the field. They 

have a focus on more home-based providers because not all of 

us like centre-based care. I like the opportunity or the . . . I 

think some of us like the opportunity to be able to put our child 

in a smaller, more home-like setting. 

 

What else are they doing to create a stronger workforce? 

They’re working to recruit back those people who have left the 

child care profession because there is such a high burnout rate. 

So that might be something that we’d look at having in our plan 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, I will definitely make sure 

the minister has a copy of this. 

 

Stronger parental stewardship — making sure parents are part 

of the process. Strategic expansion. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is a child care plan. Adding 2,000 spaces, 

500 a year for the next four years, is not a child care plan. And 

a child care plan involves talking with families, trying to 

connect and figure out all the various needs that families have. 

We don’t all want a one-size-fits-all child care model, so let’s 

talk to families about the kind of care that they want and need. 

 

Saskatchewan values — what does that look like? We need to 

talk to educators. We should be leading in this area. If Prince 

Edward Island can go from the bottom of the class to the top of 

the class in the last three years, which they’ve been doing, we 

can do the same here, Mr. Speaker. We have the resources, the 

financial resources, a government that had a budget of $10.7 

billion last year, Mr. Speaker. There is money to invest in our 

children. The reality is this is about investing in employment as 

well, making sure we have the workforce to be able to fill the 

positions. 

 

When I was working for the work and family unit about five 

years ago, still under an NDP government, it was amazing. It 

went in a short period of time, the demand . . . We were in the 

midst of a labour force shortage just starting five or six years 

ago, Mr. Speaker. So training and making sure we have the 

child care workers to fill the need, making sure that we’re 

supporting those who want to provide at-home care — there’s 

so many things we could be doing. But again I’m on a tangent 

here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to do proper consultation. There’s been 

lots of very good work that’s been done. We need to talk to 

families, educators, care providers, and figure out what kind of 

plan fits our needs here in Saskatchewan. Then we need to 

implement it. And the minister talked about action yesterday. I 

think we’d all like to see some action on this front. 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I encourage the minister: look east, 

Ms. Minister. You have some . . . [inaudible] . . . Manitoba, 

Quebec, and Prince Edward Island. There’s some fine examples 

out there. Let’s lead on this front and make sure families have 

what they need to be the best possible parents and the best 

possible employees or students. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, as I said, there’s many gaps in this 

Throne Speech. I’ve mentioned a couple. Particularly I 

mentioned child care. But I will, on that note I will say that I 

will be supporting the amendment and I will not be supporting 

the Throne Speech. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and may I add my 

congratulations to you for being elected as the Speaker of this 

House. I’d also like to extend congratulations to the member 

from Moosomin who had served as Speaker for the previous 

four years. 

 

As many of you know, the mayor of our city of Moose Jaw is a 

former Speaker, and I am proud to have been the one to give 

him the opportunity to become the mayor of this city just a few 

years ago. And thank you to the constituents of Moose Jaw 

North who have shown their confidence in our government and 

also in me as their representative to serve as another term. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Moose Jaw is a fascinating city with a lot of 

character and a lot of history. The history goes back to the early 

settling of this province and to the days of prohibition and the 

illegal sale of booze. Some sharp thinking minds, just a few 

years ago, took advantage of this rather embarrassing history 

and began to think of tourism as an economic engine. 

 

It was led by the development of the Temple Gardens Mineral 

Spa and later the Tunnels of Moose Jaw that depicted the 

hardships of the Chinese immigrants and the bootlegging days 

that created an economy in the 1920s. Added to that, the 

murals, three museums: the art museum, the Western 

Development Museum for travel, and the pioneers museum at 

Sukanen. There are also specialty shops throughout Moose Jaw 

as well as the Mae Wilson Theatre performing arts theatre. So 

Moose Jaw has become a tourist centre of the province. 

 

Moose Jaw has the potential to grow and be much more than 

that as well. It’s a general location of strong agriculture in the 

province. It is also the hub for transportation. There’s not only 

two highways that intersect — both the TransCanada and the 

No. 2 Highway — but it is the largest CP [Canadian Pacific] 

Rail centre between Calgary and Winnipeg. Now I suspect that 

that will change with the transportation hub just a few 

kilometres east of Moose Jaw. However, the link that will be 

played in that will be a great tribute to the growth of the region 

and to the prosperity of Saskatchewan. 

 

Moose Jaw is also served by the CN [Canadian National] Rail, 

as well as the Soo rail line that goes right into the United States. 

With the development of the industrial corridor between Regina 

and Moose Jaw, there’s significant potential for growth in the 

area and for our city. 

 

[16:00] 



88 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2011 

Over the past four years, there has already been substantial 

development. Streets that were vacant lots before are now filled 

with houses and families. We were caught like a lot of centres 

that there weren’t enough serviced lots, but that has since 

changed and there are now two new subdivisions that have been 

developed. And there are several new housing starts that will 

add to the construction phase over the winter months and will 

lead to help the housing shortage that we have all experienced. 

 

In the past four years, Moose Jaw has constructed the field 

house, the indoor track, and the soccer facility. And to the 

amazement of many of the citizens, especially the city 

management, the facility is being utilized more than double of 

what was expected when it was first constructed. It’s a beautiful 

facility and it’s a great asset to the city of Moose Jaw. 

 

This fall we’ve also officially opened Mosaic Place, our new 

downtown recreation complex and the new home of the Moose 

Jaw Warriors who currently are leading the eastern division 

conference. And we’re so proud of them, and they’re having an 

exceptionally good season. Moose Jaw Place also has a new 

curling surface that is attracting some major world-class 

bonspiels, as well as a convention room and banquet facilities 

right in the heart of downtown Moose Jaw. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, the new hospital that was 

announced earlier this year — a new state-of-the-art facility that 

will be first-class, and the first of its kind in Canada 

encompassing the LEED [leadership in energy and 

environmental design] principles and providing quality health 

care to Moose Jaw and the Five Hills Health Region. Now the 

former opposition member from Moose Jaw and the candidate 

for the NDP in my riding tried their best to undermine the 

concept, saying it would be smaller and less efficient. Well that 

just isn’t so, Mr. Speaker, and the citizens of Moose Jaw didn’t 

buy into that, and I give them a lot of credit for it. 

 

The hospital is one of the promises that we made and we will be 

keeping. In fact, it will surpass the original suggestion of a new 

wing that was presented to the former government. And in early 

2007, that government actually turned down any renovations to 

the Moose Jaw Hospital. So I’m pretty proud of what this 

government has done for Moose Jaw when it comes to health 

care. 

 

The hospital is going ahead in spite of the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre’s remarks on the radio on Tuesday, saying 

that the Moose Jaw Hospital wasn’t even mentioned in the 

Throne Speech. Well that member should know better. It wasn’t 

mentioned but it is going ahead. It wasn’t mentioned simply 

because it has been announced. He might know that the 

children’s hospital in Saskatoon and the Saskatchewan hospital 

in North Battleford were not mentioned either because they 

have already been announced. This is an aggressive 

government. It’s moving forward. The misleading tactics of the 

opposition that they’ve tried to use haven’t worked, but they 

just won’t stop. And they won’t fool the people of this 

province. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan spoke loud and clear on November 

the 7th, yet the member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre just 

doesn’t seem to understand. They’re not willing to accept the 

decision of the people of Saskatchewan who want 

Saskatchewan to keep moving forward. Saskatchewan is 

moving forward, and I appreciate the efforts of all the people in 

my campaign that helped so diligently. 

 

I’ve heard a lot of comments and recognition that my first 

reaction is, I didn’t do it alone. It was good organization and 

good campaign strategy and 4,565 other people who assisted in 

the victory. I have a lot of people to thank but mostly is my 

family and especially my wife, who worked diligently 

throughout the campaign. She door knocked on a lot of doors. 

 

And in fact as the campaign was winding down on that 

Saturday before the election — we didn’t work Sundays; that’s 

a day of worship and a day for family — but on that Saturday 

night it was going on to 8 o’clock. And I’m thinking, 

everything we’ve done we’ve possibly could do; it’s getting 

late. And her retort was, well I’ve only got seven more houses 

to do. But we did our best, and we were victorious and 

appreciate the efforts of all the people who helped. Even my 

grandsons were getting into it. And to this day, they want to 

play door knocking, and I don’t understand that. 

 

I want to recognize a couple of other people, Jeff McElroy, who 

is a young contractor. He came to Moose Jaw a few years ago, 

specifically to take the carpentry course at SIAST Palliser. He 

had no intentions of staying in Moose Jaw and probably not in 

Saskatchewan. But when he got there, he liked what he saw. He 

understood the province was moving forward, and he stayed. 

He started a company, and he’s working. On one particular day, 

I had somebody that cancelled out from door knocking, and I 

phoned Jeff and he came over. And I said, you know this is 

great that you would do such a thing for me, is to come over at 

this time. And he said, Warren, a few hours now, especially in a 

fall like we had that we could do construction well on into the 

fall. And he said, if I take an hour or two now it means we will 

keep Saskatchewan moving forward; I’m willing to invest that 

time just for this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Shane MacDonald is a retired military person who 

also gave me a hand and walked a lot of blocks with me and 

helped an awful lot. And his retort when I thanked him was that 

we have to keep this province moving forward. We cannot have 

it move backwards. So he was willing to spend as much time as 

it took to keep knocking on doors. 

 

Wayne and Brenda Zimmerman were another couple. They’re 

business people from Moose Jaw that had been out of the 

province, out of the country, for an extended period of time. 

They weren’t able to come to the advance polls or take 

advantage of the absentee ballot. And to their expense, they 

changed their departure time and made sure they were back in 

the province two days early so that they could vote and make 

sure that they did their part to keep Saskatchewan moving 

forward. And I thank them for that. 

 

I want to also thank a number of the organized labour members 

who also supported me and the new Saskatchewan. They came 

out because they realize that Saskatchewan is moving forward 

and as the future gets brighter for Saskatchewan, it’s brighter 

for them. And I thank them. 

 

Why did these people do so much? Because they could see the 

progress that Saskatchewan has made and wanted to continue 



December 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 89 

moving forward. They like what is happening, the growth, the 

entrepreneurial attitude that now exists in this province. They 

like the lower taxes — personal income tax, property tax and 

small business tax. They like the opportunity that is now open 

for our young people. There’s more jobs being created, the 

student retention program of up to $20,000 for those who 

choose to stay in the province. 

 

And we continue to invest in our youth and the future with the 

new Saskatchewan advantage scholarship for high school 

students going on to post-secondary education with up to $500 

per year for four years. The Saskatchewan advantage grant for 

education savings makes it much easier for parents to save for 

their children’s education. People said they want their children 

to be near them when they graduate rather than move to other 

jurisdictions as had been the case for decades prior. 

 

They like the fact that we support families with help for 

families like extending the active family benefits for children 

up to the age of 18, the provincial sales tax exemption for 

children’s clothing being extended for children up to the age of 

18. And they like what we’ve done to child care. And the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale talked about child care and 

the five-year plan. Well, as you know, the five-year plan may 

be working in other places, but the NDP in their 16 years of 

reign never had a plan like that themselves. 

 

The people like what we do with child care — 35 per cent more 

child spaces than when we took over in 2007, and the promise 

of an additional 2,000 child care spaces over the next four 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is moving forward. The people 

appreciated the opportunity for the kids to live and to work and 

to stay in Saskatchewan. And people like the idea of the 

first-time homeowners tax credit, and the Saskatchewan 

advantage home plan to create 4,600 entry-level housing units 

over the next five years. 

 

They like the improvements of the health care facilities like the 

new hospital announcement for Moose Jaw. They appreciated 

the surgical wait times that have been lowered. In fact, two of 

my constituents, when we were door knocking, one had heart 

surgery. When the doctor asked him, can you be available on 

the 15th? And he’s thinking a month later, and the doctor said 

no, this is next Tuesday. Just appreciated that, that they could 

get in that fast. When another constituent was just so excited 

about the hip-replacement surgery that he received, everything 

was explained to him. It was all in a timely matter, and he really 

appreciated what this government has done as far as health care. 

 

People said they appreciated the open and trustworthy 

government that we have been. The government that has kept 

its word and has done what it says it would do. They wanted a 

government that would invest in their future, not like the NDP 

who lost money on bad management, government ventures, 

losing millions of tax dollars like $43 million in Navigata and 

$35 million for SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 

Development Company], just to name two. But there are over a 

dozen of bad deals that citizens had to pay for because of the 

mismanaging of the former NDP. People like our plan to 

continue the debt reduction, to balance the budget, to have 

competitive taxes, and to move Saskatchewan forward. 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is moving forward. This was even 

very evident at the Enterprise regional luncheon last week when 

the announcement that K+S is going forward in the 

development of a new solution potash mine just north of 

Buffalo Pound. This will be a huge economic impact for Moose 

Jaw, and for the entire province. It’s the . . . 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. This K+S mine will be the first 

greenfield potash mine to open its doors for four decades with 

an investment of $3.25 million. There will be 1,100 jobs at the 

peak of construction, with 300 full-time jobs during the mine’s 

operation which is scheduled to start production in 2015. And 

you know what we say, Mr. Speaker? We say welcome back. 

Welcome back to Saskatchewan, K+S.  

 

K+S were in the province 40 years ago but were forced out 

when the NDP government at that time forced them out. Over 

40 years of investment, over 40 years of revenue, of jobs to this 

province gone because of the short-sightedness of the NDP 

government that didn’t have a growth agenda and didn’t believe 

in growth. That’s changing now. And it’s good to see that K+S 

has returned to our province and will contribute to the positive 

future of the growth of Saskatchewan. They and we appreciate 

the most recent Conference Board of Canada’s report as was 

read in the Throne Speech: 

 

Saskatchewan’s economy is being fuelled by the 

continued development of the potash industry, and steady 

expansion of oil and gas extraction. Real gross domestic 

product is expected to rise by a brisk 5.1 per cent in 2011, 

and Saskatchewan will have the fastest growing 

provincial economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne confirms our 

government is moving forward with lower taxes, better health 

care, improved education facilities, investment in infrastructure, 

$2.2 billion in highway improvement, and an additional $100 

million investment in SaskTel’s 4K network. To grow the 

province, we need to communicate better and have a good 

transportation system. And that’s exactly what we will continue 

to do. 

 

We’re looking after people, our seniors, the people who worked 

to make Saskatchewan this great place, like my grandparents 

who came from different parts of Europe and my parents that 

farmed and served during the Second World War. These people 

deserve the dignity and comfort of living in Canada’s best 

province. During the past four years, we doubled the seniors’ 

income plan. The seniors’ income plan will increase again, as 

we stated in the Throne Speech. Our government will also 

introduce a new seniors’ personal care home benefit that will 

subsidize the difference between the senior’s monthly income 

and the cost of their personal care home space up to a threshold 

of $1,800. 

 

Mr. Speaker, seniors, students, first-time homebuyers, families, 

communities, commitments to leading more First Nations and 

Métis people to active participation in the workforce, and a 

place where people with disabilities get the best care and 

support available — that is the new Saskatchewan and that’s 

what is presented in this Throne Speech. 



90 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2011 

The Throne Speech is a plan to continue to grow Saskatchewan 

and keep the province moving forward. It was summed up the 

best in the quote that was in the Throne Speech, and it said: 

 

Simply put, our vision is that Saskatchewan will be the best 

place in Canada to work, to live, to start a business, to get an 

education, to raise a family and to build a life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the amendment, but I will 

support the Speech from the Throne. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

privilege to be able to stand up in this Chamber and speak. And 

I guess the first thing I want to do is, I want to congratulate all 

of the members on the recent election but especially, especially 

the 16 new members — the 15 from the government side and 

the one from the opposition side. This is a great privilege to 

come into this Chamber and speak for the people of your area 

as I speak for the people of Carrot River Valley. 

 

It’s a wonderful building, Mr. Speaker. And I can still 

remember I was listening to the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana talking about the first time she was in here. And she 

was in here with the Girl Guides. First time I was in here was in 

1968 and I received my Queen’s Scout badge in here, and that 

was the last year they had the Queen’s Scout badge in 1968. 

And then she said that she was in here again and was sitting, 

sitting there but they had to move her to the back. It was some 

movie thing because of her hair. I didn’t have that problem, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But it is, it is a wonderful building, and when you look at the 

history of it, you know, it is absolutely fantastic, the foresight 

that the Premier Scott had to have a building such as this within 

this province of Saskatchewan. And you know, it’s its 100 

years next year. And I know that the member from Moosomin 

can just barely remember when it was built. He’s been around 

that long. 

 

But anyway, continuing on, Mr. Speaker. I want to congratulate 

not just the members of this Assembly, but I want to 

congratulate you on your election as Speaker. And I want to 

thank the member from Moosomin for the four years of diligent 

work he did. And I realize being a Speaker is a terribly tough 

job, and you know, to sit there and listen to some of the rhetoric 

that goes on and to keep decorum in the Chamber is a tough 

job. And I know I certainly wouldn’t want to do it myself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have some thank yous to make. And I want to 

thank, I want thank the people of Carrot River Valley. It is a 

humbling experience to come in here and I want to thank them 

from the bottom of my heart for re-electing me to speak on their 

behalf, to bring their concerns forward to the government. 

Carrot River Valley is well-known as . . . I know that the 

member from P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote said that she felt 

that she was in the best constituency. I beg to differ because I 

believe that Carrot River Valley is the most beautiful and most 

productive place that there is. We have forestry. We have great 

farmland. It’s just a great place to be. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I will mention, you know, I had brought it 

up and I was doing some introductions yesterday about the 

Carrot River Wildcat football team. Carrot River Valley is 

well-known for its football team. Now it wasn’t just Carrot 

River that has done well in football. This year the Hudson Bay 

Riders won the 2A six-man football championship, provincial 

championship. 

 

So things are moving in Carrot River. We’ve got a great spirit 

there in sports and in various different things. We have, like I 

said, probably the most progressive farmers in all of 

Saskatchewan and probably all of Canada . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Now, somebody mentioned that Raymore . . . 

Carrot River played Raymore and the score was 50 to 54. 

Raymore barely beat Carrot River. Had it not been for that, 

Carrot River probably would’ve won the 1A six-man football 

championship, provincial football. Not that I can remember 

things like that. 

 

But Carrot River Valley is a great place to be. It’s, like I said 

before, probably one of the most beautiful places in the 

province and it’s humbling to be representing them. We have to 

remember, for all of the people that are sitting here, that we 

have to represent our constituents. That’s number one. And we 

have to look after the province of Saskatchewan and that’s what 

this Throne Speech has done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also want to thank my CAs [constituency assistant], Shelley 

Meyer, Cindy Warner, and Charlene Enns, because when I’m 

not around there, they do the heavy work. And actually they 

probably do most of the heavy work around there. At least 

that’s what they’ll tell the people. 

 

And I also want to thank my wife, Terry, for allowing me to do 

this. I know when we first talked about it and she said, well 

how long would you be gone, you know, if you were elected, 

and how long would you be gone away from home? And I said, 

well probably quite a while because, you know, we have 

session; we have all these meetings and whatnot. And she says, 

right on. Go for it. But, Mr. Speaker, you do need the help of 

your family and the support of your family in this occupation. 

And I know that everybody knows that that is here, and the new 

members will soon find out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I talk about Carrot River Valley and the 

things that have gone on around Carrot River Valley, the people 

actually are very happy with what this government did in the 

previous four years. And that’s why they want to see this 

government continue. 

 

I was fortunate enough to be elected in 2007 with 61 per cent of 

the vote and moved up this time to just about 76 per cent. They 

obviously don’t know me that well. 

 

But the people, the people of Carrot River Valley have seen 

their roads being fixed. They’ve seen the education portion on 

their property taxes reduced. They’ve seen their income taxes 

reduced. 

 

They’ve seen their mills reopening without any taxpayer dollars 

being put in there. This is great. We have Hudson Bay, actually 



December 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 91 

the Weyerhaeuser mill in Hudson Bay is going to be coming on 

with the third shift in January. And Edgewood is actually, they 

are harvesting wood right now and we are hoping for cold 

weather so they can continue harvesting wood. They wanted to 

have boards coming out of there before Christmas but 

unfortunately the wood’s not going to be in there quick enough. 

And so they’re planning for January; the boards will be coming 

out of there. This is great news, great news for northeastern 

Saskatchewan and great news for all of Saskatchewan having 

employment up there in those . . . in that respect. 

 

They also like to see the government debt going down — $3 

billion in the last four years where the government debt has 

come down. The people of Carrot River Valley realize that this 

is very important to the well-being of Saskatchewan, to the 

well-being of Carrot River Valley. They like to see the fact that 

this province, this province moved into a AAA rating last 

spring by Standard & Poors. Now we were probably the only 

jurisdiction in North America that actually moved forward. 

First time Saskatchewan has ever got a AAA rating was under 

our Premier, the Saskatchewan Party government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re looking at education. Cumberland College 

just put a brand new building into Nipawin — $7.2 billion I 

believe it was, Mr. Speaker. This is great for educating the 

people who are away from the cities, who can go there, take 

their education. It’s great for the First Nations. We have two 

First Nations up there, Red Earth and Shoal Lake. Their people 

can go there and take training in Cumberland Community 

College. I’m a great believer in these community colleges. It 

helps our rural areas out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s so many things that we can talk about. But 

one of the things I found out when we were on the doorstep was 

people mainly talked about . . . They’re happy about pretty well 

everything except, you know, everybody is concerned about 

health care. Now, Mr. Speaker, this government has moved 

forward on health care. When you take what this government 

has done, they have moved forward, moved forward with a plan 

on health care, Mr. Speaker. We’ve increased the physician 

spaces in Saskatoon from 60 to 100, the residency seats from 60 

to 120. We went from 400 nurse training spots to 700. Mr. 

Speaker, these are initiatives that our government has taken. We 

have 200 more doctors working in this province right now than 

what we did in 2007. We also were told that we couldn’t hire 

800 nurses. Well, we hired 900, over 900, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I realize that these 200 new doctors, most of them, most of 

them are going to the cities, and what we really need is we need 

those in the rural areas. However our government, under the 

leadership of our Premier, has come up with a good way. First 

off, increasing the seats from 60 to 100 means that a lot of our 

people, a lot of our students will be coming out of our high 

schools from the rural areas, going into the medical college. 

And when they come back out, they will want to go back to 

their roots. They will want to go back to the rural areas and go 

into practice. Now to help that out this government has come up 

with $120,000 forgiveness in student loans. They come back 

out, these new physicians . . . when they go back out to our 

rural areas, they have those advantages to set out there, do the 

work, put the roots back in, in rural Saskatchewan. And it is a 

hope of this government that those new physicians will stay in 

our rural areas. 

Also we need more nurse practitioners. And we are increasing 

. . . A total of 20 new nurse practitioner training seats will be 

added over the next four years. This is this government’s 

commitment. That’s a 67 per cent increase from the training 

seats that are there already. This is also good news for the 

people of rural Saskatchewan, the people of Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

The new 20 doctor rural locum pool will be set up for those 

doctors who, when they want to leave or take a holiday for a 

while, now we can have a pool of doctors who will come in 

there and fill in for when those doctors are gone. Great news for 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when you continue on and look at the things 

within the Throne Speech . . . And I’m just going to bring up 

the odd one here and there. 

 

Last night we attended the Canadian Diabetes Association 

reception here. They’re ecstatic that they have moved the 

children’s insulin pump program from the age of 17 years up to 

the age of 25. This is a great move. And I know that I have had 

some constituents who were worried about their children 

coming off of this program, you know, before they actually 

went out and got a job. By the time they’re 25 years old, the 

hope is that they will have a job and continue on with that. Also 

putting the two longer-acting insulins on the . . . or changing 

them from the exceptional drug status to going on to the full 

formulary is another great thing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of things moving forward in 

Saskatchewan, and I have to say . . . And I want to quote 

Hansard from yesterday. The member from Athabasca said, 

“Now I will point out, Mr. Speaker, that as I listened to the 

Throne Speech, it was pretty bland. It was [pretty] visionless, 

and there was huge gaps.” That was the member from 

Athabasca that said that yesterday. This, this, this Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker, has great vision. It has great vision to 

move Saskatchewan forward. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, another thing for rural Saskatchewan is the new 

community rink affordability grant. The rinks in a lot of our 

smaller communities are our centre of attraction. We have 

obviously lots of hockey teams, lots of our kids playing hockey, 

and providing up to $2,500 a year to help with the cost of 

operating our rinks is a real boon for rural Saskatchewan and 

Carrot River Valley. Rural Saskatchewan was forgotten for far 

too long under that previous administration. They had 16 years 

and they basically forgot about rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to say that this Throne Speech has a 

great vision. Now you remember, Mr. Speaker, back in 2007 

during the campaign, during the campaign, Mr. Speaker, they 

were called . . . the NDP ad said we were a wolf in sheep’s 

clothing. Now, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that that has 

certainly changed because Saskatchewan is not like that any 

more. They can’t use that saying any more because 

Saskatchewan, under this Premier and under the Saskatchewan 

Party government, has turned into a tiger. Basically the best 

place in all of Canada, in all of the world, is moving forward. 

Lowest unemployment, we have the lowest unemployment and 



92 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2011 

every economic indicator is putting Saskatchewan as number 

one in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for these reasons I am going to be supporting the 

Throne Speech and I will not be supporting the amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 

few comments I’d like to make in reply to the Throne Speech, 

and I would like to start by saying I certainly look forward to 

working with you in your role as Speaker and my role as 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as other members have taken this opportunity to 

thank a number of people, I’d like to do the same. First of all I 

would like to thank the voters of Last Mountain-Touchwood 

who have placed their trust in me one more time to represent 

them in the chambers. Mr. Speaker, I certainly realize the 

privilege that I have been given and certainly I once again 

commit that I will certainly do my best to represent them in the 

fashion that they would like me to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the constituency of Last Mountain-Touchwood 

used to be, prior to ’99, it was one of those bellwether ridings 

where for many, many years as the government changed, so did 

the representative. In fact for many years Last 

Mountain-Touchwood was represented by a member of the 

government. It is again but it didn’t start out that way in ’99, 

Mr. Speaker. And as I said, I believe the people of Last 

Mountain-Touchwood have some faith in my ability and I 

certainly respect that and thank them for that. 

 

There are a number of people who were actively involved in my 

campaign as every other member had people involved, and I’d 

like to thank those. I’d like to start by thanking my wife, 

Marlene. She’s certainly engaged in the political process and an 

avid student of political process in our province and in many 

ways is probably more political than I am at times. And she’s 

certainly been a great help to me over the last number of years 

that I’ve been serving in this House and certainly once again 

was a great help in the upcoming campaign — or in the last 

campaign, I should say. 

 

In Last Mountain-Touchwood in our campaign team, we 

actually had quite a small team but we were quite effective and 

that was due to the hard work of a number of key people. Carol, 

my campaign manager, just did a great job in managing things 

and making sure that I was on track and so on and looked after 

all the things that needed to be looked after in the campaign. 

Marilyn, who has been my business manager for the four 

campaigns that I ran in, once again did a great job. And I thank 

both of those two ladies for all the great help that they provided 

and the guidance and all the hard work and long days that they 

put in. 

 

We have Bob who did yeoman service in getting the signs out 

and getting them up, and then of course taking them down. He 

also doubled as a fundraiser. Larry was our techie. And a 

number of other people who played a role, whether that being 

scrutineers or helping put up signs and so on: Bob and Sheila, 

Violet and Fred, Randy and Lawrence and many other people 

who, if I started on the list of people, particularly with 

scrutineers . . . I know I’ve missed many of them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to take a moment to congratulate and 

thank my opponent. I was in a bit of unique situation this time 

in that the opponent, the candidate representing the NDP, was a 

member from my home community. In fact he was the mayor 

of my hometown. And we were in the unique situation where 

our campaign offices were located on opposite sides of Main 

Street. And I should mention for those members who were in 

this House in ’99 that my campaign office was located in the 

Cupar co-op food store which had closed in May. And there is a 

bit of a story behind that, and you can ask some of the people who 

have been around in ’99 and they can perhaps fill you in for those 

members who haven’t been here or weren’t here at that time. 

 

But Don and his team, they worked hard — in fact he was the 

hardest working candidate in the last three elections that I ran in 

— and took the high road. And that’s what I would like to 

congratulate him for. We both ran, I believe, very clean 

campaigns. Personalities didn’t enter into it. As I said, Don and his 

team worked hard and, however, as I had hoped and predicted 

when he was introduced in the last sitting, that he would be able to 

continue full-time in his role as mayor of Cupar. And I certainly 

congratulate him on maintaining that role. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate all members who have 

been elected, whether they’re returning members but, in particular, 

the newly elected members. I believe all of them now have 

delivered their maiden speech, and I must say that they did just an 

excellent job. In fact they really raised the bar for those of us that 

have been around here for a while and I congratulate them for 

that. I can say to their voters that they can be very proud of the 

people that they have sent to this place to represent them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe we are in a new place in the political 

scene of this province. We all know of the results of the last 

election and the dynamics of it. But it does . . . We have a 

returning government who increased our share of the popular 

vote. We increased our seats. This is something, at least since 

the time that I’ve been following politics here in Saskatchewan, 

that that has happened. And it does present some opportunities 

for both sides of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I believe that we have, as we all know who have been here for a 

while and of course the people who follow the democratic 

process and governance in this province, that they know that 

these chambers are a place where politics is practised. And 

sometimes, at least in my view, sometimes the political aspects 

of issues take precedence over what I would call the aspect of 

providing good government to the people of this province. And 

in this place we all need to find that balance. 

 

And I believe at this time, Mr. Speaker, that it does provide all 

of us with an opportunity where we can view the issues that we 

need to deal with, firstly through the lens of good government 

— in other words, what is best for the people of the province. 

But we’ll never . . . Because of the nature of our government, 

our democratic system, politics will always be part of it, but 

sometimes it can be a separate part of it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in that regard, Mr. Speaker, I would say that we could 

make some starts that way. We already have a system that was 



December 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 93 

put in place with some of the good work that you and the 

former member of Regina South did when we changed the way 

we operate in this Assembly, where a lot of work is done in 

committees made up of members from both sides of the House. 

But in practice, the working committees have been largely done 

by opposition members, you know, and they were designed for 

opposition members to hold government to account and so on. 

 

But I believe there was a greater purpose to the committee 

system, where all members of the committee could participate 

and ask questions on behalf of their constituents and get 

information because it’s been my experience that ministers, 

when they appear before committees, bring their most senior 

officials who quite often have the information very readily 

available. And I think that’s something we maybe we need to 

explore. And not to say that government members should be 

taking up opposition members’ time to hold government to 

account because that is the role of opposition members, but I 

believe that the time could be used to benefit all members of 

committee and if all members and particularly government 

members participated more actively. 

 

I know when we were in opposition, the government members 

quite often had very limited participation in committee and now 

and when as us being in government, our members will have 

very limited participation in committee. And I know, I’ll always 

remember the words of our retiring Clerk, Gwenn Ronyk, when 

she spoke to us on her retirement. She urged us to use all the 

tools available to us, and this is something that I would urge 

that we perhaps look at, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said when I started, I just wanted to take this 

opportunity to thank a few people, perhaps put a few comments 

on the record. And I’m looking at the Throne Speech and it’s 

something that there’s a portion in the conclusion that perhaps I 

would just like again to read into the record and it’s something 

that I feel that we should all keep in the back of our minds 

when we are speaking, whether it be in the House or in 

committee, and in the way we conduct ourselves. And the 

portion that I would like to read again to the record is this, Mr. 

Speaker, and I quote: 

 

I ask that you remember every day that your seat in this 

place — hard-fought and well-earned as it might be — is 

on loan. 

 

It was purchased with the blood of our soldiers and the 

toil of our settlers. 

 

It is sustained with the efforts of women and men all over 

our great province. 

 

It is willed to you, in trust, by future generations. 

 

If you keep this in mind during all your deliberations, I 

know you will be worthy of the great responsibility you 

have been given. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, if we remember that, we will be much 

better members of this Assembly and we will serve the people 

of this province much better. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:45] 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 

join in the debate on this 2011, this twenty-seventh legislature 

of the first Throne Speech of our new government. And I would 

be remiss if I didn’t continue on with the tradition of my new 

colleagues and my veteran colleagues in thanking the many 

people and those that brought us here. 

 

Firstly I thank the good Lord for allowing me the honour and 

the privilege to serve my constituency in this province, in this 

blessed province, in this iconic institution that we know is 

coming to be 100 years old in 2012. 

 

Next would be my wife and kids. Again, as many members 

have spoken about their spouses, my wife, Leone, is probably 

my hardest . . . Not probably — was definitely my hardest 

working campaign worker and door knocker and support no 

doubt throughout the whole campaign experience and day to 

day the past essentially six years or so, being nominated over 

two years ahead of the last election and serving as the member 

for Yorkton for four and now into my second term. Without 

her, I truly could not, could not do the things I am able to do. 

 

And my children, they’re truly special kids. My one daughter, 

my older daughter has chosen to take up nursing. Many of us 

have spoken in this Assembly about the ability for our children 

to now stay here. And having a daughter that has worked as a 

care aid, a care assistant in this province, realizing she wanted 

to continue on with that health care profession to do more for 

those in the province . . . And I have often teased her that I 

looked after her as a child, and as I get older she’s going to look 

after me. And now truly she might be looking after me in 

whatever institution I might end up in. 

 

She is a very, very nice young lady, a very hard worker, going 

to her schooling here at the U of R and SIAST, the nursing 

program here, and has that ability to do that, Mr. Speaker, 

because of the expansion of the nursing seats, the expansion of 

the nursing college here in the province, where admittedly we 

shored up the shortage off the beginning. A lot of hard work 

done by now the member for Regina Qu’Appelle, the Minister 

for Government Services, in her work as the Legislative 

Secretary to the Minister of Health in the nursing initiative, 

bringing those immigrant nurses to our province, helping us till 

we were able to build up that nursing program, and now starting 

to graduate our own children in the nursing program and to 

serve the people of the province. I’m very proud of her. 

 

And my other daughter that has gotten her post-secondary 

education in this province is now a journeyman or 

journeyperson hairdresser in Yorkton and is starting her new 

life. Just recently engaged, Mr. Speaker, 21 years old, she’s 

bought her own house and . . . 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Yes, thank you. Engaged to a fine young 

man from Melville. You know, when it comes to hockey there’s 

a bit of a rivalry there. Not a bit; there’s a lot of a rivalry there. 

But all of the things, Mr. Speaker, we’re willing to share, 

including some of the recent news — BHP Billiton in the news 

with the expansions, the new mine they’re developing, Jansen 



94 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2011 

Lake, and the possibility of that new mine that may be going 

somewhere in the vicinity of Yorkton-Melville. 

 

And myself and the member from Melville-Saltcoats, the 

Minister of Agriculture, are more than willing to share that 

good news and how it will influence not only our area, create 

all those thousands if not tens of thousands of jobs and spur the 

economy of our province and our area, the eastern part of the 

province but through to the whole province. Already seeing the 

spinoffs of that type of investment, just with the initial work 

that’s being done for that proposed mine, and the huge impact 

it’s had on our area. 

 

And admittedly, you talk to anybody from the potash sector, 

that if we didn’t have the stable resource royalty rates we do 

have . . . again the highest resource royalty rates for potash 

likely in the world, second only to the Kingdom of Jordan. Our 

next competitor in Canada is actually New Brunswick, at 6 per 

cent. So even with our reduced rate, helping them with the 

expansion and helping them with the ability to write off some 

of their resource royalty income when they’re doing those 

billions of dollars of expansion, creating those thousands and 

tens of thousands of jobs that aren’t here, Mr. Speaker, for the 

short term, but for decades and decades, possibly the next 

century. Spurring on that investment and funding all the 

initiatives that the people of the province are coming to expect 

from a province and from the government that they have come 

to elect again for the second term. 

 

Going on with my thank yous, there are constituents for their 

confidence in me. Plurality — again as the member from Carrot 

River touched on — increasing. We were very lucky to get in 

with a 59-point-some-odd per cent in ’07, increasing to almost 

73 per cent this time, Mr. Speaker. So that was quite an honour 

and very humbling. The vast campaign volunteers that came out 

to support were truly, truly amazing — people that just took on 

any job that was needed, filling positions where needed, 

working until the late hours. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, there’s one I have to mention in particular. 

So many that were very helpful. One young girl — we’ll just 

call her Grasshopper; that was her nickname — 13 years old, 

grade 8 student, worked day upon day upon day. She door 

knocked with me. She ran computers. She input data. Whatever 

she needed to do, she did, Mr. Speaker. And I was very truly 

honoured to have Brooke Webster come and help me, along 

with her parents. But truly an amazing young woman, who has 

told me she really wants to be the premier of this province at 

some point, and I think she’s down the right road. You know, 

give her about 10, 15, 20 years, she just might be able to do 

that. So a very nice young lady and I was honoured to have her 

help me out. 

 

Congratulations and thank you to again our veterans, all of our 

returning veterans. Every incumbent that we had on this side of 

the House returned, Mr. Speaker. And those that didn’t run 

again, the people filling those seats obviously have returned, 

plus 11 other ones, so we are very thankful to the people of the 

province for that. And again a huge congratulations to all my 

new colleagues on this side of the House, and another mention 

of all the great speeches. The depth of the people who have 

been re-elected and elected here, Mr. Speaker, is truly amazing. 

And we are honoured to have them here, and they will truly 

make our caucus even more diverse, more input from around 

the province from different areas of perspective and 

professional backgrounds. 

 

I’d like to thank the staff, the caucus staff that serves us so very 

well in this building. We don’t have any in the galleries here to 

introduce, but just second to none. And again the legislative 

staff, the Clerk’s offices, everybody else in this building that 

does make our job so much easier. Those resources to go to 

when we need are truly invaluable, and we’re very thankful for 

them. 

 

My staff back in Yorkton: Lauretta Ritchie-McInnes has been a 

constituency assistant now for 16 years; Ingrid Stumph who has 

been with us just over a year doing a very fine job; and her 

daughter-in-law who is now off on maternity leave, serves 

part-time. It’s 1,060,000 . . . I told her, that’s 1,060,001 

residents in the province now, Sarah gave birth to. And again 

looking forward to her coming back to work and helping us as 

well. 

 

And congratulations to you, Mr. Speaker. I’d be remiss as well 

if I didn’t congratulate you on your recent victory and are 

looking forward to working with you. And your dedication to 

this institution, this Assembly, is truly thanked. And 

congratulations to you. 

 

And again to the past Speaker, the member from Moosomin, 

just an amazing man who has come to be a very good friend of 

mine and a mentor, and I’ve learned a lot from him. And it’s 

just an honour to continue working with him now from the 

benches where maybe he can be a little bit more vocal as well. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech, obviously it’s reflective 

of our election platform. That goes without saying. The media 

did pick up on the fact — they were quite surprised in fact, I 

believe — that a lot of the campaign promises have actually 

been rolled out in this Throne Speech. Again I think the 

Premier was very proactive last election in that same respect. 

We don’t want to save a whole bunch of powder, keep the 

powder dry for the next election and politicize all these 

announcements that are going to benefit, for sure benefit the 

people of the province. We want to make sure they benefit as 

quickly as possible so there’s no sense keeping that in the can, 

so to speak, and rolling it out later. We want to do the best we 

can for the people of the province even if that means carrying 

through with a lot of promises earlier and having those people 

benefit from them. 

 

And again with the theme that I think we’re well known for, the 

reputation that we’ve developed over the last four years and the 

relationship we’ve developed with the people of the province, I 

think the voters spoke in that regard. When you look at the 

layout of this Assembly and the vast amount of chairs on this 

side and the number fewer on the other side, Mr. Speaker, that 

they like to hear what you’re going to do, and they like it when 

you carry through with your promises. And again well over 140 

promises from our last platform carried through with. And 

knowing full well that we will be able to carry through with the 

promises of this election and continue to earn that trust and 

serve the people of this province. 

 

A lot of the theme of this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, was 



December 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 95 

about vision, forward-looking vision. That forward-looking 

vision that again we earned our second mandate on the vision, 

and the reputation that we have in carrying through with the 

things we said we would do, moving our province, our 

economy forward. 

 

And again, as the Premier will speak so often is that, you know, 

what is the reason for that strong economy? What do we want a 

strong economy for? As, you know, what will be seen as a right 

wing party, strong economy is a strong part of what we stand 

for. But what purpose does that serve? Well, Mr. Speaker, as 

the Premier, the member from Swift Current will quite often 

say, that there’s not much sense in having a strong economy if 

we can’t serve those and help those that need help. And again, I 

don’t think you can ever do enough for all people. And the 

opposition, obviously you can’t do anything at times. It’s kind 

of the message we get from over there. 

 

But when we look at the records, I will point to the social, our 

social record, Mr. Speaker. We are predominantly, again, a 

right wing party, but I would argue a very strong social 

conscience. And when we look at the record of our parties, 

again the New Democrats are very good at talking about the 

things that are very important. A lot of their platform was 

things that made sense. But when you promise all things to all 

things, Mr. Speaker, really you lose credibility when you know 

that, you know, likely some things you might be able to deliver 

on. But to promise well over $5 billion in promises on a 

balanced budget mandate was quite surprising. So they lost 

credibility and lost believability, and I think the people of the 

province did speak. 

 

And when you look at our record, Mr. Speaker, with our social 

conscience, our social policies, that again you probably can’t do 

enough for everybody. But when you look at the balance of 

initiatives that have happened, I’ll point to community-based 

organizations for example, Mr. Speaker, where we saw over 16 

years of NDP government, one and a half, 2 per cent lifts. And 

strategically around election times these bumps would come in, 

and it served them quite well. But you know, I think the people, 

after a while, they didn’t get fooled again, as the popular song 

says. When they looked at over four years of our government, 

16 per cent lift averaging 4 per cent a year for 

community-based organizations, I think that record stands for 

itself. 

 

When you look at our background and our plans for those with 

disabilities, again we talked about the SAID program. I won’t 

go in too much detail about the specifics of the Throne Speech. 

But breaking that plan out, we heard that four years ago it took 

a bit of time to get the nuts and bolts figured out. But now that 

separate disability income plan for those that truly will not 

return to work, that need those supports, that need a living 

wage, breaking that apart so we don’t have to lift social 

assistance the same as the disability income plan, truly giving 

those members of our society dignity and their own income 

source for that. 

 

One thing I know we’ve talked quite a bit about, Mr. Speaker, 

is that the province is growing. And I have talked to those from 

maybe more the social side of the spectrum and they are 

worrying about our growth and how quickly things are 

growing. And you know, gosh darn, it used to take me five 

minutes to get across town, and I’m in rush hour. Now it takes 

me seven. And that really seems to upset some of them, you 

know. There used to be more here for the rest of us and now 

there’s more people coming and contributing, and we’re 

growing. 

 

And I’ve argued with them, Mr. Speaker. You know, ideal 

situation — wouldn’t it be nice if we could keep our children 

here? And they, yes, darn it, be nice to keep our children here. 

Well I point out to them, Mr. Speaker, if we just grew by our 

birth rate, that’s 15, 16,000 people a year — without 

immigration, without any other factors that would come into 

play — we would be growing as quick or possibly quicker than 

we are now if we only kept our children here. 

 

Ideal situation likely won’t happen but I think the growth rate 

that we are enjoying is something that’s very manageable. 

We’re looking at the potash, the resource sector that is growing 

and providing those jobs for our children. We’re looking at 

post-secondary education opportunities that are growing, 

helping our children get education here. We’re hearing about 

the different programs, graduate retention, the new scholarship 

program that’s going to help retain our children here as well, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So you know, there’s so much information here. I’ve got notes 

upon notes and I just, I’m not going to have time for all this. 

We have come very close to the appointed hour of the end of 

the day here. 

 

So you know, let me just say this: that again, the best indicator 

of future behaviour is past behaviour. I’m very proud of the 

record we have on this side of the House. I’m very proud of our 

veteran members. 

 

Again would be remiss if I didn’t mention some more key 

people in our caucus and that would be the Premier, the Deputy 

Premier, our cabinet, our ministers, and all our supportive 

MLAs, backbenchers alike. Everybody’s got a say in this 

government caucus, always have and I believe always will 

when you look at the direction and the leadership of our 

Premier. Best Premier in the province — well obviously in the 

province — best Premier we’ve ever had in this province. Best 

leader in Canada and possibly one of the best and getting to be 

one of the most renowned leaders, I would argue, in the world. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, you know, we . . . Yes, I better . . . If 

I start on another train of thought here, we’re going to be going 

for quite a while. So with that, Mr. Speaker, again thank you. 

To the support of all my colleagues, thank you. Thank you to 

the Premier. Thank you to all the people in this province for 

honouring us and trusting us with our second mandate. And 

with that, I would like to make a motion to adjourn debate. 

 

And I will be supporting the motion and not the amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Yorkton has moved 

adjournment of debate. Is the motion agreed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being near or at the hour of 5 o’clock, 

this House does now stand adjourned till 10 a.m. Thursday 



96 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2011 

morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  McMorris ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 65 

  Jurgens ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 65 

  Norris ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 65 

  Elhard .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 65 

  McCall ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 65 

  Cheveldayoff ................................................................................................................................................................................ 66 

  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................... 84 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 International Day of Persons with Disabilities 

  Marchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 66 

 Awards for Teaching Excellence 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................... 66 

 Community Initiative Reaches Semifinals 

  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................... 67 

 New Women’s Clothing Store Opens in Regina 

  Nilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 67 

 Air Ambulance Service Celebrates Anniversary 

  Steinley ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 67 

 2012 Year of the Fransaskois 

  Elhard .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 67 

 Saskatchewan’s Small Businesses Strong 

  Moe ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 68 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Provision of Surgical Care 

  Broten .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 68 

  McMorris ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 68 

 Support for Northern Saskatchewan 

  Vermette ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 69 

  Cheveldayoff ................................................................................................................................................................................ 69 

  Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 70 

 First Nations and Métis Issues 

  McCall ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 70 

  Cheveldayoff ................................................................................................................................................................................ 70 

 Funding for Education 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................... 71 

  Harpauer ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 72 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on House Services 

  McCall ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 72 

MOTIONS 

 Lobbyist Registry 

  Morgan ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 73 

  Nilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 73 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Jurgens ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 74 

  Tochor .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 76 

  Sproule ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 78 

  Vermette ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 81 

  Doke ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 82 

  Chartier ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 84 

  Michelson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 87 

  Bradshaw ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 90 

  Hart .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 92 

  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................... 93 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

Lobbyist Registry Motion 

  Nilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 77 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


