




















































Hansard: December 06, 2011


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 2B  TUESDAY, DECEMBER 6, 2011, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 43 

 December 6, 2011 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Members, the business before the 

House is reply to the Throne Speech, and I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, to have this 

opportunity once again to jump in on some of the content about 

the Throne Speech having carried the debate up until the supper 

hour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we come back to the Assembly here, in my 

earlier comments I of course thanked the many people who 

were involved in my re-election in Saskatoon Massey Place. 

I’m very appreciative of all the help and assistance that people 

have provided and am very honoured and thankful to the people 

of Saskatoon Massey Place for the opportunity to represent 

them here in this Assembly for the next four years. So you can 

never say thank you enough, and so to the people of Saskatoon 

Massey Place, thank you so much for the trust that you’ve 

placed in me for this period of time, and I will strive to do my 

best. 

 

In my remarks before the supper hour, Mr. Speaker, I was 

talking about some of the experiences and some of the 

conversations that I’ve had with constituents as I was door 

knocking over the spring, summer, and fall, as many of the 

members that made it to the Assembly were doing over the past 

months. And when we go door to door, Mr. Speaker, one never 

knows what is behind the door, when we knock on it or ring the 

doorbell. And often it’s a surprise; often we may approach a 

door with a certain stereotype of what the story or the situation 

may be. And the experiences that I always appreciate most from 

the doorstep are when my own assumptions about how things 

may be are turned upside down. Because, Mr. Speaker, it 

causes us to think about the views that we express and it causes 

us to ask ourselves how best we can represent the constituents 

that we represent in this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before the supper break I shared a few stories, 

issues to do with affordability, Mr. Speaker, especially with 

families that are working hard but still struggling very much so 

to make ends meet. I addressed, Mr. Speaker, about many of the 

concerns I’ve had relayed to me by many people, especially 

young people, about the environment and the need in our 

province to look at renewable energy sources in addition to the 

other traditional activity that has occurred, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I talked and relayed a story about child care needs and a young 

mother that I met who was carrying on with her school but did 

not have child care arrangements made for her local area, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I talked about some of the seniors that I remember meeting and 

one couple in particular who were struggling with providing 

care to one of the partners in the relationship who was suffering 

with Alzheimer’s and how a few additional supports for that 

person would have made a world of difference for their quality 

of life and their ability to stay in their home over the long term. 

 

I talked about job training needs, Mr. Speaker, and the many 

families that are in Saskatchewan who are unemployed and 

looking for work, and being aware of that as we head into the 

Christmas season. And, Mr. Speaker, I also mentioned the issue 

of AIDS [acquired immune deficiency syndrome] and HIV 

[human immunodeficiency virus] in many of our Saskatchewan 

communities and talked about how that does affect many of my 

constituents. And, Mr. Speaker, I also talked about the need for 

. . . concerns that people related to me about education, 

specifically in the neighbourhood of Hampton Village and the 

need for a new school in that area for that community, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And as I think of those encounters that I had with voters and 

think of those views that were shared with me, and as I pledged 

to those people that I would speak up for those issues and carry 

those issues forward to the legislature, and as I conduct my 

work over the coming years if I was successful to be re-elected, 

I find myself now, Mr. Speaker, I am re-elected in this 27th 

legislature, and I’m still concerned about these issues that 

people brought to my attention.  

 

And so when I look at the Throne Speech that was presented, 

Mr. Speaker, when I go through the content, and as I sat 

yesterday and listened to the Lieutenant Governor read the 

speech, it’s these people, these situations that I keep in mind 

when I evaluate whether or not I will support the Throne 

Speech. And in my view, Mr. Speaker, on many of those issues 

that I raised, the measures that are taken in the Throne Speech 

in my opinion aren’t adequate. Many of the measures that are 

presented in the Throne Speech I do not see as a proper 

response to the issues that are being raised by these constituents 

and by these encounters that I had with people over the past 

months. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I won’t be supporting the 

government motion. I will be supporting the motion from the 

opposition. 

 

And I say that, Mr. Speaker, at the same time recognizing the 

reality of this Assembly and recognizing the reality of the last 

election. As our leader said earlier on in the day today, Mr. 

Speaker, we understand that the government does have a 

majority, and a strong majority that allows them to carry 

through on their mandate. That however, Mr. Speaker, is not a 

carte blanche for government to do anything. And that, Mr. 

Speaker, also means that the concerns that were raised with me 

by my constituents, I am still responsible and feel an obligation 

to carry those concerns forward and present those concerns to 

the government. And my pledge to the people of Saskatoon 

Massey Place is that I will do my best over the coming four 

years to bring their concerns to the legislature and hold the 

government to account on the things that the government wants 

to do. 

 

So while we certainly know and recognize that we have our 

work cut out for us, our conviction in holding government to 

account and our conviction speaking up for our constituents, 

Mr. Speaker, has never been stronger. And I know I speak for 

all opposition members when I make that point. 



44 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2011 

And it’s with that recognition, Mr. Speaker, that I will conclude 

my remarks and indicate that I will not be supporting the 

government’s motion. I will be supporting the opposition’s 

motion. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in closing I simply want to say once again a 

huge thank you, and I have a huge sense of appreciation to the 

people of Saskatoon Massey Place for choosing me to be their 

representative for the next four years. I take that seriously and I 

will do my best to represent their concerns. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melfort. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. First and 

foremost I would like to thank the members on both sides of the 

House for their warm welcome, and I would also like to include 

all the people that work in this glorious building in that 

welcome or that thanks. My appreciation is extended to the 

Premier of the province, Premier Brad Wall, for his support and 

encouragement during this period, during this time when our 

learning curve is going pretty much straight up. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss in not thanking my 

predecessor, Rod Gantefoer, for his guidance and kind words 

over the last year — great guy. Mr. Gantefoer will be a tough 

act to follow, and my goal will be to leave the legislature when 

the time comes with as much respect and integrity as Mr. 

Gantefoer has. 

 

As all of the hon. members who are married know, it would be 

difficult, if not impossible, without the support of your partner. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you. In my case, my wife April has 

supported me. She has stood beside me. She has been a tower 

of strength, and I sincerely thank her for that. 

 

I would also like to thank, Mr. Speaker, my campaign manager, 

Laurie Hookway, and my entire campaign team. Over the four 

years of the writ period, there wasn’t a harsh word. There 

wasn’t any added stress, and I didn’t get yelled at once. And I 

was pretty happy about that. Thanks to all those who helped me 

in the campaign. 

 

And especially thanks to the citizens of the amazing 

constituency of the Melfort constituency for the confidence 

they have shown in me. It is truly an amazing constituency, a 

constituency, Mr. Speaker, that has the BHP Jansen Lake 

potash mine on the southern tip. On the northern tip we have 

the Pehonan hydro dam and we have the Shore Gold diamond 

mine. This is going to be the constituency to watch in the next 

decade. 

 

But even without those multi-billion-dollar mega projects, the 

Melfort constituency is one to be envied. We have world-class 

manufacturers, such as Bourgault Industries and Schulte 

Industries; Michel’s Industry; Koender’s Manufacturing; 

Failure Prevention Services, FPS; and Sapphire Water. As well 

we having growing industries, like M & K Welding, Worley’s 

Iron Works, Holmspun Hoppers, and many others, all creating a 

manufacturing base in the constituency. 

And also in the constituency, Mr. Speaker, we have some of the 

richest farm land in the world, and we have the leading-edge 

farmers that go with it. 

 

I grew up in small town Saskatchewan. You’re envious, aren’t 

you? . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, I grew up in 

small-town Saskatchewan — Kinistino to be exact. And I have 

led a life of security, and family, and community. It was a place 

where each of us looked after each other and watched out for 

each other. It was just the way things were done and the way 

things still are done. 

 

I had three older brothers and one younger sister, and it has 

always been my feeling that if I’d had, say, two older brothers 

and one older sister, I wouldn’t be here or anywhere. I would 

just . . . But I feel that an influence on my life was the fact that I 

had three older brothers because I learned the art of negotiation 

very early in life. 

 

My mother was first generation Canadian with her parents 

immigrating from England. My grandfather arrived in 

Vancouver a few years earlier than my grandmother so he could 

build a life in the new country. Then my grandmother arrived 

some four years later and they were married. Much of my 

grandfather’s efforts were destroyed by the stock market crash 

of 1929, although through perseverance and hard work they 

were able to achieve a good life for their family. 

 

On the Phillips side of the family, I am eighth generation 

Canadian with my ancestors arriving in Canada from Scotland 

in the mid-1800s. I like to think my father was long ahead of 

his time because he moved from Alberta to Saskatchewan in 

1940, then was called to the war effort, then opened the 

newspaper, The Kinistino Post, in 1945. They had planned to be 

in Saskatchewan for maybe a year or two, build up the business, 

and move back to the warmer climates of Vancouver. But they 

fell in love with the community. They fell in love with the 

residents, and they were still there some 60 years later. 

 

My parents taught me a lot of things, but probably the most 

important thing that they taught me was empathy, that if you 

can appreciate what other people are feeling, then that’s the 

beginning of solving any situation or problem that you may 

have and that they may have. Other strong memories and 

philosophies of my childhood were sayings like: you can learn 

something from every person you meet, and it’s a poor, poor 

day when you don’t learn something. Now those philosophies 

are integral to the newspaper business, but they’re pretty good 

in life in general. 

 

My own political career started with a protest and a challenge. 

There was a point in the ’80s when the Melfort school division 

had decided that they would rotate the principals around the 

schools. And we thought in our south side community that we 

had the best principal. Of course every community thought that, 

but we were sure we were right. So we protested against the 

policy. But keep in mind we weren’t protesting against 

anything. We were standing up for the elementary school, and 

after we presented them with our ask, they rethought their 

decision. 

 

But the result of that was that following fall when the school 

board elections came up, I was asked to put my money where 



December 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 45 

my mouth is and run for the school board. And that started nine 

years on the school board, four as facilities chairman and three 

as board chairman. 

 

Five years ago I was asked to run for mayor of the city of 

Melfort, a position that I had wondered about before. Why 

couldn’t good things happen in Melfort? Is there anything that a 

municipal government could do to make good things happen? 

 

In the year before I became mayor, there were four houses built 

in Melfort. In the first year we pushed that number to over 20. 

Was this because of the new mayor? Far from it. It was because 

we built the team of council, of administration, and of citizens 

who were excited. 

 

There are many reasons as to why those things happen. One of 

them, the city had built up reserves before 2006 which allowed 

us to move on opportunities. A new progressive attitude began 

in Melfort, and the citizens finally started to believe that good 

things could happen in their community. We built a new 

multi-use community centre with performing arts theatre, new 

residential, new commercial, and a new sense of confidence. 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is why I am a member of the Legislative 

Assembly today, is because I saw that same positive attitude, I 

saw that same excitement in our Premier and in the 

Saskatchewan Party. 

 

[19:15] 

 

In my years as mayor, I found that Premier Brad Wall’s 

government backed up their words with action. The SIGI 

program, Saskatchewan infrastructure growth initiative 

program, allowed communities to borrow interest free for a 

five-year period to meet some of the growth problems in their 

municipalities. In 2008 the municipal economic enhancement 

program injected $100 million into the infrastructure of 

municipalities right across the province. 

 

The revenue sharing problem that had been worked on by the 

previous government and the government previous to that . . . 

And that government was long on promises and short on 

delivery. This government, the Brad Wall government, picked 

up the challenge, adopted a formula to raise revenue sharing to 

a full 1 per cent of the 5 per cent PST [provincial sales tax]. The 

municipalities now receive more dollars from the provincial 

government than ever before, and their funding is predictable 

and sustainable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is strange how one line can change a person’s 

life. And in my case it was the line, will the last one out please 

shut off the lights? That was the line that was said about 

Saskatchewan from the people right across Canada, joked about 

Saskatchewan from the people right across Canada. Our sons 

and daughters are the most sought-after workers in the country. 

We have the resources. We have the expertise. We have the 

people. We have the agriculture. And yet we were a have-not 

province. I tell you, Mr. Speaker, it was embarrassing. 

 

Two weeks ago I was driving home on Highway 6 North and I 

noticed a glow in the west, and it would be 7 miles off. And I 

thought maybe a new city had sprung up somewhere in my 

travels. But the glow was amazing. Five or six weeks ago I 

visited that site. It’s the site of the possible new BHP Jansen 

Lake potash mine which one day may become the world’s 

largest potash mine. And I looked at the land, and it was all on 

one small section of the property, and I wondered to myself 

what the government received five years ago from that section 

of land, what the people of Saskatchewan received five years 

ago from that section of land. And the answer is basically 

nothing. 

 

What would change if, on that empty section of land, there was 

the world’s largest potash mine? How would our great province 

be different? For those few years, the people of Saskatchewan 

would co-operate and work with this world leader and build the 

new potash mine, and the cost to us would be nothing. But what 

do we gain from it? We gain 2,500 estimated people working 

out there during the construction stage. We’re talking about 

wages of 150 to $180 million each year — all the income taxes 

comes in from that, all the PST that comes in from that. 

 

And the total investment from BHP, when it gets completed, of 

$12 billion. Now they talk about a number of seven times when 

it’s spinning in the economy — $84 billion of economic 

opportunities spinning in Saskatchewan from that empty 

section of land. And what was the cost? Nothing. 

 

We’ll have houses that have to be built. We have vehicles 

purchased. We have businesses started. We have schools that 

are filling with children, and our small villages are growing for 

the first time in decades. 

 

Then after construction, and this is important, BHP will start 

paying the highest royalties honoured. They will be twice, 

nearly twice the royalties of the Kingdom of Jordan. In fact 

BHP estimates in the 70-year lifespan of that mine they will pay 

$90 billion in taxes and royalties, $60 billion to the people of 

Saskatchewan alone. And the cost to us? Nothing. 

 

All those jobs, all that activity, all that growth, all from an NDP 

[New Democratic Party] policy that the Saskatchewan Party 

fully supported. The cost of the former leave-it-in-the-ground 

policy was the one that kept Saskatchewan as a have-not 

province year after year after year. Remember the billions of 

dollars in benefits, the good that will come from this huge 

project. And remember the world’s highest royalties and 

remember the cost — nothing. 

 

In this past election, Saskatchewan had a choice. The people 

chose Brad Wall and the Saskatchewan Party to keep 

Saskatchewan moving forward. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I’d just like to remind the member 

that members are to refer to other members by the seat that they 

hold or the office that they hold. I realize that the member is 

new to the Assembly, and we’d like just to inform all members 

that that is the tradition of the House. 

 

I recognize the member from Melfort. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — As I was saying, the past election 

Saskatchewan had a choice, and they chose. And the results 

could not be, the results could not be any clearer, especially in 

this House. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan are no longer satisfied with being 



46 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2011 

a wee province, one that will always be in and out of 

equalization as suggested by a former leader of the opposition. 

The new Saskatchewan is one that leads the nation in growth, 

leads the nation in trade, and will soon lead the nation in wages. 

A wee province? Not today, not tomorrow, not ever. Not in the 

new Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government will continue to help the most 

vulnerable with programs for senior citizens such as building 

more long-term care facilities and by providing the pioneers of 

this province with a personal care home benefit of $3,000 for 

low-income seniors residing in personal care homes. This 

government will also increase the seniors’ income plan, 

providing a monthly supplement and access to extended health 

care benefits. This income supplement will raise over 40 per 

cent in the next four years. It had already doubled, Mr. Speaker, 

in the last four years. That is how the Saskatchewan Party 

government helps the senior citizens of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

For decade upon decade, the post-secondary students have 

struggled financially. It happened way back when. It happened 

now. It happens, but all over the world, not only in 

Saskatchewan. But we will help families prepare for those 

educational costs by instituting the Saskatchewan advantage 

grant for educational savings, by matching up to 10 per cent of 

the annual contribution to a child’s RESP [registered education 

savings plan] to a yearly maximum of $250. Plus, the new 

Saskatchewan will help to reduce the cost of post-secondary 

education with up to $2,000 over four years for new high 

school graduates. Then when the student graduates from a 

post-secondary institution, the Saskatchewan graduate retention 

program provides up to $20,000 for grads staying in the 

province. 

 

Now some people here in the Assembly may ask about young 

families. Well we have lower income taxes. We have PST 

exemption up to an 18-year birthday on clothing, activity tax 

credits, affordable housing projects, first-time homebuyers 

benefits and, Mr. Speaker, there’s much, much more coming in 

the new Saskatchewan. That, Mr. Speaker, is why BHP Jansen 

Lake potash mine and all of the other incredible developments 

under way in Saskatchewan come in. 

 

Our strong and multi-faceted economy allows this government 

to help those who are most challenged: the seniors, the students, 

the young families, the disabled, the First Nations, and others. 

In the old Saskatchewan, it was raise the taxes or more 

equalization from the feds or add it to the debt. Not anymore, 

not in the new Saskatchewan. Like the BHP potash mine, the 

new Saskatchewan is about moving forward, paying down the 

debt, and making life better for residents of this great province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe this Throne Speech will keep 

Saskatchewan moving forward, and that is why I will be 

supporting the government motion and I will not be supporting 

the opposition amendment. 

 

Just as a final note, Mr. Speaker, I hope, sincerely hope that 

there is never a day when I walk into this hallowed Chamber 

and take it for granted in that I realize daily what an honour it is 

to serve the people of Saskatchewan and be a member of this 

Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take a 

moment to congratulate you on your election as Speaker, as 

well as I would like to congratulate the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood on his acclamation as Deputy Speaker. I 

would also like to congratulate all returning and newly elected 

members on both sides of the House. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to tell you what an honour and a 

privilege it is to address the Assembly here today. Having this 

opportunity, as I am sure my colleagues would agree, is the 

culmination of hard work and commitment of not just ourselves 

but our campaign teams and our families. I might mention that 

the same efforts and commitment was also required for those 

individuals in teams that were not successful, and I would like 

to acknowledge those efforts as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Rosthern-Shellbrook is geographically a very 

large as well as a primarily rural constituency. The stability of 

agriculture and tourism as well as the strength of the people and 

the businesses that service these and other industries is resulting 

in growth of the Rosthern-Shellbrook constituency. Tourism 

alone generated over $15 million in revenue and employed 

about 750 people in the last year in our region. 

 

The reduction of small business tax as well as a decrease in the 

education portion of the property tax are positive changes for 

our business climates in Rosthern-Shellbrook. By funding 

programs like the AgriInvest, AgriStability, and crop insurance 

at the outset each year, as well as providing relief for those that 

experience disaster events, this government has provided a 

more secure environment for our agricultural producers to 

operate in. Mr. Speaker, small business and agriculture are part 

of the spinal cord of our economy, not just where I live, but 

across this great province. This government’s commitment to 

debt reduction and competitive taxes while continuing to invest 

in agriculture is conducive to continued growth for not only our 

constituency but our entire province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I firmly believe that when you live in a 

community, you need to give back some time and some effort 

to maintain and improve facilities and programs that are 

available — in other words, leave things just a little bit better 

than you found them. Throughout my travels these past months, 

I am happy to report that Saskatchewan people in the 

Rosthern-Shellbrook constituency are extremely busy 

volunteering their time and expertise to all types of different 

projects that benefit not only their community but the residents 

within, whether it’s upgrading local arenas, working to 

maintain health professionals, building a park, general 

economic development, or seniors conducting a major cash 

lotto to upgrade and improve their hall, such as the case in 

Blaine Lake. 

 

[19:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, while we are discussing seniors, I would like to 

discuss my first public engagement as a newly elected MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly]. Each year the Lions 

Club in Spiritwood organizes a seniors’ appreciation supper 

that I was asked to attend. That evening it was asked how many 



December 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 47 

years this event has been happening. After much discussion, it 

was determined that it had been an annual event for 31 years. I 

said it that night and I’ll say it again here today: to organize a 

supper each year to honour the people that built your 

community that you now live in speaks volumes as to the depth 

and the integrity of the people in Spiritwood. 

 

I am sure many here today can speak to similar events that 

happen in communities all across this province. Our ability to 

come together as individuals within a community and 

communities within this province is something that sets us apart 

and makes Saskatchewan strong and great. 

 

I would be remiss if I did not discuss rural health care as our 

constituency has three towns — Spiritwood, Shellbrook, and 

Rosthern — that offer medical care and service to residents and 

to neighbouring communities while facing a common rural 

challenge of ensuring the appropriate complement of health 

care professionals. This challenge is not unique to my 

constituency or to our province, and it did not transpire over a 

few months although sometimes the resulting change in 

services makes it seem that way. The challenge of rural health 

care is a result of many years of not training sufficient 

replacement numbers of medical professionals locally here in 

our province. 

 

Our government has increased the number of seats for 

physicians as well as created the central recruitment agency 

known as the physician recruitment agency of Saskatchewan. 

There has been a large initiative taken to recruit and retain 

physicians, nurses, and other health care professionals. 

Additional measures in the five-point plan — such as the 

forgiveness of student loans for health care professionals that 

choose to relocate to rural areas, the STARS [Shock Trauma 

Air Rescue Society] air ambulance service, as well as the 

formation of a 20-physician locum pool — are truly appreciated 

by the rural people in this province. This is in addition to 

initiatives that benefit all of Saskatchewan residents, such as 

our commitment to lowering surgery wait times to three months 

by 2014, construction of a new Saskatchewan hospital in North 

Battleford, and a new children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 

 

I look forward to working with our government, the good 

people of Rosthern-Shellbrook, and the people of Saskatchewan 

as we continue to build rungs in the ladder to climb our way to 

success regarding Saskatchewan health care and keep our 

province moving forward. 

 

I would like to talk about just one of the reasons why I chose to 

apply to the constituents of Rosthern-Shellbrook for the honour 

of representing them here in this Assembly. It involved 

discussion on future career plans with my son and a few of his 

friends as they neared the end of their grade school education. 

My son indicated to me that he was thinking of entering 

engineering at the University of Saskatchewan, and he was 

wondering where he could live and work upon completion. And 

I proudly explained to him that you could live and work 

anywhere you like — New York, Vancouver, Toronto, and so 

on. His face dropped a little and he asked if he could live and 

work here, where he grew up, in Shellbrook. His wish is my 

example of why we need strong growth and opportunity in our 

province. This will enable us to retain the most important and 

valuable natural resource that we have, which is our youth. 

This government’s commitment to implementing the 

Saskatchewan advantage scholarship, the Saskatchewan 

advantage grant for education savings, along with the already 

functioning graduate retention program, will enable many of 

our students that are from here and allow them to choose 

careers that will allow them to be here. 

 

None of us were able to get here on our own, and I was no 

exception to this, as we had a superb campaign team and 

countless people volunteer their time throughout the past few 

months. We had a great mixture of youth and experience. Mr. 

Speaker, for many of us it was our first campaign and to have 

people available with the level of experience and dedication 

they each possess was truly appreciated. It was an honour for 

me to be associated with so many hardworking individuals: 

Bevra, Lyle, Les, Richard, Anne, Keith, Heather, Jason, Tonia, 

Darrin, Lanny, Harold, Ruth, Dave, Grant, Tanya, and I will 

miss many, I know. To each of you and the others, words 

cannot truly express my gratitude, but thank you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the decision to venture down the road that leads to 

this Chamber is a commitment that is made by families, not by 

individuals. And I’m sure many will concur that without the 

full support and agreement of your family, the decision is over 

before it begins.  

 

I would like to thank my mother and father for always being 

supportive and available when I needed them. My mother has 

always encouraged me to keep life’s events in perspective, and 

this was especially helpful the last few months. My father is 

one of the most hard-working, genuine, unjudgmental people 

that I have ever met. He has always allowed each of us kids to 

choose what we were interested in, and then he supported us 

wholeheartedly. My parents, along with my wife’s father and 

her late mother, have been a tremendous influence on both 

Krista and I. We are thankful for the family values, the work 

ethic, and most notably the integrity that has always been 

displayed and encouraged by both of them. 

 

I would also like to thank my son, Carter, and daughter, Taryn, 

for all their support over the last months. Children give up some 

time with their parents so that we may come to serve publicly in 

this Assembly. This is a sacrifice on their part, and it’s one that 

I definitely appreciate. 

 

I would like to thank my wife of over 18 years, Krista. When 

we made the decision that I would run for this position, I was 

very fortunate to have her full support. This was extremely 

evident over the past year, and I am forever thankful for the 

person that she is. 

 

Lastly I would like to thank all of the people in 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. These last few months have been a 

tremendous opportunity for me to purposely travel the entire 

constituency and meet many, many, many people. I can’t help 

but feel that many of these communities and the people in them 

have been a part of my upbringing. I’m truly humbled with the 

support that they gave me and honoured to represent them and 

to represent all the good people of Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this past election, the people of 

Rosthern-Shellbrook gave me their approval to represent them 

with a four-year lease on this seat in this Assembly. These 



48 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2011 

people voted to move forward with myself, this team, our 

Premier, and the Saskatchewan advantage growth plan. The 

people from Rosthern-Shellbrook constituency agree with the 

present government’s vision, and I quote from the Throne 

Speech, “. . . that Saskatchewan will be the best place in 

Canada — to live, to work, to start a business, to get an 

education, to raise a family and to build a life.” 

 

It is for these reasons, on behalf of all the constituents of 

Rosthern-Shellbrook, that I will be supporting the motion to 

move the Throne Speech. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Eagles: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Estevan has asked for leave 

to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to all members of this honoured Assembly, I 

would like to introduce two constituents of mine who are in the 

gallery: Pat Ferguson and her son Mark. They were here for the 

diabetes reception, and I ask all members to join me in 

welcoming them to their legislature. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, fellow 

members, it is indeed with great honour and humble pride that I 

join my colleagues in this hallowed Assembly today. Mr. 

Speaker, I am convinced that I will forever marvel at the 

grandeur of this renowned Chamber. The sheer magnificence of 

this entire building provides us with a better understanding of 

the tremendous vision, the energy, and the foresight of our dear 

forefathers. 

 

As most everyone here knows, Regina was the capital of the 

North-West Territories when these vast territories included 

nearly 34 per cent of Canada’s land mass. That area included 

Alberta, the territories, and an area that ran clear across, taking 

in part of Ontario and Quebec. I am so proud to acknowledge 

that our forefathers had plans and dreams as vast as the massive 

territories they so aptly governed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I feel deeply privileged and humbled to represent 

the constituency that was the home of the original Government 

House to the North-West Territories, the town of Battleford. To 

think that decisions pertaining to that huge portion of our 

country were debated and passed into law from our town 

certainly inspires a sense of pride in our town’s celebrated 

history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I, like so many other residents of The Battlefords, 

was devastated the day our beloved Government House burned 

to the ground. In my former profession as a realtor and many 

years before that fire, I was requested to conduct a full 

evaluation of Government House for insurance purposes. Allow 

me to say that, although not as grand as this Chamber, the 

Government House in Battleford was a beautifully appointed 

building with amazing architecture and remarkable furnishings. 

We truly lost a treasured piece of our history that day, and I feel 

so fortunate to have a very clear and profound memory of that 

historically grand structure. 

 

In point of fact, Mr. Speaker, our Government House was truly 

a major attraction to The Battlefords and a deep source of pride 

for all of our constituents. Anyone who has visited The 

Battlefords knows what a rich history we have in our 

community. A quick tour would include a visit to our Town 

Hall, with its unique opera theatre on the top floor, then a stop 

at our historic Fort Battleford, followed by a stroll through 

Colonel Otter Park where today you can still see the trenches 

from battle preparations from years gone by. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one building that was ancillary to our Government 

House still stands proudly on Government Ridge today. That 

building is of course the original Land Titles Building for the 

North-West Territories. This was the first Land Titles Building 

west of Winnipeg and today it boasts of being the oldest brick 

building in Saskatchewan. Upon close inspection of this 

building, you can actually see bullet holes in the bricks from 

one of the last First Nations skirmishes in the area. As a 

participating realtor, I was pleased to be involved in a decision 

to make a sizeable donation to begin the historical restoration 

and preservation of that landmark. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can all be proud of our heritage and our past. 

But we are equally proud of today’s Saskatchewan and doubly 

proud and excited about the Saskatchewan of tomorrow. We 

have only begun to realize our potential as we constantly strive 

to fulfill the vision rooted in the dreams of our forefathers. We 

know we must continue to build on that vision, a vision that is 

clearly outlined in our Throne Speech. A vision such as a 

province of 1.1 million people, a province steadily eliminating 

the general revenue fund debt, and a province caring for our 

young people, our seniors, and those with disabilities. We 

continue to take steps to put that vision into action. We need 

only look at the progress and growth we have experienced in 

the past few years. 

 

I read with great interest the SaskEnergy year-end report for 

2010 which indicates there were 5,470 new gas connections in 

that year. And now for the first 11 months of this year there is 

another 6,227 connections. Mr. Speaker, that’s nearly 12,000 

new homes, apartments, businesses, or industries that are now 

calling Saskatchewan home. These new homes, apartments, and 

businesses will become the roots of the new fibres that in fact 

will grow in and strengthen the very fabric of our province. 

New and existing residents now have opportunities to stay in 

communities, to stay in Saskatchewan. These same individuals 

will help build our communities in the future along with our 

schools, our churches, our rinks, our playgrounds, and our 

parks. 

 

[19:45] 



December 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 49 

Mr. Speaker, I first began thinking about wanting to become an 

MLA because I was totally appalled by the number of young 

people who were leaving Saskatchewan, leaving their homes in 

order to seek opportunities elsewhere. Like so many of us who 

were here last spring I heard the emotion in our Finance 

minister’s voice when he so proudly confirmed his family was 

now living closer to home. Mr. Speaker, that same emotion 

lived in my own heart. 

 

In 2006 two of our three children were working in Alberta. 

Today two of our three children have returned to Saskatchewan 

and hopefully our third will find opportunities here shortly. We 

certainly did not relish the idea of spending every long weekend 

travelling to Alberta to visit our children and grandchildren. I 

humbly thank this government for all they have done to create 

the opportunities that have allowed our young people to stay at 

home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when my wife Linda and I did make the decision 

that I would run, the clear choice was to represent the 

Saskatchewan Party. I had read a paper entitled a vision for 

Saskatchewan, prepared by our leader at that time. This 

document clearly outlined a plan for this province, a plan for a 

better future and, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to be a part of that 

exciting new future. In my opinion, so many things needed to 

be improved to make this province more appealing and to allow 

it to reach its full potential. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to see in this Throne Speech we are 

continuing to replace and develop our infrastructures. In the last 

four years, we have spent $2.2 billion on our highways alone, 

fixing, repairing, or rebuilding over 6000 kilometres of our 

highways. According to Google, Canada is 9306 kilometres 

wide at its widest point, so already we’ve built, rebuilt, or fixed 

a highway equal to two-thirds of the distance across this great 

nation. In addition to this, we have now committed another 2.2 

billion for the next four years. Great news for Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, I’m concerned that the Saskatchewan pothole as 

we once knew it may soon be coming onto the endangered 

species list. 

 

We have again included many growth agenda items in this 

Throne Speech, such as our Saskatchewan advantage housing 

plan. This government recognizes that along with our 

population growth there becomes a housing affordability issue. 

We will work towards our target of 4,600 new entry level units, 

and we will implement new growth tax incentives. Our 

secondary suite program will provide $2 million to develop 70 

to 100 new secondary suites. Also, we will provide a tax credit 

to first-time homeowners because we truly believe, and I quote, 

“. . . the best way to make life more affordable for 

Saskatchewan families is by ensuring they keep more of what 

they earn.” 

 

In the last four years, we’ve removed 114,000 people from our 

tax rolls. Mr. Speaker, we will continue to provide further relief 

with such measures as increasing the PST exemption on 

clothing for children under 18 and by providing the active 

families benefit to the same age limit. We remain committed to 

funding up to 80 per cent of the cost of 13 new long-term care 

facilities, and we are steadfast in our goal to have no surgical 

wait times longer than three months by 2014. Mr. Speaker, 

these are our commitments to the people of Saskatchewan, our 

commitments to bring our vision into action. 

 

As I mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, my journey to become the 

legislative representative for The Battlefords began quite some 

time ago. As one colleague quipped on election night, you kind 

of took the scenic route. Well we both chuckled at first, but 

then I realized that the scenic route has prepared me to be a 

more effective representative for my constituents. My first 

campaign experience was a manager for the 2003 election. 

Then I ran unsuccessfully in 2007. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I believe the past four years have given me 

an honest appreciation of the work and dedication exhibited by 

the members of this Assembly. The scenic route, if you will, 

has allowed me to carefully observe and learn what is involved 

in becoming the best representative I can possibly be. It has 

allowed me to accept invitations to functions such as an elders’ 

round dance at the Sweetgrass First Nation, numerous chamber 

of commerce events, and participate in many worthwhile 

fundraising projects. Along with this I have been able, on a 

personal level, to assist fellow citizens with questions or 

concerns with various government departments. 

 

Over these past four years, The Battlefords have experienced 

some significant growth, not unlike the rest of this province. 

We now are home to a new Saskatchewan Power peak gas 

turbine power plant, and soon our Northland Power plant will 

be open as well. We are all excited about the potential for 

growth that that brings to our area. 

 

Our new multi-purpose facility, the CU Plex, is now taking 

shape and hopefully will open soon. 

 

Some of our best news came this past August when our Premier 

announced that at long last a firm commitment was being made 

to replace our Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford. That 

new facility will bring a whole new environment to the patients 

and staff who have endured their outdated surroundings for far 

too long. 

 

The Battlefords are positioned as a gateway to the North on our 

side of the province, and we are happy to see the outstanding 

improvements being made to the highways in our area. These 

improvements will assist in handling the increased activity in 

the oil and gas, forestry and agriculture, and we look forward to 

even more improvements as outlined in this Throne Speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I was not to take this 

opportunity to thank the many people who supported me in 

becoming the MLA for The Battlefords. As I mentioned before, 

mine has been a five-year journey. It began with a nomination, 

a contested nomination in 2006, a narrow defeat in 2007, 

another contested nomination in 2010, and finally election this 

fall. 

 

My greatest supporter through all of this has been my wife, 

Linda. I will never be able to thank her enough for her strength, 

her encouragement, her support, guidance and her great insight 

into things that I on occasion missed. Along with Linda’s 

support came the unwavering and loyal support of our three 

children, they and their partners. They make us proud every 

day. 

 



50 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2011 

So many people provided such strong support and influence to 

all of my steps on this great journey. I certainly cannot name 

them all here today, so to each and every one of you I say a 

heartfelt thank you. I will never forget all of your efforts. To the 

residents of The Battlefords constituency who have put their 

confidence in my ability to represent them, I thank them for 

their trust. I will work every day to continue to be worthy of 

their trust by honestly and faithfully representing them in this 

Assembly. 

 

And as it was so clearly and correctly pointed out in yesterday’s 

Speech from the Throne, this chair is on loan to me. That 

statement closely aligns itself with the principle that I’ve held 

onto ever since I heard it some 35 years ago. A principle that 

has guided me both in my real estate career and in my various 

endeavours in community involvement and associations, and 

that statement simply put, and I quote because I didn’t originate 

this, “Service is the rent you pay for the space you occupy.” I 

am 100 per cent committed to serve this Chamber, this great 

province, and certainly the residents of The Battlefords to 

ensure my rent is paid fully each and every day that this chair is 

available to me. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, that brings us to this special moment. 

Today I stand humbled to be here in this Assembly with my 

respected colleagues on both sides of this Chamber, humbled to 

be able to be here in this place with so much history, proud to 

be able to participate in debate on this message from the 

Throne. We have already heard much discussion about the 

Speech from the Throne, and I wish to add my voice in support 

of the vision and action that is included in this speech. 

 

It is imperative that our government continues in its 

commitment to provide opportunities at home for our young 

people, to continue to make life more secure and affordable for 

seniors and for those with disabilities. It is equally important to 

make Saskatchewan the place to be by improving highways and 

schools and hospitals, by providing a stable economy in which 

to invest, by paying down our debt, and by further reducing 

taxes — all the while staying the course within a balanced 

budget. These are the kinds of actions, the kinds of stewardship 

required to ensure that Saskatchewan will continue to lead the 

nation in job growth, employment growth, population growth, 

and in opportunities that are in fact the envy of so many other 

jurisdictions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members of this Assembly have the energy, 

the optimism, the courage, and the great responsibility now to 

unlock the tremendous opportunities that our pioneers 

envisioned. Mr. Speaker, for these reasons I will be supporting 

the motion to move the Speech from the Throne and not the 

amendment to that motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Doherty: — I seek leave to introduce a guest. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Regina Northeast. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I’d like to introduce a guest in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s a former colleague of mine in the pharmaceutical industry, 

Mr. Geoff Squires. Geoff hails from British Columbia and is in 

town here this evening supporting the Canadian Diabetes 

Association dinner that was held earlier this evening. His 

company — I believe it’s Novartis Goeff is with right now — 

was one of the sponsors of the dinner and the educational 

program that was afforded to a number of us from the 

Legislative Assembly earlier this evening. So welcome, Geoff, 

and thank you for spending your hard-earned dollars in our 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

appreciate this opportunity to rise and speak on this very 

important occasion, the reply to the Throne Speech 2011. 

 

First, some important notes of recognition: I’d like to 

congratulate yourself, Mr. Speaker, on your election. It’s an 

important vote of confidence by the House that we believe that 

you’ll act in a very fair and appropriate manner to your 

position. And we appreciate that. And also I want to thank the 

former Speaker. We have a long tradition of good Speakers in 

this House, I believe, and the member from Moosomin served 

us well as well. I would also like to congratulate the Deputy 

Speaker elected by acclamation, Last Mountain-Touchwood. I 

am looking forward to working with him over the next number 

of years, and I have a lot of confidence in him as well. And as 

well, the former Deputy Speaker, the member from Arm River 

served us well, and of course these are of some recognition. 

 

I also want to take a moment and recognize our Clerk and the 

staff at the Table for the good work they do, and the Pages and 

everyone behind the scenes who makes this House flow. And it 

is critical that we have good people. And they are good, and 

they do a very good job to make this place work. 

 

I also want to offer my congratulations and best wishes to those 

newly elected to this House. We have one on our side, many on 

that side. But I do want to wish you all the very best and 

congratulations on your election to this House, well-deserved, 

and I think you folks will do a good job. 

 

It is pretty special to have the confidence of your neighbours. 

It’s something when your neighbours do vote for you, and I 

have been fortunate to experience that. I wish you all the best 

here. It’s a very special and honourable calling that we have to 

serve in the legislature, and our duties are very, very important. 

I also wanted to say congratulations and best wishes to those 

who are re-elected. You know, we develop some interesting 

relationships while we are here in the House. Sometimes we 



December 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 51 

look like we’re right at each other, particularly during question 

period, but other times we work really hard to make things 

work for this province. 

 

And I want to say what I do reflect on over the past when I have 

seen the best work done in this House and in the legislature, it’s 

because we have the common value of doing what’s best for all 

of Saskatchewan citizens. And I truly believe that. It is not one 

side against the other side, it’s all of us for the people here in 

this province. And it’s my hope and my belief that if we can 

keep this core value alive in this legislature, we can do some 

outstanding work, and we will continue to do that. We have our 

role in opposition to hold the government to account and we 

will do that. 

 

I also want to congratulate the government on its re-election. Of 

course, it was a hard-fought battle and we have these every four 

years. And we know, we can see what’s happening in the 

Middle East over the battle for democracy, and we cannot take 

that for granted here in Saskatchewan. We must always value 

our democracy and the fact that we have an opportunity every 

four years to make some choices. And we did that this fall. So 

congratulations. 

 

[20:00] 

 

And of course for us it was a bittersweet election. And we have 

to — and our leader has talked about it; of course we will be 

selecting a new leader — but it’s a time for us to reflect on our 

values and a period of renewal and rebuilding. And that’s going 

to be an important part of what we do here. And of course every 

party goes through this. And it’s one that we often don’t look 

forward to, but we are where we are. And we’ll be working 

hard in this House, making sure people in Saskatchewan get the 

best, best work from this legislature. 

 

I am looking forward to my new role — well partly new, partly 

old. I’m continuing in housing, in Sask Housing Corp. I’m 

looking forward to that, but also returning to the area of Labour. 

And I’m also looking forward to Municipal Affairs. That will 

be very, very important. So I think this will be very, very 

interesting, and I am going to be asking some good, tough 

questions on that. So I’m looking forward to that. 

 

But I also want to, and probably most — well, not probably — 

most importantly I want to thank the good folks who have 

given me this very precious opportunity to serve. And I speak 

of course about my constituents of Saskatoon Centre. I think 

Saskatoon Centre is a very unique constituency. We have the 

whole range of demographics, and it’s a diverse community. 

We have people who are living in poverty and people who are 

doing very well. We have some beautiful theatres downtown. 

We have some wonderful restaurants. The economic buzz in 

my riding is phenomenal, and it’s a pretty special place. And it 

is probably one of the most urban of all constituencies in 

Saskatchewan, and so I think it’s unique in that. But of course, 

Mr. Speaker, I do need to give a big thank you to my team that 

put me over the top. And I’ve got to tell you that this was a 

tough battle, and I really do appreciate the good work of Erica, 

Dennell, Alexa, David, Ryan. And of course my own family, 

Dawn, Cam, Alison, and Reilly, they were always there for me. 

And I truly appreciate it and I want to give them a big, big 

thank you. Thank you. 

I also want to make note, my constituency assistant, Leslie, has 

moved on in the last week or so. She is in fact in Florida now; I 

don’t think she will be watching this at all. But she served me 

well for seven years, and she’s decided to move on and go into 

retirement. So this is a big change for her. And I wanted to put 

on the record, thank you very much, Leslie. You served me 

well. Some very tough, trying times, and I do appreciate all the 

good work that she had done. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, our job as opposition is to hold the 

government to account. And we know the government side will 

talk about the positives and the things that they see as good 

things in the Throne Speech, and our job is to say some of the 

concerns. Because whenever you put forward a document, there 

is a reason to scrutinize it and go over it rigorously and say, so 

is this living up to what the people of Saskatchewan are 

expecting from a government? 

 

And I have to say, and we will hear tonight and we will hear 

over the next few days about promises kept and that type of 

thing, and a lot of promises were kept, and I want to say that I 

recognize that. But you know, particularly on this day — on 

this day, December 6, the day that we recognize violence 

against women — one of the most, and to me one of the biggest 

promises that was not kept from 2007 of course was the 

promise to re-enact the all-party committee for children who are 

exploited though the sex trade. And it’s been four years and I 

know for some reason this government has not decided that it 

would act on its promise. And it was a promise in 2007 that it 

would do that, and it didn’t do that. And so I think that it’s 

particularly fitting on this day that we think about vulnerable 

people, that not all promises were kept. It’s not a completely 

perfect record. 

 

And what I’m also concerned about, Mr. Speaker, are promises 

that are made, and we have them and we have their record, but 

we have the actions that were not promises in 2007. And we 

saw what happened. We had a minister in question period today 

talk about how actions speak louder than words. And what we 

saw in the last term, and I can just think and I’ll just say really 

quickly three things that happened that were not promises. 

Nobody knew in the campaign of 2007 that this was going to 

happen; of course, there were a lot of people who speculated. 

But of course we can talk about Station 20 West in my riding 

that saw a cut of $8 million. And of course we’re very fortunate 

now to see that project go forward, largely because of the good 

work of the volunteers who were deeply committed to Station 

20 West. But this government did not make a promise that they 

were going to cut $8 million from that project, which they did. 

 

As well, we saw some horrendous, horrendous labour 

legislation passed very quickly in the last legislature. Those 

were not on the campaign bill that they went and campaigned 

on, but they did it anyways and now they are the law. And of 

course one in particular is The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

There were no promises in the campaign in 2007 that they were 

going to do a Bill like that, but they did it anyways, and in fact 

it led to one of our more raucous sessions.  

 

But those are some examples, and so when we look back and 

we say actions do speak louder than words. And we will be 

looking for things, not only the promises that were in the book, 

but the other ones that weren’t in the book that they presented 



52 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2011 

to the people of Saskatchewan but they feel they have the right 

to put forth. Now of course every government has to respond as 

they see accordingly, but those are some that were not done 

without public consultation. And clearly we have some 

concerns as opposition. 

 

I want to talk about three words that I could not find in the 

Throne Speech, and maybe they’re there, but I didn’t see them. 

First they did talk about housing, and that’s very important and 

I’m glad to see that there’s going to be more work in that area. 

And today we had some questions about that. But I am 

concerned that we did not hear any reference to homelessness. 

It is a new reality in Saskatchewan, and we have to face the 

facts. This is becoming a bigger and bigger issue, and we need 

to act on it. And I know in my hometown of Saskatoon and I 

know in Regina this is an issue, and there are alternatives being 

put forward like Housing First. And I was hoping to see 

something more concrete about that in the Throne Speech, and 

it wasn’t there. 

 

And of course the member from Battlefords alluded to it briefly 

today in his comments, but the whole issue around mental 

health which I think we really need to take a much more 

aggressive . . . work much more aggressively on. And I think 

this is one that I think I’m looking forward to seeing over the 

next four years, more work done around mental health. 

 

The other one that now that I’m critic for Labour I’ll be looking 

to see, but I did not see anything in the Throne Speech about 

safety. And I raise that as something that I hope that we will see 

much more. I know this government has a Mission: Zero policy 

and is working hard on that. But I know that there is a 

committee of review that’s working for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board, and we hope to see some of those 

recommendations come forward. And I’ll be watching for that 

very carefully because I think this is important. When a person 

is injured at work, it is a horrible, horrible thing. We all expect 

and we all hope when people leave in the morning to go to 

work that they’ll be coming home. And when they don’t, it’s a 

sad, sad day but the impacts are huge. And so, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to say that we’ll be talking a lot and looking for safety. 

 

Now I just want to go to the book just briefly, quickly, and 

there are three things that I just want to say. And one is I’m 

looking forward to hearing more details about the seniors’ 

income plan. I know in the last four years there’s been more 

money raised for this, and of course seniors are facing more and 

more challenges. And of course we raised issues about the fact 

that rents are going up for seniors. And so more, more funds 

that go to seniors can be a great thing, but we know what 

happened in the last time the government raised the funds. Of 

course they talked about 10,000 going onto the rolls, but then it 

soon became clear it was going to be 8,000. 

 

And the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, there’s only two 

people, two people who work on the seniors’ income plan. Now 

I could be wrong, they may have changed that, but I hope 

there’s more people working so people can stay on that plan 

and make full use of it. Because quite often people go on it and 

then they go off it, and they don’t even know they do that 

because it’s tied into the federal program. So we’re looking 

very carefully at that. 

 

And the other one that was very interesting was about the 

Global Institute for Food Security. I think also a good concept 

but it reminds me of the saying, think globally, act locally. 

When we have poverty here in Saskatchewan — in a province 

where we produce such abundance, such a wide range of foods 

— that we should have poverty and people going hungry and 

that the use is up in food banks, and we have this kind of 

institute, I think this is the time where we put in that saying, 

think globally, act locally. I think this is critical. 

 

To conclude my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I do want to recognize 

and I do appreciate that the government in its Throne Speech 

has said that it will consider ideas from all sources, including 

Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. So expect no shortage of ideas 

from our side. And I do want to say, and I think about the 

Minister of Agriculture, last year when we did the animal 

protection Bill and how we were able to work together on that 

and a respectful language Bill. We did some good things. And 

we can work together, and I think this is a good thing. So I 

think this is a . . . There has been some good work that we can, 

some models of how we can make this work. 

 

And I do want to say that when the government has said that it 

will reach out, when they have no labour legislation in 

consideration right now but it will be listening to all views of 

all stakeholders, including unions, employees, employers, and 

the public, I think this is an important thing. And we will be 

holding the government to account to make sure that they do. 

 

I was a little disappointed this afternoon when I asked about the 

public consultations on the new ideas around the voluntary 

tenant protection initiative that the government has, and they 

said that they’re not going to have any public consultations on 

that. I think that’s too bad. I think there’s a lot of good ideas out 

there in the public, and I think this is critical. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will not be voting for the main 

motion, but I will be voting for the amendment. Because I think 

that it’s not quite right; I think we have to do better, and we can 

do better. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. The first 

thing I’d like to do is congratulate you on your election as 

Speaker. And I’d like to thank the member from Moosomin for 

the good work that he’d done over the last four years even 

though I wasn’t part of the House then. 

 

I wish to thank my colleagues for this warm welcome, and I’m 

humbled by the opportunity to represent the constituents of 

Moose Jaw Wakamow during this twenty-seventh sitting of the 

legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to recognize 

some of the people that, without their help and support, it 

would be not possible for me to be here. Mr. Speaker, since the 

beginning of this journey, my wife, Marjorie, has been the 

source of my strength and encouragement. And I am sure that 

all the hon. members here can confirm that running for public 

office is not for those faint of heart. Perhaps no one knows this 

more than our spouses. Since my nomination 14 months ago 



December 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 53 

and throughout the election period, my wife has been at my 

side, and I sincerely want to thank her for everything. 

 

To my boys, who gave up their evenings and weekends all 

summer long to knock doors with me and always encouraged 

me to keep going, I have never been so proud and so thankful 

for their support. 

 

For my team, under the leadership of my campaign Chair, Cole 

Schulz, I was truly blessed by his hard work and support. His 

notes of encouragement and endless efforts mean more to me 

than you can imagine. Our team included a large youth 

component that were so exuberant to the cause, and they kept 

the whole team energized. And for many of them, this was their 

voting for the first time and only confirmed why I made this 

decision to run for public office. 

 

I can never express enough sincere gratitude to the people of 

Moose Jaw Wakamow, from the amazing rural constituents to 

those within the city of Moose Jaw who gave me their support 

and trust. And I give them my word to do all that I can do to 

represent them with all the respect and honour that they 

warrant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a child growing up in this province, living in 

communities as small as Coleville and Bienfait, as well as in 

cities like Estevan, Swift Current, and Moose Jaw, I have 

learned that one of the main things that tie the people of this 

province together, other than their love for the Riders, is their 

work ethic, commitment to family, and community. And I am 

proud to call Saskatchewan home and happy to see the change 

in the attitude in its people, knowing that there are great things 

that lie ahead. 

 

[20:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk about our city, Moose Jaw. 

It’s an important railway junction for the area’s agricultural 

production. The city is known for its giant historical murals on 

the exterior walls of its buildings in the business district, and its 

tunnels which also have a colourful history. 

 

It’s also home to CFB [Canadian Forces Base] Moose Jaw and 

it’s a NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] flight 

training school, which is home to the Snowbirds as well as 

Canadian military aerobatics flight demonstration team. Moose 

Jaw also has the casino and geothermal spa, and we have the 

Sukanen Pioneer Village Museum in our riding of Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

The riding also has a rich Aboriginal history as well. Moose 

Jaw was originally settled as a traditional Indian fur traders’ 

camp. A narrow crossing of the river with plenty of water and 

game for food made this an ideal place for settlement. It was a 

winter encampment for both Cree and Assiniboine nations and 

there is said to be a burial ground in the vicinity. The natural 

protection of the Coteau range provided the valley with many a 

warm breeze and the Cree word — I hope I say it right — 

Moose Gaw, meaning warm breezes, was translated to our 

city’s name, Moose Jaw. 

 

The recent announcement by K+S Group to develop a potash 

mine near Moose Jaw is great news for the city and the 

surrounding area. The $3.25 billion potash mine is expected to 

employ over 1,000 people during the construction and create 

300 permanent jobs when the mine opens in 2015. Having K+S 

once again investing in Saskatchewan is especially great news 

since this same company was chased out of the province when 

the former NDP government nationalized the potash industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now I’d like to speak to the Throne Speech. It 

starts with our vision which, with the unprecedented support of 

the people of Saskatchewan, shows that in contrast with the 

lack of vision the opposition has, that this is what people of our 

great province, the best in the country, want to see. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we will do this with action. As stated in the Speech 

from the Throne, we will take action to sustain growth and 

opportunity, to address affordability issues, to maintain a 

competitive tax and royalty regime, to improve our quality of 

life, and to ensure we remain responsible, responsive, 

trustworthy, and accountable to the people of this province. We 

are a government of action. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about growth with our 

Saskatchewan advantage growth plan and our continued 

commitment to it, it has keys to success, and they are stated: 

continued debt reduction, balanced budget, competitive taxes, 

and promoting global trade. Some of the other keys include 

further highway improvement over and above our record that 

we set in our last term, as previously stated, with more than 

6000 kilometres of highways being improved and in this term 

another $2.2 billion being invested. Then there is the digital and 

electronic infrastructure that is essential to the new economy, so 

much so that in the current budget year another 100 million is 

allocated, with 75 million being allocated over the next three 

years for the next generation in wireless technology. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, when speaking to affordability, tackling 

some of the housing issues with Saskatchewan advantage 

housing plan which is on target to have 4,600 new entry-level 

housing units to be created over the next five years. On top of 

this, we will explore new growth tax incentives to boost 

construction of new affordable housing with improvements to 

the secondary suite program, with another $2 million which 

will be available to develop 70 to 100 additional secondary 

suites. And then there is the Saskatchewan first-time home 

buyers tax credit, saving first-time home buyers on average 

$1,100. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the list goes on. Our first promise kept, making 

life more affordable for families — exempting children under 

18 their clothes from the PST and the active families benefit 

expanded to all children under 18 on November 15th. 

 

Now to add to all of that, the graduate retention program which 

has paid out over 53 million and which will remain in place. 

We now have the Saskatchewan advantage scholarship for 

every new high school graduate who will be eligible for a 

$2,000 credit towards post-secondary tuition. And we’re not 

done. The Saskatchewan advantage grant for education savings, 

which is a new program that will help parents save for their 

kids’ education — again, Mr. Speaker, showing Saskatchewan 

is the best place in Canada to live and raise your children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not only about our children. We’re here to 

help our seniors. Today in Saskatchewan, one in seven of our 



54 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2011 

people is over 65. We have renewed our commitment to build 

13 new long-term care facilities under the new funding formula. 

We have made great improvements to the seniors’ income plan, 

doubling the maximum benefits and increasing them by 40 per 

cent over the next four years. And this is to have tripled 

compared to what we took over in 2007. Mr. Speaker, we have 

also introduced the seniors’ personal home care benefit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a quality of life here in Saskatchewan 

that is unparalleled anywhere else in Canada. From our 

abundance of natural resources to our people and everything in 

between, Saskatchewan is simply the best place to live. But we 

need to make it better though. To do this we’re going to help 

with creating an additional 2,000 child care spaces. We’re 

going to improve support for people with disabilities. We’re 

going to increase support for autism, Mr. Speaker, and the list 

goes on. 

 

We are continuing to reduce our surgical wait times. We’re 

improving health care access in our rural communities and 

improving services for people with diabetes. So children with 

. . . The insulin pump program will be extended to people under 

25 years old, up from 17 years. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it continues with a further $10 million over 

the next four years for our provincial parks, also an additional 

$2,500 a year to help about 750 municipally owned indoor rinks 

to run. Mr. Speaker, my family and I love living in the new 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So I’d like to speak in favour of this motion but not for the 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to 

congratulate you on getting elected as the Speaker. I would also 

like to congratulate the Deputy Speaker from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood constituency. And thank you to all my 

colleagues on both sides of the House for their gracious 

welcome. It is a great privilege to be here today to represent my 

constituency of Saskatoon Meewasin and to provide some 

opening remarks in this Chamber. I am truly humbled and 

honoured to be appearing here among colleagues who have 

made a positive impact in our great province, including our 

Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is hard to believe that it’s been almost a full 

month since we have all been elected. In that time, I have 

learned a lot about the role of an MLA and my respect for those 

who have gone before me has grown immensely. With this title 

comes great responsibility and I will work hard to fulfill this 

role and serve all of the constituents, not only those who voted 

for me, but everyone in Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have so many people to thank for helping me 

along this path to this House. I would like to acknowledge my 

dear wife Sheila. She is a rock for me and is my best friend. 

Thanks to my daughter Shanaya, who has helped me knock in 

two elections, as a 16-year-old and this time as a 20-year-old, 

and her boyfriend Kyle, for their strong support. Without them, 

I would honestly not be standing here today. I owe so much to 

them for their dedication and understanding as I continue down 

this path to serve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to acknowledge my friends, my 

campaign team, and I apologize if I’ve missed someone: Lorne, 

my campaign manager; Bernadette, membership and data 

control; William, Lorne and Bernadette’s grandchild; Gabriele, 

our office manager, who made sure that of the five girls that we 

had, that the office was open every day from 9 to 8; and the 

other four ladies are two Joannes, Lesia, and Connie. 

 

Joanne, of course, also was my e-day [election day] food 

coordinator, and she did a fabulous job. She had 200 boxes of 

meals for the volunteers that she made the sandwiches and she 

made the treats in them, the juice, and I had the privilege of 

delivering them to all my helpers out scrutineering. She also 

made sure that every time a runner went to pick up the bingo 

sheets, they were delivered something to drink and another 

treat, so she did a fabulous job. Lesia also was . . . pretty much 

did every function there was in the office for me. 

 

There is also Chad, Terance, Mark, Ryan, Stefanie, John was 

my e-day Chair, Sally, Edward, and Jack, his counterpart, John, 

Barry, Mathew, Wally, Carol, Carl who has helped me in three 

elections, Elizabeth, Terri who is another political nut just like 

me, Randy, Joe, Jean, Blaine, Laureen, Mike, Nick, Cheryl. 

 

Milt, who commented one day at the doors when we were door 

knocking that he was being selfish and door knocking for 

himself because since the Saskatchewan Party had got elected 

four years ago, two of his sons have moved back to 

Saskatchewan because there’s actually jobs here for them. 

Sheree and of course Sheree’s daughter, Ava, who was my next 

door neighbour at one time. She really puts a bright smile to my 

face. 

 

Trudy, Cynthia, Lynne, Murray, Rita, Carolyn, Mel, Daryl, 

Robert, Anne, James, Brigitte, Donna, Nadya, Anne, Joan, 

Marjorie, Rita, Pat, Nathan, Venessa, Tim, James, Pat, Fran, 

David, Ian. 

 

I had a large team. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They did great. 

 

Mr. Parent: — Yes. Kathy, Andrea, Brad, Don, Bonnie, Lyle, 

Ray, Wilma, Annette, Michelle, Russel, Debbie, Erin, Terri, 

Edna, and Henry, Dwayne, Ruth, Lois, Garth, Art, Bryan, 

Wayne, Wendy, Howard, Doreen, John, Peter, Barbera, Charles 

and Elva who came all the way from Melfort and spent the last 

three days on my campaign helping me. 

 

And of course the last one, Wcar from Pakistan, who is a new 

immigrant to Saskatchewan and able to vote. He went door 

knocking with me where all the immigrants stay in this . . . 

there’s about 24 apartment blocks and in those apartment 

blocks 90 per cent are immigrants. And he was well-dressed, in 

a suit and everything, and I’d go to the doors and I’d knock and 

if the person . . . I’d ask them where they were from, and if they 

said India, he’d wait until I was finished talking to them and 

then he’d say . . . in their language, he’d talk to them and ask 

them if he was supporting the Sask Party or not and he’d 

convince them that they have to vote for the Sask Party. 



December 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 55 

Well on the third building, we go downstairs to start on the 

basement and I turn around and look and who do I see but my 

NDP counterpart door knocking the same apartment block. So 

anyway, Wcar and I, we continued door knocking and as we 

walked by our NDP counterpart, he took a double look. He 

looks at Wcar and he looks again like that. He knew what was 

going on. But that was a real pleasure that day. 

 

I thank you all for believing in me and also my colleagues who 

came and helped door knock with me like Greg and several 

others. I thank you all for believing in me and for your support. 

I am not sure who you believed in more, me or our Premier. 

Either way, I am glad to see we are both in this place today. 

 

[20:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, my roots are here in Saskatchewan. I was born in 

Prince Albert and have spent most of my life in Saskatoon. I am 

proud, proud to call this great city home and continue to marvel 

at the beautiful Saskatchewan River running through the 

Meewasin constituency. Enjoying the beautiful river view along 

the Meewasin Trail is truly a beautiful experience. We are very 

blessed to have such a natural beauty right in the heart of our 

city. Although there has been discussion about bringing a white 

water rafting park to this central area, we cannot dispute that 

nature’s creation is also a great attraction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this urban constituency in Saskatoon is split 

among residential, businesses and industrial areas. Residential 

areas along the west bank of the South Saskatchewan River 

contain older, upscale neighbourhoods. The other main 

residential area is west of Idylwyld Drive, Circle Drive. Circle 

Drive and Idylwyld Drive are major service and retail districts. 

This constituency is bounded by 51st Street on the north side, 

the South Saskatchewan River on the east, 29th and Queen 

Street, and Avenue D on the west. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan institute of applied technology, 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology], Kelsey Campus is located here as well as the 

city’s only indoor golf dome, the mall at Lawson Heights, and 

the Saskatoon John G. Diefenbaker International Airport. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon Meewasin was created as a new 

constituency in 1995, but the boundaries were altered before the 

2003 election. It now includes some polls formerly in 

Saskatoon Idylwyld and Saskatoon Northwest. Mr. Speaker, my 

fellow residents of Meewasin have the privilege of living close 

to this breathtaking view, and I invite everyone to experience it. 

I have spent the last five years getting to know my neighbours 

and it is truly an honour to now be able to serve them in this 

capacity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have lived in the Saskatoon Meewasin 

constituency area for more than 25 years, and I am so proud to 

call it home. However, I am even more proud to serve the 

people of this vibrant community. Again, thank you to all who 

supported me. And to those who did not mark an X beside my 

name, I am here to serve you as well. 

 

I am pleased to be on the team moving Saskatchewan forward 

and to work together to make great things happen in our 

province. From the booming north end of Saskatoon Meewasin 

to the growing downtown, it’s clearly a time of expansion we 

intend to keep moving forward, welcoming new business, 

residents, and working with the municipal and federal 

governments to improve and provide the necessary 

infrastructure and supports to keep the province on track. This 

province has given my family so much opportunity and now it’s 

my turn to give back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a few short weeks ago, our government presented 

the people of Saskatchewan with a clear, concise, and 

forward-looking vision for our province. Voters responded by 

providing the government with its second mandate. 

 

I would like to reference the Throne Speech. This government 

is humbled by the confidence Saskatchewan people have shown 

us, and we vow to approach the coming four years with an 

attitude of humility and service. 

 

[This] . . . government vows to keep Saskatchewan 

moving forward, to keep its commitments and to work to 

achieve the vision outlined in the recent election 

campaign. 

 

. . . a province of over 1.1 million people by 2015; 

 

a province that is steadily eliminating its General 

Revenue Fund debt; 

 

a place where young people get the best education and 

opportunities; 

 

a place where seniors are treated with dignity and 

respect; and 

 

a place where people with disabilities get the best care 

and support available in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through a continuing commitment to its 

Saskatchewan advantage growth plan, this government will 

foster population growth and nation-leading economic 

performance. This government will build on the Saskatchewan 

advantage housing plan by exploring additional new-growth tax 

incentives to encourage construction of new affordable rental 

housing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people enjoy a sense of community 

and quality of life that is simply unrivalled anywhere in 

Canada. Our natural resources, our pristine environment, our 

people, and our communities make Saskatchewan the best place 

in Canada to work, to live, and to raise a family. 

 

But there is always more work to be done, and this government 

will take action to continue improving Saskatchewan’s quality 

of life. Many families have expressed concerns with the school 

year starting before the Labour Day long weekend in 

September. Further, a desire was expressed to achieve some 

measure of consistency in the schools’ start date across the 

province. To address these concerns, this government will 

introduce legislation to standardize the start of the school year 

so that the instruction will begin after the Labour Day long 

weekend across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, four years ago this government received a 



56 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2011 

renewed mandate to keep Saskatchewan moving forward. 

Today governments all over the world are facing the dire 

consequences of overspending, deficits, and debt. So it is not 

surprising that the people of our great province in their 

collective wisdom provided this government a mandate that 

included a strong word of caution: live within your means. 

 

Today Saskatchewan has a tremendous advantage — balanced 

budgets, less debt, declining interest payments, a growing 

economy. Saskatchewan people have told this government: 

make sure you keep our advantage. This government has heard 

this message. This government will keep the budget balanced. 

This government will keep the economy strong. This 

government will live within its means. And finally, this 

government will keep Saskatchewan moving forward. 

 

And with that, I support the motion to move the Throne Speech, 

and I do not support the amendment. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the 

opportunity to introduce myself and thank you for the podium. 

I’d like opportunity to introduce myself to my distinguished 

colleagues on both sides of the House. I would first of all like to 

congratulate all elected members on their successful campaign. 

It was a very hard fought battle but I’d like to . . . just glad to 

see everybody here that is going to participate in this session of 

the legislative process. 

 

Congratulations to you, Mr. Speaker, as well for being 

successfully elected to the Speaker’s post for the first time. I 

look forward to your guidance during this session. 

 

I am being given the honour to represent the people of 

Saskatoon Sutherland for the next four years. Sutherland is one 

of the oldest communities in our great city of Saskatoon, and I 

am very humbled by this opportunity. On November 7th, I 

realized a dream of mine. That dream, Mr. Speaker, was in any 

way possible to help this province reach its full potential. I 

believe morally, economically, socially that this government 

has the means to accomplish this. 

 

Over the past four years, I have witnessed this change, the 

change that has started. And hopefully, Mr. Speaker, I will be 

able to add my assistance to this government to help keep the 

province on the current track of prosperity. That track that we 

are on was laid out in the Throne Speech yesterday, our vision 

— a province of over 1.1 million people by 2015, a province 

that is steadily eliminating its General Revenue Fund debt, 

down over $3 billion in our first term, Mr. Speaker, a place 

where young people receive the best education and 

opportunities, a place where seniors are treated with dignity, 

respect, and a place where people with disabilities will receive 

the best support in all of Canada. 

 

How we’re going to accomplish this, Mr. Speaker — to sustain 

growth and opportunity in our province, to make life more 

affordable for Saskatchewan people, to maintain a competitive 

tax and royalty regime within Saskatchewan, and to improve 

the quality of life for all?  

 

The affordability side, Mr. Speaker. The legislation to extend 

the notice periods of rent increase from six months to one year 

for property owners who choose not to participate in the newly 

created tenant assistance initiative established by the 

Saskatchewan rental industry association, building on the 

Saskatchewan housing advantage by exploring new growth tax 

incentives to encourage construction of new affordable housing 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Our quality of life. The next four years, an additional 2,000 

child care spaces will be created. Further, said benefits will 

increase over the next four years by $100 a month for those in 

residential care, $350 a month for a single person living outside 

residential care, and $400 a month for couples. Working with 

community-based organizations to develop and implement 

better programs and services for adults with autism, and 

bringing the Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society emergency 

medical helicopter service to Saskatchewan to provide an added 

emergency coverage to complement our existing road 

ambulance service. 

 

Now a little bit about myself, Mr. Speaker. There are four main 

reasons why I wanted to become an MLA and keep 

Saskatchewan moving forward. These reasons are very personal 

and somewhat selfish. The reasons are Courtney, Carter, 

Kassidy, and Keely. These are my children, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I grew up in Toronto, and my family moved to Saskatchewan in 

1988. This was certainly bucking the trends in the late ’80s to 

move from what we considered a thriving metropolis of 

Toronto to smack dab in the middle of the flatland in Regina, 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The move came with its ups and downs, Mr. Speaker. One of 

my first memories of living in Regina was when my parents 

purchased their pride and joy, a new Buick Park Avenue. They 

took this gleaming blue car out to the air show in Moose Jaw 

while I stayed home to watch TV with some newly friends that 

I had just met. Halfway through our show, Mr. Speaker, our 

neighbour came across the street, came barrelling through our 

front door yelling something about our roof had been torn off. 

Not knowing what he was talking about, a series of storms had 

moved right across southern Saskatchewan to greet us in our 

newly arrived home in Regina. It picked up all of the shingles 

on the back side of our house that we had just purchased and 

quietly deposited them on the front street, with us inside the 

house not knowing any different. My parents arrived back from 

the air show in Moose Jaw with a completely hailed-out Park 

Avenue that was unrecognizable. They caught the storm just 

outside of Moose Jaw. 

 

This amazing thing happened, Mr. Speaker. After the storm was 

finished, the entire neighbourhood came out of their houses, 

saw what had happened, came down the street with rolls of 

plastic, hammers, ladders, and climbed up on our roof and 

started to proceed to repair the roof without saying anything. I 

instantly knew, even though I had left all my friends and family 

in Toronto, that this was a very special place we were now 

calling home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I first visited the Saskatchewan Legislative 

Assembly soon after I moved from Toronto. I was amazed at 

how many people would spend their summer days in and 



December 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 57 

around this beautiful building. I remember spending hours upon 

hours around the Legislative Building playing football, 

baseball, Frisbee or just hanging out with my friends trying to 

avoid all the little treasures that the local geese had left for us 

on the playing field. I was awestruck by the sheer beauty of this 

building and the surrounding grounds and how people could not 

take a trip to this great city without stopping by this beautiful 

building. 

 

When I called Regina home, I lived not too far from where we 

stand right now, Mr. Speaker. I graduated from Campbell 

Collegiate, so I was literally raised in the backyard of the leg 

[legislature] as we so eloquently called it.  

 

Mr. Speaker, my political journey started in 2003 when my 

father, Ted, was first elected to represent Saskatoon Northwest 

in the Saskatchewan legislature. I joined my father’s campaign 

team and in several areas along with his number one supporter 

— my mother, Marie. I learned many lessons from my father 

and my mother: treat everyone like you like to be treated, help 

those in need, and family comes first. I would like to thank 

them tonight for tuning in while they are out of the country on 

vacation. 

 

[20:45] 

 

My strong Catholic background, God always played an 

important role in my life. Now that I am the father of four and 

married to a good, staunch, French Catholic girl from Willow 

Bunch, Saskatchewan, I am good to see that he is guiding my 

decisions and my conscience. 

 

I have had an exciting career over the past 20 years, Mr. 

Speaker. Lately I have had the honour of being the executive 

director at the Saskatoon Food Bank and Learning Centre and 

helping people in and around the community of Saskatoon in 

various ways. I was a business owner of three businesses. I 

owned a car wash detailing centre, a painting company as well 

as another small business. As well as I worked at SaskEnergy 

for nine years in their salvage operations, helping that 

corporation save millions of dollars by recycling and 

refurbishing their material. I have worked with members on 

both sides of the House of this Chamber to help those in need 

and hope to continue this work helping my community which 

now includes Saskatoon Sutherland, Saskatoon, and the great 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I would not describe myself who was someone very politically 

active when I was younger. I voted in every municipal, federal, 

and provincial election though. I was deeply intrigued by the 

election process when my father ran in the by-election in 2002, 

in Riversdale, against former Premier Calvert and worked with 

my father on his victorious election in the general election of 

2003. 

 

Once elected my father’s passion for serving the people of this 

great province inspired me. Now I have been awarded this great 

privilege and responsibility to represent the constituency, and I 

will work for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Yesterday this Assembly was filled with both party supporters, 

media, Saskatchewan enthusiasts waiting to see how this 

government will map out its second term. There were several 

phrases that jumped out at me, but the one that impacted me 

was contained in the conclusion, and I quote, “I ask that you 

remember every day that your seat in this place, hard fought, 

well earned, is on loan. It was purchased with the blood of our 

soldiers and the toil of our settlers.” This statement and the 

message that I have been receiving from veteran MLAs of 

humility, honour, and patience resonates with me. 

 

I would not be here today if it wasn’t for the support of my 

family, and most importantly, my wife, Leane. Leane was there 

on the doors with me every night. After a gruelling day of 

running her own business six days a week, she would cheerfully 

pick up her clipboard and would be off to the knock. Leane 

taught in the inner city school of Saskatoon for nine years until 

her seven-year-old daughter told her, mommy, follow your 

passion. So she did. She resigned from teaching, cashing in her 

pension and opening up the best shoe store in Saskatoon. Now 

eight years later, she is a successful businesswoman and 

allowing me to follow my passion. Without her unwavering 

support of all of my dreams, I would not be here. 

 

I want to thank my campaign manager, Dan Wiks, and his wife, 

Arlene, as well as my campaign executive of Ron Hicks, 

Sumith Kahanda, and Lori Pusher, and the entire team who 

worked hundreds of hours during my 15-month campaign. 

 

One person I would like to single out is my predecessor, 

Joceline Schriemer. Joceline worked tirelessly for the people of 

Saskatoon Sutherland over the past four years. Joceline quickly 

became a friend and a mentor to me. She worked for months 

leading up to the writ and was in the office every day during the 

campaign, coordinating all of the volunteers, Mr. Speaker. 

Joceline, you were a great MLA, a great mentor, and most 

importantly, a good friend. I wish you all the best returning to 

your career in policing in Saskatoon. 

 

I also want to thank the people of Saskatoon Sutherland for 

putting their trust in me. I will make sure that I represent you to 

the best of my ability throughout my term. I do not take this 

responsibility lightly, Mr. Speaker, or for granted, and will 

conduct myself in a respectful and honourable manner. 

 

I will not be supporting the amendment to the speech, but I will 

be supporting the motion moved by my colleagues. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured 

to rise and enter debate in response to the Throne Speech here 

tonight. And I’d like to start with congratulations to yourself, 

Mr. Speaker, in accepting and in taking on that new role as 

Speaker to this Assembly. And I know you and I both have a 

shared interest in common, and that is, pursuing the beautiful 

pheasant in southeastern Saskatchewan and often in your 

constituency. And I look forward to the leadership you’ll 

provide this Assembly and the fair hand that you’ll provide. 

 

I’d like to also recognize our Deputy Speaker, the member from 

Last Mountain-Touchwood. And what I will say is that, through 

a time, working . . . significant time with our Deputy Speaker as 

the Vice-Chair of Public Accounts, I earned a great deal of 



58 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2011 

respect as to how that individual went about a course of 

business. Of course we differ on some political matters and the 

way we see the better Saskatchewan being fulfilled, but I know 

he’ll serve us honourably in the role as Deputy Speaker. 

 

Coming out of the election, just a month out of the election 

here, I want to specifically thank and recognize our local team 

in Regina Rosemont, a very, very special local team of 

volunteers and individuals that come together with great 

sincerity and purpose to what we work towards. And I want to 

thank those individuals. I want to thank our exceptional and 

dedicated organizing team: Trevor, Deb, David, Gloria, Donna, 

Bob, Taren, Hazel, Gerri, Nicole. The list goes on. And then 

that’s the primary organizing committee. And of course I want 

to thank the countless volunteers, the door knockers that make 

things happen, that make it such a delight to go about the 

process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We had an impressive team, Mr. Speaker. I have never seen it 

like this. So many what we called mat leave moms that would 

come out on afternoons, Mr. Speaker, with babies in tow, 

whether by way of a stroller or with a carrier, and there to work 

for something that they cared about, Mr. Speaker, a very special 

bunch. And it has been my privilege working with them 

through that process. 

 

And certainly our organizers, by way of activities and all 

aspects of a campaign, Mr. Speaker. There’s many roles and 

there was many individuals that fulfilled those roles. I want to 

thank each and every one of them, and simply say thank you to 

them for their leadership and their work within our 

constituency, and their work to fulfill a better province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I want to specifically recognize my wife, Mr. Speaker, 

Stephanie, for her love, her support, and her advice, and 

certainly for the fact that she comes by politics and bettering 

her community in a very sincere way, Mr. Speaker. And 

whether it’s her teaching or her coaching, her graduate studies 

or the fun and love that she provides to our friends and family, 

to our constituency as a whole, I want to thank her for all that 

she provides, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to as well thank our extended families that play 

such a significant role in the lives of Stephanie and I, and in the 

lives of us both from a political perspective, but also in all those 

important and blessed ways that we are as a family, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I want to thank our constituency assistant who has served us so 

honourably and represents the casework that comes into our 

office in such a delicate and fair fashion, always keeping the 

constituents’ best interests at heart, Mr. Speaker, and keeping 

those front and centre in making sure we deliver the kinds of 

advocacy and the kinds of responses that they deserve, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And it’s fair to say that we don’t arrive in this legislature 

because of our own merits or because we’re so special 

ourselves. That would be both self-righteous and incorrect. We 

come here carried on the backs of our constituents, our families, 

our friends, our volunteers, and certainly those that have served 

before us and led before us, Mr. Speaker. And for that it’s 

something that I have a great respect to, and something that we 

should remember and keep in mind as we go about our 

deliberations in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also want to recognize the two other individuals that put their 

names forward in Regina Rosemont, Mr. Speaker, and pursued 

service within the constituency. And I want to recognize both 

Tony Fiacco and Allan Kirk, Mr. Speaker. And at this point in 

time I’d like to in fact recognize all of the candidates that put 

their name forward for the Saskatchewan New Democratic 

Party, both for nomination but also for the general election, and 

worked so hard to serve their constituencies and better their 

communities. And I can say, Mr. Speaker, this was a team that 

was dynamic, that was diverse, that was incredibly able, and a 

group that pursued the betterment of their community and their 

province in a sincere fashion, Mr. Speaker. And to all those 

individuals I say thank you to them for pursuing that important 

service. Thank you for their contributions to their communities, 

to our province, Mr. Speaker, and it doesn’t go unnoticed. 

 

I’d certainly like to thank and recognize the many MLAs, Mr. 

Speaker, who served as hard-working MLAs that haven’t 

returned to this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And I think of some of 

our past colleagues and I wish each of them well, thank them 

for the leadership they provided, and I wish them well into the 

future. And certainly their contributions will be remembered 

and have been important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On this note, I would recognize that certainly we accept the will 

of voters and recognize the smaller caucus that we have here at 

this point in time, the nine members that are here. I would like 

to say that of the nine members or the nine members that are 

here certainly are an able, talented group, intelligent group that 

will go about the work of Saskatchewan people in an earnest 

and sincere way and do that work, I know, in strong fashion, 

Mr. Speaker, will do it with spirit, will do it with purpose, and 

will serve Saskatchewan people very well in holding a 

government to account, in playing that role of an opposition, 

but also in of course representing their own constituencies, Mr. 

Speaker, and of course in that role of proposing and putting 

forward the policies that will better our fine province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I want to at this point in time welcome all members on both 

sides of this Assembly, all new members specifically to this 

Assembly. And I’ve enjoyed sitting in the chambers here today, 

Mr. Speaker, and hearing the maiden speeches of many of these 

members and understanding who these individuals are and how 

they fit into our Assembly and how they fit into our province, 

and also understanding what motivates them to serve, Mr. 

Speaker. And to each of these new members on both sides of 

the Assembly, I welcome those members and I thank them for 

the service that they’ll pursue and the service that they’ll 

provide, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When I look to our side of the Assembly, I know specifically I 

want to recognize a new member, a new colleague that’s an 

exceptionally strong individual, the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. And I know this member will make a significant mark 

in representing her constituents but also in bettering our 

province. And as members in this Assembly and as the public 

get to meet this individual, they’re going to recognize how 

intelligent, how hard-working, how devoted this individual is. 



December 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 59 

And although we’re a nine-member caucus right now, I can 

certainly suggest that that member will play a significant part 

— of all these members and all of us — doing the work we 

need to, to better circumstances here in Saskatchewan for all 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And the member from Nutana certainly brings with her the 

background as a lawyer, exceptional background, and the files 

that she was working on. But she certainly also brings with her 

a family’s history to serve us in this province, and to economic 

development, specifically as it relates to agriculture, Mr. 

Speaker, as with her grandfather and her family being 

instrumental in the development of the Wheat Pool in this 

province — in fact her grandfather having some relationship 

with my great-grandfather, Mr. Speaker, back at that important 

time of development. I know just as those weren’t insignificant 

accomplishments, I know that our new member, the member 

from Nutana’s accomplishments will be significant as well, Mr. 

Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . That’s right. 

 

I’m honoured to serve the great people of Regina Rosemont 

once again, Mr. Speaker, an exceptionally special constituency, 

Mr. Speaker, hard-working people, strong families, young 

people building their lives here in Saskatchewan, many new 

Canadians that are making their way in our province and as 

well bettering us as a province at that same period of time and 

evolving who we are as a province, Mr. Speaker, and many 

seniors that have played that instrumental role in building out 

what’s important to us as a province and a community. And 

certainly I’m going to work in earnest to represent the needs of 

my constituents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[21:00] 

 

I want to highlight specifically some of the strengths of our 

constituency. And I would highlight the volunteerism and the 

community leadership that occurs, specifically by way of our 

community associations, Mr. Speaker, and individuals that are 

committed to bettering both our community but also our 

province. But whether it’s McNab or whether it’s Rosemont, 

Mount Royal, or whether it’s Prairie View or Dieppe or 

Normanview West, these are community associations and 

community leaders that work, in many cases tirelessly, to make 

important improvements both to our community but also to the 

lives, significantly to the lives of people within the community. 

I thank them for that leadership and for that service. 

 

I’d like to just maybe make a mention that the, in the role of 

serving the public and in through that process, the relationships 

that you build and that you maintain, so both those that are new 

and those that are lifelong, are something to cherish and 

something that I value. And I truly appreciate the open 

relationship that I’ve been provided with so many of our 

constituents, in working to better understand what’s important 

to their lives and how we can best move forward in making sure 

we’re making those improvements that are meaningful to my 

constituents and their respective lives, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I’d like, before moving into some of the discussion of the 

Throne Speech specifically, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to touch on 

just a few of the local issues that need, certainly need some 

action and improvement on, Mr. Speaker, and that are 

important to my constituents, one of them being the traffic and 

the heavy haul and freight that’s new to, relatively new over the 

past year, to Dewdney Avenue, Mr. Speaker. And certainly 

many contend that it certainly does impede both peace of mind 

but also, but also safety and allegations and concerns about the 

degradation of that infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we have an exciting project just outside our perimeter in 

the Global Transportation Hub. But we need to make sure that 

we’re planning this in a fashion that betters the lives of all 

people, Mr. Speaker, and doesn’t, doesn’t cause concerns of 

peace of mind, of damage, in fact, which has been alleged by 

many, Mr. Speaker, by way of foundational problems, many 

allegations of new cracks that have appeared in foundations and 

in drywall, Mr. Speaker. And certainly I can attest to standing 

in many of those homes and certainly in the yards and 

driveways of so many of those places, and it certainly is 

significant by way of the noise and the traffic and the pounding 

and the vibrations. And we need to make sure that we bring 

around a plan to mitigate that in the near term, to reduce that 

impact. And we need to make sure that we plan to eliminate 

that as we move forward. 

 

And I know significantly the bypass is important but also the 

twinning of 9th Avenue North. And these need to be done in an 

expeditious fashion that provide peace of mind and security to 

individuals who deserve it, Mr. Speaker. And I hear a 

commitment from across the floor, Mr. Speaker, that they will 

be, and that’s important. And in fact it needs to be done in a 

very timely fashion, and I think that’s what we maybe need to 

establish because there’s a real lack of understanding on this 

front in the meantime, a real hardship that’s being incurred. 

 

As well we need to look specifically at concerns that are being 

raised by many constituents as it relates to the potential closure 

of Dieppe School, Mr. Speaker, a school that in fact the roof 

was replaced last summer, Mr. Speaker, just last summer 

repaired and the infrastructure in very good repair — in fact the 

facility itself planned in a fashion that’s consistent with some of 

the new models of facilities to keep pace with some of the 

innovations in education. 

 

What’s challenging many constituents on this and a pause for 

concern is that both Dieppe is a very remote part of the 

constituency — separated by creek and road, Mr. Speaker — 

but also there’s a lot of activity going on and the changing 

demographic that should be reflected and understood. And we 

have the Global Transportation Hub that is on the immediate 

west of this part of the constituency, and what we see is a real 

transfer and change of demographic. And I think we really do 

need to make sure we understand how that’s going to change 

the numbers of school-aged children in that part of the 

constituency. And how do we then retain potentially that asset 

that’s so important to the community, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So I know there’s many constituents who ask. They ask about 

the schools of opportunity, schools of opportunity and 

understanding what’s fair is fair, Mr. Speaker. This is applied 

certainly to rural boards, Mr. Speaker. We need to look here 

and now with a school that’s in good repair. How do we work 

to keep those doors open, or at least understand what it means 

to close something that’s of significant value? Of course to 

rebuild that school as a new facility would be close to $20 

million. I think of the Arcola project that’s right around that 



60 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2011 

$20 million piece. We need to understand what’s going on by 

way of demographics and what possibilities there are to keep 

that important piece of infrastructure open for my constituents, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And one last piece of infrastructure that’s very important but 

something that touches the lives of many in this Assembly and 

certainly the lives of all of our constituents is the Pioneer 

Village care home, Mr. Speaker, care facility, and this is a 

building that has served this province in a fine way, but it’s 

seen a better day. And it needs significant rebuild and 

significant renovation or complete rebuild, Mr. Speaker. 

Certainly it’s something that I know that the Ministry of Health 

has a responsibility to, and I hope that it’s there as an important 

priority, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So these are some of the pieces that are important from a local 

perspective. 

 

But what I need to highlight as well, Mr. Speaker, is that just 

quite simply we hear a lot about the booming Saskatchewan. 

We need to do a better job, Mr. Speaker, in making sure that’s 

equated into better lives for Saskatchewan people. We need to 

make sure that that’s reflected in the well-being of 

Saskatchewan people and the quality of life of Saskatchewan 

people. And all too often, Mr. Speaker, and far too common, 

that’s not the case. So that’s where our focus needs to go by 

way of developing policy, by putting forward a vision and a 

plan. 

 

And you know, this Throne Speech that was put forward 

certainly is rich on words but certainly a tad weak as it relates 

to the meaningful actions required for Saskatchewan people. 

And if we are looking at the important challenges facing . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . And the member shouts, from 

Moose Jaw North says, what are we talking about? And I know 

what we’re talking about is the challenges facing Saskatchewan 

people, specifically by way of affordability, Mr. Speaker, and 

the security and protection that’s needed but not had by so 

many in this province right now, Mr. Speaker. We need a 

government to be responding on those fronts, whether it’s rent, 

whether it’s housing, whether it’s post-secondary, whether it’s 

child care that’s both not affordable but also not accessible, Mr. 

Speaker. And we need to do a better job on these fronts. 

 

We need to make sure that, as we’re apparently booming as a 

province and at our height of prosperity, that in fact we’re 

improving ourselves from a fiscal perspective, Mr. Speaker, and 

not as we’re seen skating through with imbalance, Mr. Speaker, 

at a period of time right now where we’re adding $500 million 

to our provincial debt this year alone, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And these are the questions that people are asking, Mr. Speaker. 

So when they see a government not even address fiscal balance 

or fiscal plan in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, is one of 

concern. When we have what’s purported as a booming 

economy but yet a government that skates through with 

imbalance, we should be doing better on this front. We need to 

be addressing so many of these pieces. 

 

We see the challenges in health care in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, in every region in this province, and we see narrowly a 

mention in this Throne Speech that will bring important 

changes that are required. And Saskatchewan people are 

wanting of more. In fact, Mr. Speaker, they’re deserving of 

more. Whether we are talking about the important services that 

must be provided in all regions of this province, we need to first 

of all acknowledge the challenges that exist and then put 

forward plans to address it. Neither of that is happening, Mr. 

Speaker. And in a rich and prosperous province, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s entirely unacceptable when we look at certain 

circumstances in this province. Specifically if we are looking at 

HIV and AIDS, a circumstance that is afflicting far too many in 

this province, Mr. Speaker, and a government again that sits 

rather idle on this front instead of putting forward an aggressive 

plan as a prosperous province to ensure we are in a better 

circumstance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think of some of the other challenges we have and I think Eric 

Howe has described this one, Eric Howe being the U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan] economist, Mr. Speaker, and 

writer. And he highlights the educational gap for our First 

Nations and Métis people, and he highlights this as both the 

biggest challenge and opportunity before our province, Mr. 

Speaker. And I would certainly agree with Eric Howe on this 

front. 

 

Now he quantifies this as a $90 billion challenge facing 

Saskatchewan, or opportunity facing Saskatchewan. It’s 

important to us, Mr. Speaker, to improve those outcomes for all 

of us. A child doesn’t choose the circumstances for which they 

are born into, Mr. Speaker, and we need to do a better job of 

making sure there is equity and equality and reducing the 

disparities that exist, Mr. Speaker, and making sure the 

economic opportunities exist to all Saskatchewan people. And 

of course this is in all of our best interests, both from an 

economic perspective but also from a social perspective. 

 

I noticed in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker — in fact, I guess I 

didn’t notice it — that there was no mention of an education 

funding formula to provide adequate funding to the school 

divisions of this province, and the schools and communities and 

parents and students of this province, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 

disappointing, Mr. Speaker. This is a promise that has gone 

unfulfilled for some period of time when, three years ago, a 

funding formula was ripped up, Mr. Speaker, and replaced with 

no new model. And it’s caused constraint for school divisions 

and certainly challenges, and cuts across Saskatchewan in 

different areas and in different aspects that certainly have had 

an impact on the lives of students and on the lives of families 

across Saskatchewan. So these are fronts where we need to do a 

better job, Mr. Speaker, and an area that we can work 

co-operatively to strive to do a better job. 

 

But certainly as it relates to the Throne Speech itself, whether 

the inaction on many of these fronts or the environment, and the 

list goes on, Mr. Speaker. And I’m cognizant of the fact that I 

am not able to take more time in this Assembly here today, and 

I’m being asked by members to conclude my statements. But 

there are many, many aspects that weren’t addressed in this 

Throne Speech that should be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So quite frankly, Saskatchewan people deserve a vision and a 

plan to address the needs of today, but also to fulfill on that 

promise of a better tomorrow, to make those improvements to 

our fine province. And we don’t see that within this Throne 



December 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 61 

Speech, Mr. Speaker. We see areas that certainly require 

improvements and that certainly require actions, and we’re here 

to make that call, to put forward those proposals. And that’s the 

work that we’ll be doing in the days, weeks, months, years 

ahead of us here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At this point in time, Mr. Speaker, I’ll conclude my statements 

and certainly make it known that I won’t be supporting the 

Throne Speech. I’ll be supporting the amendment. Thank you 

so much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s certainly an honour to represent the good people of Regina 

Dewdney in this beautiful building. I can’t believe I get to come 

to work here. What a testament to the people that built this 100 

years ago. We practise the tradition of the first parliamentary 

system that’s been around for hundreds of years, so it’s 

certainly an honour. 

 

You know, the first time I was in the Legislative Assembly . . . 

I didn’t get to come on a school trip like a lot of these folks that 

have spoke previously. I moved to Regina in ’97. I’ve always 

been interested in architecture and the political process, but I 

didn’t come down to the Legislative Assembly, the reason 

being is I saw a picture of the 1989 Grey Cup team and they 

had their picture taken out front of this beautiful building. And I 

said to myself, I’m not coming back; I’m not entering those 

doors until I win one myself. And so I was thankfully able to do 

that in 2007. The government of the time, the Premier of the 

province allowed us to come down to the building. It was a 

great day. I’m not sure, it must have been an extremely warm 

November because that ’89 picture, they had short sleeves on. 

I’ll always wonder how they do that. In ’07, that certainly 

would have been impossible. 

 

But there’s quite a few thank yous I’d like to do. I know this is 

a response to the Throne Speech, but I would like to veer off 

course a little bit and do some thank yous if that’s all right. I 

certainly want to thank the people of Regina Dewdney for 

allowing me to represent them. You know, we were able to win 

with 60 per cent of the popular vote. And, you know, I certainly 

like that number 60, so I thought it was pretty appropriate. You 

know, I like to think I work hard and I’m certainly not flashy 

or, you know, a great speaker or anything like that. But I think I 

do work hard, like I said, and I listen. I think those are 

important things that I will bring to the people of Regina 

Dewdney. And I’m honoured that they chose me, and I vow to 

serve them. 

 

[21:15] 

 

I’d also like to take the opportunity to thank members of my 

campaign team. It’s certainly a humbling experience to have — 

at the time about a year ago — strangers willing to take time 

out of their private lives and just help you out. Boy, you can’t 

thank them enough. They devote hours and hours. And I don’t 

want to specifically single anybody out except for my campaign 

manager, Kelly Gallagher. Again, strangers a year ago and from 

my perspective anyway, now a lifelong friend. So it was just a 

great experience, and you can never thank those people enough. 

 

I’m here for a lot of reasons, but most importantly my family. 

And I’d like to share a little bit about them. One of my 

favourite stories or one of the things I think about when I’m 

going through tough times or things aren’t going like I plan, I 

think of my grandfather — my dido, actually. In the Ukrainian 

language, it’s dido. And he was orphaned at 12 years old and, 

you know, he found a way to start a successful farm during the 

depths of the Depression. And he started a family and he 

worked the land for 60-some years and he lived in 

Saskatchewan to 90. And, you know, my baba and dido were 

just great people. And I think the reason I bring them up is, 

well, I’m certainly very proud of them. And I wanted to, if I 

could, put their names on the record: Steven and Katherine 

Makowsky. But I think they’re a great motif of what 

Saskatchewan is all about. They’re hard-working people. You 

know, tough times don’t last but tough people do, and that’s 

what they were all about. 

 

I think that’s the great part of the great promise of 

Saskatchewan. If you get a little bit of luck, despite long odds, 

despite tough times, if you work hard and give yourself a 

chance, you’re going to be able to create a life for yourself. And 

that’s what I think I really think about Saskatchewan when I 

think of baba and dido. I’m not bringing that up because it’s 

certainly not a unique story, that happens hundreds of times day 

after day, but it’s just something I think about. 

 

I’d like to acknowledge my parents as well. I had a 

stay-at-home mom. My Dad was an electrician. And just like 

everybody else, he worked hard. He went through strikes, 

starting his own business. And, you know, the thing I’ll say 

about my parents is my brother and I, we always came first. 

Like I said, every family goes through tough times but there 

was never a question of whether we could play hockey, whether 

we could play ball, play football. And you know, that’s 

something very special that I always thanked them for. I kind of 

wished that Mom would have cut the line at piano lessons once 

in a while. And again, I’m not saying we were deprived. We 

were well-looked-after but certainly sacrifices were made, just 

like so many families here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And of course my in-laws. They’re great people. My 

father-in-law worked in the construction industry for 50-plus 

years. And they’ve always treated me like their own. And 

they’re great, great Saskatchewan people. 

 

And my immediate family. I’m not sure who the number one 

fan of the Riders is. It might very well be the Premier. But I 

know who my number one fan is, and that’s my wife, Tami. 

And actually she likes to be referred to now as the first lady of 

Regina Dewdney. So she’s been with me through the ups and 

downs of football and in this new life.  

 

And boy, my three sons Nick, Ryan, and Blake, it’s so nice to 

come home to when you say something silly that you worry 

about in this arena or you give up a sack, fumble a touchdown. 

When you come home they don’t care. They just love their dad. 

And I suppose that’s a lot of reason why we do what we do here 

in this Chamber is we do it for our kids. We do it for future 

generations. We want to leave this place better than what we 

found it. And of course I’ve benefited from many great teachers 

and coaches and teammates throughout the years. I won’t get 

into that. I’ll save it for a book maybe one day. 



62 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2011 

Again, congratulations to my new colleagues, my new 

teammates for being elected. I think it’s really a great thing, a 

brave thing really, to put your name up to be publicly judged by 

your peers and stand up for what you believe in. I think that’s 

really great. It’s the foundation of our democracy. So 

congratulations for that. We’ll all be painted with the same 

brush in a lot of cases and so, you know, let’s continue the great 

work that this government’s done. 

 

Thanks to all the veteran MLAs. Boy, you guys have been 

really helpful. You have busy parts in your lives and the 

support, I’m sure my first-year colleagues will attest, you’ve 

been really great. And of course the great job you did in 

government the last four years, let’s face it, that made it 

certainly a lot easier for us to be elected, us new guys. So great, 

great work and look forward to enjoying, continuing that on. 

 

So I thought I would just — my colleagues have gone over the 

Throne Speech in great deal — I thought I’d just touch on a few 

of the things that I heard on the doors in Regina Dewdney and 

that the Throne Speech addresses. In Dewdney, the east part of 

Regina, there has been incredible growth. You’d hardly 

recognize it from ’07. There’s just been new housing, new 

businesses, infill lots in the older areas, and all the walks of life 

— recent immigrants, all people up and down the economic 

continuum, I guess you would say. 

 

And, boy, some of the things I heard on the doorstep is, number 

one, most of all, is just keep doing what you’re doing. Continue 

to lower taxes, continue to lower debt, and certainly we saw on 

November 7th that there was certainly agreement with that. 

 

A lot of the things I heard about were there are challenges with 

growth, certainly, and housing affordability is certainly an 

issue. I think the Minister of Social Services has done a lot of 

great work in this area. The five point plan, the Sask managed 

housing plan to add 4,600 new units over the next five years is 

certainly seeing some benefits, and certainly more as the years 

go on. Increasing the supply, we believe, is the solution to the 

rental housing problem. 

 

Moving notice periods, the Minister of Justice has brought up 

for those landlords that don’t participate in the rental housing 

industry association. I think that will bring some stability to the 

market as well. With the idea of affordability, we’ve taken 

114,000 low-income people off the tax rolls altogether. The 

first-time homebuyer tax credit certainly moves people from 

rental accommodations, gives them that little extra push to help 

them get into their own place that they can be proud to call their 

own. 

 

The graduate retention program has been a great success over 

the last four years. It’s certainly helped more of our young 

people stay here, including more doctors to stay here, more 

nurses to stay here. And on the doorsteps, boy, is it so good to 

see so many young families not only staying here but coming 

back from places like Alberta and Ontario. You see that all the 

time. It’s just really great to see. 

 

Certainly this has been said many times before, but people of 

my vintage, when I was graduating from university, the 

question really wasn’t if you were going to stay in 

Saskatchewan but where in Alberta you were going to move. 

And you know, my brother, he moved to Calgary. All my 

cousins live in Edmonton. And whenever I went to play in 

McMahon Stadium or Commonwealth Stadium, people thought 

it was great that we had so many fans supporting us. But I 

didn’t really see it that way. I thought those people should be 

right here at Mosaic Stadium cheering on the Roughriders. And 

certainly a growing economy and lots of jobs here certainly 

does help stem that flow, not to mention the graduate retention 

program. 

 

Lots of seniors in my constituency, and I spent some time at 

Queen Victoria Estates. The first appearance I guess I did as an 

MLA was at their November . . . excuse me, the Remembrance 

Day ceremony, I’m sorry, and certainly honoured to go there. 

But lots of seniors, as I mentioned, and we’re looking after our 

seniors. By the time 2015 rolls around, from 2007 levels, what 

we inherited, we’ll have tripled the seniors’ income plan. 

 

One of the biggest things I heard on the doorsteps was health 

care, and the surgical initiative is something I’m certainly very 

proud of. You know, I had a story where I was at the doors, and 

when I said that our goal by 2014 is to have nobody wait longer 

than three months to have surgery, there was a couple I was 

talking to, they actually burst out laughing at that. They thought 

there’s no way that can happen. Well those folks, they’re used 

to the old Saskatchewan. The new Saskatchewan, we set 

targets; we meet targets. People used to laugh that we . . . 

There’s no way we’ll get 800 nurses to work; we’ll never hire 

800. Well we didn’t hire 800. We hired 900 new nurses. It can 

be done. The Health minister is not afraid to set targets, so the 

public can judge on how we’re doing. And that’s certainly one 

of the things that attracted me to run for this party, absolutely. 

 

It’s great to see in the Throne Speech the idea of fiscal 

responsibility and that’s . . . When you see what’s happening in 

the rest of the world, that’s very, very important and something 

I certainly heard on the doors. 

 

S & P [Standard & Poor’s Corporation] recently gave us the 

highest bond credit rating, AAA. And that’s really something 

you can’t dispute or judge. It’s an independent body that says 

that. It’s not somebody else that’s saying that. And they’re 

certainly well respected. 

 

We have a growing economy in this province, as I mentioned. 

We have the Global Transportation Hub in Regina. Those are 

certainly exciting projects for this area and, you know, those . . . 

The new mine near Moose Jaw, those are permanent jobs that 

will be here long before we’re gone and that’s how you build an 

economy — strong jobs and economic growth. 

 

Well we certainly saw a few weeks ago that the people of 

Saskatchewan want to keep the province moving forward. I’ll 

proudly be supporting the Throne Speech on behalf of the 

people of Regina Dewdney. 

 

The former member of Dewdney said in his response to this 

government’s first Throne Speech in 2007, he said: 

 

But you have raised expectations of the . . . [people] 

beyond belief . . . over the next few years people will 

have the opportunity to see if you live up to those 

expectations. 



December 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 63 

Well I think without a doubt this government has shown it’s 

kept its promises. It’s lived up to those lofty expectations. And 

they certainly got the job done. 

 

And it’s been my experience that attitude goes a long way. 

Attitude goes a long way. Life’s 10 per cent what happens to 

you, 90 per cent how you react to it. And I think the Premier, 

this cabinet, and this government has changed the attitude of 

this province. We can be a have province. We can be a leader in 

the economy of Canada. We can be a leader in Confederation. 

And that’s a standard. When you do that, you start to raise 

standards, you raise expectations. When you reach those 

expectations, people respond and they start to believe in it and 

momentum builds. 

 

And so I think again it’s exciting time to be in Saskatchewan, in 

this province, in this government. And I’m so proud to be 

standing on this side of the aisle, and I’m going to work hard to 

represent the people of Regina Dewdney. And thank you to my 

colleagues and thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I will not support the amendment. I will be supporting the 

Throne Speech for the Government of Saskatchewan. Thank 

you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 

adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands 

adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 21:29.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Broten .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 43 

  Phillips ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 44 

  Moe ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 46 

  Cox ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 48 

  Forbes .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 50 

  Lawrence ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 52 

  Parent ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 54 

  Merriman .................................................................................................................................................................................... 56 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................... 57 

  Makowsky.................................................................................................................................................................................... 61 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Eagles ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 48 

  Doherty ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 50 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


