




















































Hansard: March 22, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 35A  TUESDAY, MARCH 22, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6835 

 March 22, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition today in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. And we know that freedom from poverty is an 

enshrined human right by the United Nations and all citizens 

are entitled to social and economic security. And we know the 

gap in Saskatchewan between the rich and poor continues to 

grow, and now one in five children in Saskatchewan live in 

deepening poverty. We also know citizens living in poverty 

have long identified affordable solutions, including the 

Saskatoon health disparities report and Canada Without Poverty 

report, Dignity for All campaign. It calls for a comprehensive 

poverty elimination strategy. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I do present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition on behalf of Northern Trappers Association 

Co-operative. The fur industry has so much potential for our 

northern trappers. It is a way to educate and empower our 

northern youth and to connect them with their culture. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to recognize that Northern 

Trappers Association Co-operative maintains the 

traditional values of hunting and trapping and also brings 

in millions of dollars to the provincial economy every year 

from the proceeds of fur harvesting combined with the 

economic spinoff to the tourism sector and to the local 

economy; and in so doing, to cause the Sask Party 

government to immediately show their support for the 

Northern Trappers Association Co-operative, to provide 

additional funding to assist in developing a value-added 

and marketing strategy that will enhance the current 

income levels available to their members. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of Sandy Bay, La Ronge, 

Buffalo Narrows, Prince Albert, Turnor Lake. I so present. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition concerning the need for a school in Hampton 

Village. The petition reads: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes, including education property taxes; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to neighbouring 

communities to attend schools that are typically already 

reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

constituents of Saskatoon Massey Place and residents of 

Hampton Village. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again with a 

petition of concern about the introduction of Bill 160 and 

signed by residents of the province of Saskatchewan concerned 

about the detrimental effects it will have on human rights law in 

the province. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Government of Saskatchewan withdraw 

Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative Assembly 

of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public consultations 

informed by a public policy paper before any amendments 

to the Human Rights Code, the law that supersedes all 

others in our province, are even considered. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Moose Jaw and 

Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise to 

present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan residents as it 

relates to the mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. 

They allude specifically to the two consecutive deficit budgets 

and the two years of debt loading under the Sask Party, Mr. 

Speaker, this year increasing our debt by $400 million at a time 

of record highs in revenues, Mr. Speaker, and in fact a plan to 

do so to the tune of $4.2 billion by 2014, which represents 55 

per cent of our total debt, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as 



6836 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2011 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents from 

Estevan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition today 

protecting tenants from unreasonable rent increases through 

rent controls. And this petition addresses the facts that rents 

have increased over 35 per cent on average in Saskatoon and 

Regina over the past four years, and it points out that Winnipeg 

has outstripped both those cities by far in the building of new 

rental accommodations. 

 

And I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take 

the following action: cause the government to 

immediately enact rent control legislation that protects 

Saskatchewan tenants from unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

These petitions are predominantly from the constituency of 

Regina Coronation Park. It is my honour on behalf of my 

constituents to present them. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Regina Citizen of the Year 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it was my honour to join 

with CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.] on Friday, 

March 18th, along with the member from Regina Elphinstone 

and dignitaries from across Regina, to honour a great friend, 

Ms. Renu Kapoor, as CTV Regina Citizen of the Year. 

 

Renu has played a leading role in the treatment of osteoporosis, 

has served our library board, the United Way, and has been a 

leader in the India-Canada Association of Saskatchewan for 

many years, including organizing the hugely successful annual 

India Night Dinner that has raised many hundreds of thousands 

of dollars for local charities. Renu has been recognized 

previously with the YWCA [Young Women’s Christian 

Association] Volunteer of the Year Award and the YWCA 

Woman of Distinction Lifetime Achievement Award. And 

Renu is showing no signs of slowing down as Renu is the 2011 

Honorary Ambassador for Mosaic 2011 and will chair the Year 

of India celebrations here in Saskatchewan. 

Renu’s entire family has assisted and supported this 

volunteerism: her husband, Dr. Don Kapoor, there every step of 

the way, and it was a pleasure to be joined by their son and 

daughter for the great honour. Renu speaks of learning the 

value of giving back to her community as a young girl in India, 

following her parents around their community and their many 

volunteer pursuits. She has devoted her life to service in our 

province as a tireless and devoted leader. She is an 

extraordinary individual and is most deserving of this 

prestigious award. Our community is better as a result of her 

leadership. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join with 

me to recognize and thank Ms. Renu Kapoor, 2011 CTV 

Citizen of the Year. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier, the member from 

Swift Current. 

 

Cervical Screening Initiative in India 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Dr. Lalita 

Malhotra immigrated to Canada in 1975. Her and her husband 

are respected doctors in Prince Albert, Saskatchewan. She is 

focusing on women’s health now, as she has been for a number 

of years in that community. She’s a member of the 

India-Canada Association and a recipient of the Saskatchewan 

Order of Merit in 2001. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Dr. Malhotra recently travelled to India as part of 

a broader Saskatchewan delegation. She wanted to be a part of 

providing organized cervical screening for the women of India, 

especially women living in urban centres in India. Mr. Speaker, 

I had the chance to visit with Dr. Malhotra about her idea, and 

thanks to the Ministry of Health, Mr. Speaker, we were able to 

offer at least to cover the supplies for her work there. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to report to the House that the 

Ministry of Health has been supportive of her initiative and has 

supplied Dr. Malhotra with the necessary supplies to assist in 

the start up of the clinic. Mr. Speaker, the supplies will provide 

cervical screening to 2,000 women in India. Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency is also involved. They’re 

supporting the doctor’s efforts in terms of her desire to establish 

this clinic in India by providing guidance, support materials, 

and presentation materials. Mr. Speaker, our Cancer Agency’s 

prevention program for cervical cancer is considered a national 

leader. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a dynamic relationship with India, our 

province does, accounting for almost half of the trade with that 

country, that the country does with Canada. But it’s more than 

just a trade relationship. It is a partnership and a friendship due 

to people like Dr. Malhotra and the great Indian community we 

have in this province, Mr. Speaker. We’re pleased to support 

her in this initiative, and we wish her all the best in providing 

better women’s health to the women of India. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 



March 22, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6837 

Brighter Futures for Children 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 

Thursday evening, myself and the members of the Legislative 

Assembly from Rosemont and Coronation Park had the 

pleasure of joining hundreds of other citizens in attendance at 

the Brighter Futures for Children fundraiser held at the Casino 

Regina Show Lounge. The purpose of this event is to raise 

money for two Regina organizations that help very young 

children in difficult circumstances. The Regina Early Learning 

Centre and the Socialization, Communication, and Education 

Problems program, or SCEP, as it is known, are the 

beneficiaries of the fundraiser. 

 

Brighter Futures for Children is spearheaded by Knight Archer 

Insurance, and Doug Archer and Gloria Knight have built a 

very strong volunteer organization for this event over the years, 

and its success grows every year. The event provides much 

needed funds for programs for kids who are in danger of falling 

through the cracks. 

 

Last year the fundraiser brought in approximately $25,000 for 

each organization, and organizers hope to improve on that total 

this year. The event included performances by Regina’s Brandy 

Moore and Random Groove as well as Kal Hourd of Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing this 

event, the volunteers, and the sponsors who are truly doing their 

part to create Brighter Futures for Children. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

World Water Day  

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today is 

the 19th annual World Water Day. In 1992 the United Nations 

General Assembly designated March 22nd of each year as 

World Water Day. Today nations across the world join together 

to celebrate the importance of water in our everyday lives. Mr. 

Speaker, the theme of this year’s World Water Day is Water 

For Cities.  

 

Water is a basic requirement for all life, and protecting our 

clean and safe water supply is a priority for our government to 

meet the needs of our growing economy. Last spring the 

Government of Saskatchewan announced the contribution of 

$10 million over seven years to the University of Saskatchewan 

for the Canada Excellence Research Chair in Water Security. 

The U of S [University of Saskatchewan] research Chair, Dr. 

Howard Wheater, is one of the world’s foremost hydrologists. 

He is responsible for establishing a world-leading research and 

training institute to solve water challenges and train the next 

generation of water scientists. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the events celebrating World Water Day and the 

initiatives of Dr. Wheater will advance Saskatchewan to the 

forefront in water science and contribute to our government’s 

vision for a research and knowledge-driven . . . an innovation- 

and knowledge-driven economy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

2011 WorkSafe Saskatchewan Awards 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, in 2010 workers reported over 

38,000 injuries to the Workers’ Compensation Board. 

Workplace safety is a mammoth task, but we are all responsible 

and must play a role. WorkSafe Saskatchewan is a partnership 

between the Saskatchewan Workers’ Compensation Board and 

the Ministry of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, WorkSafe Saskatchewan presents yearly awards 

to workers and employers in our province. The Safe Worker 

Award is presented to workers who go beyond the expectations 

of their position to make their workplace safer and increase 

safety awareness for others. And the WorkSafe Saskatchewan 

Safe Employer Award is presented to the best practice 

employer who builds safety into every task. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday I was in Saskatoon as the WorkSafe 

Saskatchewan presented its 2011 awards. The employees 

nominated were Howard Jones of Morris Industries in Yorkton; 

Pat Willis, Sysco in Saskatoon; Andrea Crittenden of Asiil 

Enterprises Ltd. from Prince Albert. Employer nominations 

were BMTR Ventures Ltd. from Meadow Lake; A.J. Harlick, 

contractor from Swift Current; and Eagle Drilling Services 

from Carlyle. The winners in the respective categories were 

Howard Jones and BMTR Ventures Ltd. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are important acknowledgments, and I ask 

all members to join me in not only congratulating the recipients 

of these awards but to promote daily safe work practices in our 

province. Thank you. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Wildwood School Diversity Dinner 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, last night along with well over 100 people, I had the 

privilege to attend the annual diversity dinner held at Wildwood 

School. Wildwood School, which is located right in the heart of 

the constituency of Saskatoon Greystone, has a proud history of 

organizing community events such as the diversity dinner as 

well as other initiatives that help to promote global citizenship 

and, at the same time, commitments to our local communities. 

 

This annual event celebrates the diversity and culture of our 

local community through both food and culture. The evening’s 

events included a potluck dinner, stage performances, and 

artwork. Some of the performers included local groups such as 

the Norwegian youth dancers, Wildwood’s own Bhangra dance 

group, the Saskatoon international folk dancers, and a 

remarkable drummer from Haiti. Local impressive artwork 

selected by the Multi-Faith Saskatchewan group also adorned 

the walls of the school, allowing a platform for up-and-coming 

artists to display their culturally rich artistry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to acknowledge Justice David Arnot, 

Chief Commissioner of the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Commission, who was also in attendance. I would like to 

congratulate the Wildwood School for hosting this very 



6838 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2011 

successful event and in particular the principal, David Katzman, 

along with his group of hard-working volunteers, students, 

staff, teachers, parents, and others that helped to make sure the 

evening was a success. 

 

Local events such as the diversity dinner contribute greatly to 

the continued growth of our province’s increasingly diverse, 

dynamic, and cosmopolitan communities, Mr. Speaker. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

World Water Day 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, nations 

around the world observe today as World Water Day. This day 

reminds us that water is an essential substratum of human life. 

Without water, there is no life. Without access to affordable 

water, our quality of life is at risk. While many residents of our 

province are fortunate enough to have regular access to 

affordable water, a growing number of rural residents are 

forced to pay an exorbitant amount of water . . . exorbitant price 

for water because of the Sask Party government. 

 

Residents of Duck Lake, a town of just over 600 people north 

of Saskatoon, know first-hand that the Sask Party government 

refused to provide any assistance to prevent skyrocketing water 

rates that went from $32 a month to upwards of an average of 

$165 a month. The member for Batoche and his Sask Party 

government sat silent as seniors, single mothers, and young 

families began to face water cut-offs in 2009 and continue to 

quietly struggle with the high cost of water. 

 

Residents of the hamlet of Furdale and the area of Birchwood 

Heights — both just outside of Saskatoon — will be faced with 

the threat of water cut-offs after the November 2011 general 

election if the Sask Party is re-elected, unless they agree to pay 

thousands of dollars to hook up to a private supplier who 

cannot guarantee access, price, or water quality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on World Water Day let us recognize that there 

are even more rural residents that are being denied affordable 

water by the Sask Party government. New Democrats reaffirm 

our conviction that people have a right to affordable drinking 

water, and we’ll continue to stand up for rural residents left 

without access to affordable water by the Sask Party 

government. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

College Governance Issues 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Advanced 

Education told the media yesterday that he will take full 

responsibility on how the situation at Carlton Trail and St. 

Peter’s has been handled. To the minister: what does it actually 

mean when he says that he will take full responsibility? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, over the course of the last 

several months, we’ve had a proposal handed in regarding a 

potential merger. We said that we would look into this. We 

used an independent process, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 

what that process found was the colleges are not ready to 

actually merge, Mr. Speaker. And at the same time, a number of 

outstanding questions were raised. Mr. Speaker, those 

outstanding questions, those outstanding questions, Mr. 

Speaker, we referred to Justice. Mr. Speaker, Justice then came 

back to us and said, our recommendation is that you get Meyers 

Norris Penny out to do more work, Mr. Speaker. This would be 

consistent, Mr. Speaker, because what we saw from the 

Provincial Auditor previously is that in November 2010 the 

auditor said regarding Carlton Trail, “The Ministry and the 

above-listed agencies had adequate rules and procedures to 

safeguard public resources.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s just one example of the type of reference 

that we have. There are questions. We’ve said we would 

certainly work with Meyers Norris Penny; we’d work with the 

Provincial Auditor. And we’ve said all respective materials 

should be referred to Justice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I thought the minister might have 

come to his senses over the course of the night but it appears he 

continues to live in some parallel universe. Mr. Speaker, 

apparently for this minister, taking full responsibility simply 

means throwing everyone else under the bus. It’s the board’s 

fault. It’s the political staff’s fault. It’s the ministry’s fault. It’s 

even the opposition’s fault, Mr. Speaker, but nowhere in there 

does the minister realize that it’s his fault. 

 

Now the minister can claim he didn’t see the emails from last 

May all he wants, but he can’t pretend that he wasn’t in 

committee or in question period when concerns were raised 

about this issue on May 11th, May 12th, May 13th, and May 

17th. 

 

To the minister: why did he ignore the concerns which were 

raised publicly in this Assembly last May, and when will he 

take full responsibility for his inaction? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Certainly we were in committee and we were in this very 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. I do take full responsibility, Mr. 

Speaker, in that we promised we would go forward, Mr. 

Speaker, with a proposal, with a proposal, Mr. Speaker, as it 

was submitted. From there we then ensured that we hired 

Meyers Norris Penny to undertake an independent overview, 

Mr. Speaker. That overview came back with the 

recommendations the mergers not go forward. 

 

From that, Mr. Speaker, there were outstanding questions as 

I’ve said previously, Mr. Speaker. From there we were in touch 

with Justice. Justice said, please be in touch with Meyers Norris 



March 22, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6839 

Penny. Go and see if you can substantiate, Mr. Speaker. Go and 

substantiate, Mr. Speaker, some of these questions. Mr. Speaker 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. From 

that, Mr. Speaker, we not only are working with Meyers Norris 

Penny; we’ve subsequently said we’re working with the 

Provincial Auditor. We’ve said any and all related materials 

should be related to Justice, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 

this is part of taking responsibility, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, a very puzzling interpretation of 

ministerial accountability we just heard from the minister. The 

minister and the front bench there, they’re more than happy, 

more than happy to collect the 1,000 bucks. They’re more than 

happy to give the marching orders. But when the mess comes 

out, the people that are put under the bus are the people that the 

marching orders were given to as opposed to the minister who 

was fully responsible. 

 

Yesterday the minister said that one of his many failures on this 

file was allowing the colleges to have a joint CEO [chief 

executive officer]. The minister acknowledged, “He was 

wearing too many hats.” Well, Mr. Speaker, I raised that very 

concern with the minister last May 11th in committee when I 

said, “So do you think it presents a problem for the CEO, or a 

challenge for the CEO, the fact that he’s the same individual 

wearing two hats and has distinct responsibilities to each group 

that he represents?” The minister replied, “I think that would be 

up to the boards.” He endorsed the actions of the board, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

To the minister: when will he take full responsibility for 

ignoring the specific concerns raised in committee last May or 

for fully endorsing the actions of a board that he has now fired? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, regarding this board, Mr. 

Speaker, what we’ve seen in the last few days is information 

come forward, Mr. Speaker, that was new information for me. 

As I reviewed that information, Mr. Speaker, as I reviewed that 

information, it was obvious that actions of the board were 

inappropriate, Mr. Speaker, and we have taken the appropriate 

action subsequently to that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — It’s always somebody else’s fault with this 

minister. Oh, my staff didn’t forward the email. Oh, the board 

didn’t tell me this. Oh, I didn’t have that meeting. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, the minister’s fingerprints have been all over this from 

the very beginning. 

Yesterday he was asked by media if he approved the transition 

board. He replied saying, “No, this is where Meyers Norris 

Penny’s work will be very important.” But in committee last 

May 12th, I asked the minister about the existence of the 

transition board and whether he knew that he had a 

representative on that board. He fully admitted that. I don’t 

know how the minister can claim he didn’t approve the board 

when he knew about it and he had a representative on it. But 

yesterday, with a straight face, he claimed that he never 

approved it and would ensure that Meyers Norris Penny looked 

into its existence. 

 

To the minister: which story should we believe, the one that he 

told yesterday or the one that he told last May? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, our position has been 

consistent. This is a grassroots, this is a grassroots initiative, 

Mr. Speaker, with meetings that began even before the last 

provincial election, Mr. Speaker. What we saw was a proposal 

come forward, Mr. Speaker. That proposal came forward last 

June, Mr. Speaker. We then initiated a review, Mr. Speaker. 

That review was undertaken by Meyers Norris Penny. Mr. 

Speaker, what we see is that the board did have a joint 

organization, Mr. Speaker, but at the same time they were 

operating independently as had been requested, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, are there questions? Are there questions regarding 

governance, Mr. Speaker? Yes, there are. These are some of the 

very questions that we’ve asked Meyers Norris Penny, now the 

Provincial Auditor and indeed Justice to help look into. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, one of the many meetings of the 

transition board — which the minister either knew about or 

didn’t know about, depending on which day you ask him — 

occurred on May 27th of last year, a couple of weeks after the 

minister received emails and was questioned in this Assembly. 

 

The minutes of that meeting show that the minister directed that 

the joint CEO receive a salary increase to the level of a regional 

college CEO and that St. Peter’s bill the public regional college 

monthly for Glen Kobussen’s salary, benefits, and expenses, the 

costs passed on to the regional college. Let me repeat that. The 

minister ordered that St. Peter’s College, a private institution, 

would be permitted to off-load the full cost of its CEO onto the 

public regional college. Saskatchewan taxpayers picked up that 

bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: this was his direction. It wasn’t the board’s 

decision. Will he take full responsibility for that ill-advised 

decision? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as we’ve said very clearly, there was a proposal 



6840 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2011 

submitted, Mr. Speaker. From that proposal, independent work 

was done by Meyers Norris Penny, Mr. Speaker. That was for 

the proposed merger, Mr. Speaker. We turned that down. We 

said quite simply, these institutions are not ready to move 

forward, Mr. Speaker. We stand by that. There were a number 

of outstanding questions, Mr. Speaker. There are a number of 

questions regarding, Mr. Speaker . . . And we saw this 

yesterday in the House from a variety of sources. What Justice 

has said, and others: go back, do more work to ensure that 

there’s greater . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. What 

we’ve said is that we would get Meyers Norris Penny to go 

back in and address a number of questions that have come in. 

There have been a range of sources, Mr. Speaker. As members 

opposite said yesterday, and rightfully so, not all of them have 

been accurate, Mr. Speaker. We’ve said Meyers Norris Penny 

needs to go back in and do some work. We’ve done that in 

co-operation with Justice, Mr. Speaker, and obviously now with 

the auditor, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the only thing that’s been 

consistent in this story is the minister’s suspension of reality. 

The only thing that has been consistent is the minister 

completely and always passing the buck on to others. The only 

thing consistent in this, Mr. Speaker, is the minister’s 

involvement from the very, very beginning. He is responsible. 

 

Had he paid attention to his emails last May, we wouldn’t be in 

this mess. Had he listened to the concerns raised by the 

opposition last May instead of dismissing them, a whole lot of 

taxpayers’ dollars would have been saved. 

 

The CEO’s salary, benefits, and expenses were off-loaded to 

the public regional college. $273,000 was moved from Carlton 

Trail to St. Peter’s for furnishings and equipment. $60,000 was 

added to St. Peter’s operating grant. $75,000 for market 

research was paid by Carlton Trail, and $100,000 was spent on 

the Meyers Norris Penny report. And we’re not even into all the 

financial irregularities yet under this minister’s watch. 

 

To the minister: when will he live up to what he said yesterday? 

When will he take full responsibility for his involvement from 

the very beginning? When will he stop blaming everyone else 

and look in the mirror? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the reference, the reference 

to the very beginning, Mr. Speaker, we know that there were a 

number of meetings that took place even before the last 

provincial election, Mr. Speaker. We know that. 

 

Along the way, we heard from grassroots groups, Mr. Speaker, 

about moving forward with this proposal, and the value to it. 

Mr. Speaker, that proposal was submitted, Mr. Speaker. We 

then fulfilled our commitment in saying that we would use an 

independent entity, Meyers Norris Penny, to go forward. The 

result of that was a decision — a very clear decision, Mr. 

Speaker — not to move forward with the merger, Mr. Speaker. 

We know that’s important. 

 

Along the way, Meyers Norris Penny came back and said, there 

are a number of questions. We’ve worked with Justice. Justice 

recommended: go back into the field, get more information, see 

if you can discern what information actually has some empirical 

basis, Mr. Speaker. Since that time, we’ve said we’d co-operate 

with the auditor and, Mr. Speaker, obviously with Justice, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re undertaking our due diligence to account for 

every cent of taxpayers’ dollars, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen from this 

minister from day one is a clear direction that he wanted this 

merger to go forward. What we’ve seen from this minister from 

day one is setting the people in place in order to ensure that this 

merger goes forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we have not seen from this minister from day one is 

transparency on this issue, and what we have not seen from this 

minister at all is a responsibility, an accountability that he is in 

fact responsible for the decisions because he has made the 

decisions. 

 

My question to the minister: today he dismissed the members of 

the board of Carlton Trail Regional College. Will he simply 

admit and tell those members that he asked to serve on the 

board, Mr. Speaker, will he admit that he is the person 

responsible and that he should be wearing this and he shouldn’t 

be off-loading it to Sask Party operatives? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, last week, I want to be very 

clear that we came forward and we reported to the two 

respective college entities, Mr. Speaker. I did that in Humboldt. 

We said that the decision we were taking is that they were not 

ready, Mr. Speaker. We made sure that some due diligence was 

undertaken so that we could say that there needed to be a 

greater business case made, Mr. Speaker, a clearer 

implementation plan, obviously greater clarity regarding 

financial management and a human resource strategy, Mr. 

Speaker, obviously as a result of that decision which we made 

clearly and directly with stakeholders on the ground, Mr. 

Speaker. We also alerted them that there were a number of 

questions still outstanding, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are working with Justice, we are working with 

Meyers Norris Penny, and we’ve certainly volunteered to work 

diligently with the auditor, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that all of 

taxpayers’ dollars are accounted for, Mr. Speaker, because at 

this point, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of allegations. There 



March 22, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6841 

is more work to do. We’re going to do that to ensure clear 

accountability for the taxpayers of this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Membership in the Enterprise Club 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Minister of Justice. The $1,000 given by former Carlton 

Trail CEO Glen Kobussen — who is also the CEO of St. 

Peter’s College but paid by Carlton Trail, Mr. Speaker, if you 

can follow that — that contribution to the Saskatchewan Party 

to join the so-called Enterprise Club in 2009 appears not to be 

disclosed in either 2009 or 2010 by the Saskatchewan Party. 

Mr. Kobussen was reimbursed $1,000 by St. Peter’s College. 

This is public funds and should have been disclosed pursuant to 

The Election Act. 

 

To the minister: will the government provide a complete list of 

all Enterprise Club donations and memberships to the Acting 

Chief Electoral Officer for his review? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. The fact is that any contribution to any political party 

over a certain threshold, $250, is publicly reported, Mr. 

Speaker, through Elections Saskatchewan. 

 

With regard to accessibility, this government . . . The bottom 

line for this government is that, to have access to this 

government, you need only be a citizen of the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s something that all members 

on this side take very, very seriously. That’s something that . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

The Enterprise Club has been around since 2002. It’s a way 

where party members can show their support for the party, for 

the Premier, showing their activity politically by being, making 

a contribution to public life in the province of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. We know that to the extent that anybody has a 

perception that by being a member of the Enterprise Club, there 

would be any different level of access than any other citizen, 

we discontinued meetings of the Enterprise Club, Mr. Speaker, 

of that sort. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, for this minister’s benefit, the 

$1,000 membership paid by Mr. Kobussen went into the 

Saskatchewan Party in 2009. It came out of St. Peter’s College 

in 2009. The fact that it was paid to a political party has not 

come out by 2011, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: knowing that this $1,000 was public funds and 

should have been disclosed in any case, Mr. Speaker, will the 

government agree to undertake an open and transparent review 

by the Acting Chief Electoral Officer of all Enterprise Club 

memberships, where they came in, and where they came out, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. The fact is that any contribution to any political 

party is disclosed publicly, Mr. Speaker, by Elections 

Saskatchewan. Any . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I think the members should 

now allow the minister to respond to the question that the 

government members allowed the member to present. I 

recognize the Minister Responsible for Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

As I had indicated in a previous response, any contribution over 

a certain threshold is reported publicly in documents made 

public by Elections Saskatchewan. 

 

With regard to the Enterprise Club, Mr. Speaker, this is an 

organization where members of the Saskatchewan Party are 

able to show their support for the party, for the Premier, to have 

some interaction with MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly], be able to ask political questions of that sort. But to 

the extent that anybody has a perception that there was any 

differential access as to any other citizen of the province, we’ve 

taken decisive action, Mr. Speaker, and the meetings of that sort 

are no longer going to be taking place. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, $1,000 a year gets people a 

membership in the Saskatchewan Enterprise Club. And the 

letter that goes to Enterprise Club members says it’s “an 

excellent venue” to present views to MLAs and the Premier and 

“ensures” ideas are heard, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: will the government agree to tell Saskatchewan 

people what it is the Enterprise Club does and, specifically, its 

relationship to access to ministers and government decision 

makers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

As I’ve said, the bottom line for this government is that any 

citizen who wishes access to the government need only be a 



6842 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2011 

citizen of the province of Saskatchewan. That’s something that 

members on this side of the House take very seriously, Mr. 

Speaker. With regard to the Enterprise Club, this is . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would think the 

opposition members would like to hear the response to the 

question presented. I recognize the Minister Responsible . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Minister of Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

As I’ve indicated, the Enterprise Club has been around since 

2002. It’s a way for members of the party to show their support 

for the party, for members to participate in the political process, 

which a number have taken advantage of. Members are free to 

join, Mr. Speaker, many of whom wish to support the party in a 

more substantial way. Mr. Speaker, to the extent that there has 

been any perception, inappropriate perception, of access 

different than anybody else, we’ve taken decisive action, Mr. 

Speaker, and discontinued meetings of that sort. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A $1,000 

membership to the Enterprise Club gets members meetings with 

cabinet ministers, with the Premier, and other government 

decision makers. We know emails don’t get the attention of 

ministers, but a $1,000 cheque clearly does, Mr. Speaker. To 

the minister: will he table the agenda for “meetings that 

Enterprise Club members have with ministers and other 

government decision makers” as referred to in the March 22nd 

press release by Sask Party lawyers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

As I’ve indicated, the Enterprise Club is a way for members of 

the party to show their support for the party, to participate in the 

political process. There obviously aren’t agendas. It’s a very 

informal sort of a meeting process, Mr. Speaker. But to the 

extent that there was any perception that anybody had the 

misconception that there was any different level of access than 

that enjoyed by any other . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

As I said, to the extent that there was a perception that there 

was any different level of access than that, than any other 

citizen would have, we’ve made the decisive decision to 

discontinue those meetings, Mr. Speaker. I would point out as 

well for the information of members opposite that there were 

over 47 individual donors last year who donated over $1,000 to 

the NDP [New Democratic Party], including the largest donor, 

$10,000 from Nexen, and we know who used to work there. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — The minister knows that, the minister knows 

that because it was disclosed. But this 2009 membership 

contribution of $1,000 appears not to be, Mr. Speaker. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, as to this misconception, Mr. Kobussen gives 

$1,000 to the Saskatchewan Party and then gets, he gets 

appointed as CEO to three boards. He gets a salary for a private 

institution paid for by a public institution. Why would anybody 

in Saskatchewan have a misconception about that, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s at least one $1,000 contribution made in 

2009 that doesn’t show up in the Sask Party financial 

disclosures for either 2009 or 2010. To the Minister of Justice: 

will he undertake to report where this Enterprise Club 

membership money is and what it is used for, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. Of course all contributions to political parties of 

all stripes are disclosed publicly. There’s requirements to do so. 

And that’s of course what this party has done all through our 

history, Mr. Speaker. But as the member’s talking about a 

disclosure, I wonder if he . . . the Leader of the Opposition 

disclosed to the 1,000 people that he fraudulently signed up in 

Meadow Lake that they were members of the New Democratic 

Party. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the minister to be 

cautious in his remarks. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — As I said, Mr. Speaker, there’s a 

process whereby donations to political parties are disclosed. 

That’s something that’s been, in all cases, followed by this 

party, Mr. Speaker. The one party that we know that hasn’t had 

a disclosure requirement has been the New Democratic Party, 

Mr. Speaker, who signed up 1,000 members without their 

knowledge in Meadow Lake and for which he is going to pay a 

very serious price, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 872 through 877. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 872 through 877 are tabled. Order. 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — To raise a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I ask the member to state his point of order. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. During 

response to a question in this Assembly just minutes ago, Mr. 

Speaker, the member for Meadow Lake stood on his feet and 



March 22, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6843 

accused the Leader of the Opposition of fraudulent behaviour, 

Mr. Speaker. That is clearly, clearly a violation of the rules of 

this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and I would ask you to deal with 

the issue expeditiously, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the comment. 

 

The Speaker: — The apology is accepted. 

 

[14:15] 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 149 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 149 — The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to rise to speak on 

Bill 149, An Act to amend The Income Tax Act. Mr. Speaker, 

this legislation is here to implement some changes that provide 

some substantial benefits for some parts of our community. 

And given the questions and no answers that we’ve heard in 

question period, my concern is that this policy that’s set out in 

this Act comes from this so-called Enterprise Club in 2009 

where people who have come forward with suggestions about 

how to change the law without having the public discussion 

about that. Because, Mr. Speaker, this is a targeted tax holiday 

for people who have done very well in their community. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting this afternoon that the 

member from Meadow Lake is discussing some things related 

to his previous career in the House of Commons where he was 

a specialist in taking federal money into his local constituency 

and spending it, and he’s involved right in the middle of a 

whole number of very difficult issues. So we were very 

surprised, Mr. Speaker, in question period when this member 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. A couple of other 

members have a debate they want to pursue. If they want to 

pursue it, I’d ask them to go behind the bar or at another 

location so we can hear the member from Regina Lakeview. 

Order. Order. Order. The member from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear that the member 

from Meadow Lake does not like his name as mister in and out. 

It’s also clear, Mr. Speaker, that it’s a great surprise to all the 

people of Saskatchewan that the Premier would allow that 

member to respond to some of the questions that we heard 

today. So, Mr. Speaker, I think . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask members to . . . Order. 

Order. Order. I’d ask members to be mindful of the words 

they’re using in the debate. And I’d ask the member from 

Regina Lakeview to address the debate. The question before the 

Assembly is The Income Tax Amendment Act. I recognize the 

member from Regina . . . Order. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill about amendments to The 

Income Tax Act relates directly to one of the most challenging 

and difficult issues in Saskatchewan, which relates to the 

amount of money that we as the citizens of Saskatchewan 

receive from the resources which are part of Saskatchewan. 

 

We know that the government, the present government backed 

off on standing up for Saskatchewan people and getting an 

appropriate arrangement with the federal government around 

our resource taxation and that we also have fairly clear 

evidence that that amounts to between 7 and $800 million a 

year over 20 years. And so, Mr. Speaker, when they come 

forward with further changes which give up amounts of tax 

from resource, the revenue from the resource, it raises questions 

about how this policy was developed and where it came from. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the member from Meadow Lake today, both 

on the record and off the record, has been talking about some of 

the ways that the Saskatchewan Party has arranged to fund what 

they do as the Saskatchewan Party. Now from my perspective 

as member from Regina Lakeview, one of the things that I’ve 

noticed over the years is that when that particular member came 

to this legislature after serving in the federal parliament, he 

unfortunately brought many of the attitudes that we now see on 

the federal government side. And that’s reflected in many 

things that have happened in the Board of Internal Economy 

and things that happen around this particular place. It also has 

affected certain things that we do as it relates to Bills like this 

income tax Act. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what I’m especially concerned about is what 

I think all Canadians are concerned about as we look at our 

federal government and how they treat the people that provide 

them with advice by inserting words in documents, by doing 

things like that, that some of that same kind of rot, if I can put it 

that way, is showing up in democracy. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, my concern is that we’re all enervated. We’re 

at a point where we don’t end up having the ability to respond 

and reflect and say that kind of attitude, that kind of perspective 

should not be people who are elected members from our 

society. Because when you run roughshod over the rules in 

parliament, when you run roughshod over the rules in the 

legislature, when you have total disdain for the very clear rules 

of The Election Act then, Mr. Speaker, those are the things that 

are wrong. And, Mr. Speaker, we cannot sit like many of the 

people across the world have and watch things happen that 

change our institutions, that change their accountability, and not 

speak out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen some things the last couple of days 



6844 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2011 

here in our Saskatchewan legislature of which we are very 

proud that have the feeling of being something bad. As some 

members might say, there’s an odour. There’s something that’s 

wrong. And, Mr. Speaker, I hope that when we look at this 

income tax Act and some of the things that are being suggested 

here, that we are not seeing the result of some of that kind of 

inappropriate activity by the governing party, the Sask Party, as 

they’ve developed their policy. Because that’s the last thing that 

we need in this legislature, is undue influence from people in 

various places that result in things that do not provide a benefit 

for all the people in the province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we end up with a fairly short Bill here, but it 

goes right to the heart of what this legislature’s all about. It 

goes right to the heart of what parliament’s all about, which is 

we rule ourselves through our elections which are fair. We rule 

ourselves through the procedures that we have in this particular 

place, and we rule ourselves through having very clear, hard 

discussions about those things which are wrong. And, Mr. 

Speaker, there are a number of things that we’ve heard in the 

last couple of days that go right to the top. They go right to the 

Premier, and they make us wonder what’s going on in his 

office. They go right to the minister’s office. Maybe the 

minister doesn’t know about some of this stuff because it was 

done some other place but, Mr. Speaker, that is the wrong way 

to run a government. The people will figure it out and they will 

make sure that it’s stopped. 

 

Now when we have this particular Bill, it has a new targeted tax 

holiday brought forward by the Minister of Enterprise. So they 

announced this December 3rd, 2009. Now we’re in 2011 trying 

to put together what the minister announced almost two years 

ago. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard a fair bit about the year 

2009 over the last 45 minutes because there were a lot of things 

that were not being sort of fully disclosed as to what happened, 

and that’s why I raise that question as it relates to this particular 

issue. 

 

And when this Bill was brought forward the question came as, 

well what is it, what is it for? And when you read the 

explanation, it says there’s a new targeted tax incentive that 

would provide a five-year corporate income tax holiday for 

corporations that process mineral imported into the province. 

 

Now I’m still not sure if there’s an explanation. Is this tar 

sands? Is that the mineral they’re talking about? Is it minerals 

from Manitoba that are going to be brought into to be processed 

somewhere in Saskatchewan? Are we bringing up some 

minerals from Wyoming or Montana? What, you know, what is 

it that’s set out here? 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you bring forward legislation, it’s always 

important that you end up explaining why you want to do it and 

what the purpose is for doing that. And, Mr. Speaker, too many 

things that we have heard don’t have a proper reason or there 

may be some ulterior motives which will come out later. 

 

That’s not how this legislature should work. That’s not how a 

democracy should work. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s our role to 

speak up very clearly and directly when we see those things 

happening. And I know that there’s a lot of us in this room who 

are having some difficulty with some of the answers that we’ve 

received and some of the stories that we’ve received about 

what’s gone on on a whole number of issues. That makes us 

then suspicious of everything that we get. And that’s not how it 

should be because we know — especially those of us who have 

been around this place for a long time — is that your word is 

important, that your word is the thing that is all you have left 

when you’re done. And, Mr. Speaker, when we have members 

of this House — who we would all like to respect — not 

necessarily following or saying things that we can trust, then 

we’re in a major difficulty. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that this particular legislation also goes 

into another aspect in the second part which relates to allowing 

for the federal government to collect the tax. And basically the 

federal government does administer most of our income taxes 

for us, but in this particular Bill, there’s one section that the 

provincial government wants to take back and administer 

themselves. So the question comes, why? Is there some other 

arrangement that applies? And given some of the questions that 

have been raised earlier today, does this relate to some of these 

breakfast meetings or lunches or whatever happened that, oh, 

it’d be much easier if you in the province administered this part 

of The Income Tax Act. Why don’t you fix that? Well we can’t 

tell from the document. We can’t tell from the legislation 

whether that’s part of what this whole Bill is about. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the challenge that you end up having in 

opposition is that you want to trust what the government of the 

day is telling you, but unfortunately our trust is at a pretty low 

ebb. And so what is it that the province wants to do here in 

self-administering this particular part of The Income Tax Act? 

What is it about this particular part of The Income Tax Act that 

they want to manage? Is there something that this . . . Or is 

there some place that this comes from that is not appropriate? I 

don’t know, Mr. Speaker. Just raising the question. 

 

Now the other section in this Bill is the section 5, and it relates 

to a subsection which provides for retroactive regulations. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we know in this legislature that we’re very 

hesitant to endorse retroactive laws or regulations. And so this 

particular one wants to make sure that any regulations that are 

passed under this particular Bill can be retroactive to January 

1st, 2011. And it even has in its coming into force laws, section 

6, a statement like this, it says: 

 

(2) If the Act is assented to after January 1, 2011, this Act 

comes into force on assent but is retroactive and is deemed 

to have been in force on and from January 1, 2011. 

 

[14:30] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious that that clause is going to have to 

be used because we haven’t even got the Bill to the committee 

stage yet. So my question once again is what is there about is? 

Where does it come from? What is it that forces a procedure 

that is delayed? The announcement was made in 2009. We had 

a lot of time last year to go through and try and deal with this 

Bill, but obviously it didn’t seem to be that important then. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to conclude my remarks by saying 

that this Saskatchewan legislature is the legislature for the 

people of Saskatchewan. They need to have faith in all of the 

members who work here. They need to have faith in how this 

organization works, and they need to understand that it’s going 



March 22, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6845 

to be fair and just for everyone. When we get some of the kinds 

of answers that we received today, that faith is sorely tested. I 

move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Regina Lakeview has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill 149, The Income Tax Amendment 

Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 150 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 150 — The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed my 

pleasure to rise today to speak to Bill 150, the superannuation 

supplementary provisions Bill, for a couple of reasons. 

 

But first I want to talk about the two main provisions of the 

Bill. The first is to clarify spousal survivor benefits and how 

they’re calculated in the case of a person who may have been 

married more than once, and who may have both current and 

former spouses who might have claim and might be qualified to 

receive some type of survivor benefit. 

 

Now on the face of it at first blush, it would appear that this is 

something that we could certainly agree with, Mr. Speaker. 

However there are, as I said, two provisions, and the second 

provision is a continuation of what we’ve seen in the past three 

and a half years and something that was highlighted today. It’s 

a continued hiding of information from the public. It’s a pattern 

of hiding information from the public by the Saskatchewan 

Party government. 

 

Now this government proposes in this Bill to remove from 

public reporting the amount of money in benefits paid out to 

individual superannuates. Well, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve 

learned today specifically is that they are attempting to hide 

money that is being given to their party by the people of 

Saskatchewan, money that has to be disclosed under The 

Elections Act. So, Mr. Speaker, the parallels between Bill 150 

and what we talked about today and what was raised today in 

Question Period are staggering. The parallels are staggering. It 

is exactly what we were talking about in terms of transparency 

and accountability. 

 

Now there are many examples unfortunately where 

transparency and accountability that was promised by the 

Saskatchewan Party government has not taken place. They 

promised in the last election . . . Their own platform document 

says that they’re going to be a more accountable government, 

Mr. Speaker. But what do they do? They say that they’re going 

to pay down . . . sorry, ensure the size of government doesn’t 

grow faster than the population. That’s how they’re going to be 

accountable. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the size of the budget of the province of 

Saskatchewan has gone up 36 per cent — 36 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. And at the same time that the province of 

Saskatchewan is taking in about $11 billion a year this year, 

this Saskatchewan Party government is running a $1 billion 

deficit. So when they say in their election document from 2007 

that they’re going to be more accountable by ensuring the size 

of government doesn’t grow, they’ve grown the government by 

36 per cent over three years. 

 

They’ve also stated, Mr. Speaker, in an effort to be more 

accountable and transparent, as is suggested in Bill 150, that 

they would protect public servants through an integrity 

commissioner. Well, Mr. Speaker, they would need 10 integrity 

commissioners to keep up with the lack of transparency and 

accountability that’s going on on that side of the Assembly. But 

worse than that, Mr. Speaker, they haven’t hired one. They 

haven’t even looked into providing one such commissioner to 

the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, in order to protect the public and 

public servants. 

 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, quite the opposite because I’m sure 

you will note that one member of the public, a civil servant, 

wanted to be transparent when a convicted felon was on the 

loose in Saskatchewan, and it was a dangerous sex offender, 

Mr. Speaker. And this person wanted to be open and 

accountable with the people of Saskatchewan and ensure that 

people were aware. 

 

And what happened? What happened, Mr. Speaker? The 

Saskatchewan Party government started a witch hunt to find out 

which individual this was, who was, on behalf of the 

government, being open and accountable and transparent 

because they wouldn’t, Mr. Speaker. What did they do after 

they found the person who they thought did this? They fired 

him. Mr. Speaker. They fired him. Open and accountability, 

openness and accountability is not something that they readily 

and ably understand, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so we have here Bill 150 where they are, through 

legislation, trying to hide money from the people of 

Saskatchewan and trying to hide disclosure of money spent by 

the Government of Saskatchewan. And it brings to mind, Mr. 

Speaker, it brings to mind another Bill that we’ve seen before 

this Assembly some years ago, Bill 9. 

 

And what did Bill 9 attempt to do, Mr. Speaker? Bill 9 

attempted to increase the amount that would be reported by the 

government that is spent on an individual for services or a 

company for services. The reporting mechanism is triggered, 

Mr. Speaker, at $50,000 currently. That’s the amount of money 

that an individual or company can get from the government 

before it has to be reported. Now what did Bill 9 attempt to do, 

Mr. Speaker? They attempted to raise that number to $350,000.  

 

So they talk about open and accountable and transparent in an 

election platform, but one of the first Bills they introduced in 

this legislature is something that does exactly the opposite of 

that. It tries to remove transparency from monetary 

expenditures of the government. And so again I spoke 

yesterday about what the motivation for bringing forward 

certain legislation is, and it’s clear that Bill 9 was brought 

forward to find a way to hide money from the people of 



6846 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2011 

Saskatchewan. Bill 150 does exactly the same thing. It’s an 

attempt, in some way, to hide funds from the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other ways in which 

this government failed in an attempt to be open and accountable 

— if there was an attempt. We asked certain questions, Mr. 

Speaker, last fall in this legislature around Amicus, which is a 

deal that removed from the books $27 million in expenditures 

in the same way that this Bill proposes to remove from the 

books money that is paid to individuals. And so what happened 

in that deal, Mr. Speaker? Well, we asked questions and found 

out that it was untendered, that the people that were getting 

contracts were directly related to the Saskatchewan Party 

cabinet members. And when we tried to find out more 

information, Mr. Speaker, through a freedom of information 

request, the document was almost entirely blacked out. So 

open, accountable, and transparent is something that the 

Saskatchewan Party government has absolutely no idea about. 

 

We learned again today, Mr. Speaker, on the subject of 

accountability, on the subject of accountability, the member 

from Saskatoon Massey Place asked the minister responsible 

for post-secondary education in Saskatchewan about a merger, 

about a college merger, which he has known about and 

absolutely has been directing from the very beginning. He 

asked today for him to be accountable for the actions that he’s 

taken and the actions that have been taken by the board on 

direction from the minister. 

 

And what did he do, Mr. Speaker? He ran away. He denied it. 

He used the term “we” 700 times in answers, but not “I” once. 

He didn’t take responsibility and refuses to be accountable for 

the actions of this government in trying to keep from the people 

of Saskatchewan money that was being given to the 

Saskatchewan Party and reimbursed by the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So as you will note, Mr. Speaker, a direct comparison to Bill 

150. Because what this Bill aims to do is take money off the 

books for people who make more than $50,000 a year and 

remove public disclosure from public accounts. And so, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s a sad day in the legislature when we have the type 

of things that were going on here today, where you have 

ministers hiding from accountability, when you have the 

member from Meadow Lake who was responsible in some way 

and had been named in an issue related to electoral . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I am trying to determine how 

that has anything to do with the legislation we have . . . or the 

motion before us regarding The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act. I would ask the 

member to, in his comments, to reflect and to speak to the 

specific piece of legislation. I recognize the member from 

Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The government 

knows full well that any amounts over $50,000 paid to 

individuals or organizations in one year have to be publicly 

disclosed. So it’s about public disclosure, Mr. Speaker, 

certainly. The salaries of anybody who works for the minister 

of a Crown or Exec Council who makes more than $50,000 a 

year are publicly disclosed each year in public accounts. And 

what has not been publicly disclosed, what has not been 

publicly disclosed . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, to ask leave to introduce a guest. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Coronation Park 

has asked leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 

member from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I thank 

all members of the Assembly for granting the leave as I 

introduce a former seatmate of mine, someone who actually sat 

in this very chair while I sat in the chair that my current 

seatmate sits, enjoys — Harry Van Mulligen, the former MLA 

for Regina Victoria, who served this Assembly for 24 years 

with huge distinction, a former minister of Finance, a former 

minister of Social Services amongst other things. Harry has 

gone on to do other things since he’s left this place. 

 

One of the things that I’m very proud that my friend Harry Van 

Mulligen did was stop by to visit my wife, Lorna, and I about 

10 days ago and shared a supper meal with us. So the friendship 

continues. I ask, Mr. Speaker, all members to join me in 

welcoming our friend Harry Van Mulligen, who is seated 

behind the bar. 

 

[14:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 150 — The Superannuation (Supplementary 

Provisions) Amendment Act, 2010 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again the Bill 150 is 

about public accountability because it’s an attempt to remove 

from the public accounts, from a public reporting, the people 

who make over $50,000 and are paid over $50,000 by this 

government, Mr. Speaker. And what we’ve seen today is 

money that was paid to a political party that was not reported. 

There is a direct parallel between the $1,000 memberships that 

are paid for by Saskatchewan people and not reported in the 

public accounts of the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s an absolutely direct parallel. So it is ironic that 

we’re speaking to this Bill today when this comes up in the 

legislature this very day. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s directly about accountability, Mr. 

Speaker, and transparency. Now another example of where this 

government is removing accountability and transparency is Bill 



March 22, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6847 

160, which I’ve spoken to earlier. Now Bill 160 is an attempt to 

remove the auditor’s report from the Human Rights 

Commission. So it’s another attempt by this government to 

remove accountability from the people of Saskatchewan. So 

what would they try to hide that the Human Rights Commission 

is doing from the people of Saskatchewan? So we have here a 

list of many examples where they’re removing public 

accountability from the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Bill 150, I would argue, does exactly the same thing. It’s an 

attempt to hide money that’s paid to individuals or companies 

by the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And so while we 

may support, while we may support one of the provisions of 

this Bill, we certainly do not support the removal of the 

accountability to the people of Saskatchewan, the second 

provision in this Bill, Mr. Speaker. The first, I would argue, is a 

red herring; the second is trying to do what Bill 9 could not do, 

Mr. Speaker. And so we will not support that part of the Bill 

certainly. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn the 

debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 150. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 155 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 155 — The 

Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 

rise and speak to The Natural Resources Act and the 

amendments that are being proposed. 

 

I want to, just before I start my remarks, comment on how 

much I enjoyed the speech from my colleague from Lakeview. 

And I think it says quite clearly what we have felt over the last 

few weeks and in particularly over the last few days. Our trust 

and our faith in getting the exact answers to the questions we 

have has been thoroughly shaken. And I think when we look at 

the intent of Bills, what it looks like on the face of the 

explanatory notes and the government’s second reading speech, 

we don’t have the faith in this that this is truly what the whole 

Bill will do or what it intends. 

 

So I think my colleague from Lakeview’s comment about when 

you run roughshod over the rules is pretty telling, I think, about 

how we feel, certainly in the opposition, when it is our job to do 

the scrutiny of Bills, of policies, of changes that the government 

is proposing. That is the job of the opposition. And when we 

don’t get answers, it’s the government in effect refusing to 

answer to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So I think that that should say to people that there is a challenge 

to democracy in this legislature by the Sask Party government. 

And I think that it does, the Sask Party government does take 

its direction from the Harper government federally because we 

see that very thing happening at the federal level where the 

government now is very close to being found in contempt of the 

parliament. And that is basically then in contempt of the people 

of the country. 

 

So when we look at The Natural Resources Act, and I’m 

reading it and thinking, you know, there’s just some very minor 

changes to be made — changing the word department to 

ministry and those sorts of things — those on the face of it look 

as if there would be nothing nefarious about this or anything 

that anybody should worry about. 

 

But then, given the backdrop of what we’ve heard over the last 

few days in particular, and the feeling that we have got and I 

have got — particularly I can say that from my point of view — 

that we don’t get the answers that we’re asking for, and that 

there is then something to be hidden, if you can’t give a direct 

answer then the first question is, what are you hiding? And so if 

that’s, if that’s the atmosphere that we’re operating under in this 

legislature and in this Assembly, then I do think the people of 

Saskatchewan need to be worried. 

 

So any Act that comes before this Assembly that the opposition 

looks at, we are now looking at with those eyes. We don’t have 

any trust or any faith, and we are speaking on behalf of the 

people because we need to ask the pointed questions. And if we 

don’t get the answers, then that is contempt for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And so when the Act presumes to change by putting money in 

the hands of a council, then we wonder, how will that council 

be appointed? And I know there’s mention of which groups 

should be on there. But there’s a bit of a chill now when you 

think, does anybody have to come up with $1,000 to be on, to 

be on any council or any group that this government is going to 

have managing money or managing programs or policies? 

 

And I think we saw . . . This is now about natural resources. We 

saw in The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act in this last session 

about what a fiasco that was with consultation of the public and 

totally running roughshod over any, any demonstration of real 

consultation. And people spoke out and against what was 

happening. 

 

So we now have a government who of course has the majority, 

so can ram their agenda through. But that doesn’t prevent us 

from providing some scrutiny on that agenda, and that people 

then can make up their own minds on what this government is 

about and what their agenda is. And is it to the benefit of the 

people? It begs the question. There is really no demonstration 

yet to me that this government has the benefit of the people in 

mind when any legislation has come forward. 

 

I look at taking some of the things out about accountability, that 

I just don’t know why. And then putting in things that allow the 

government to step back from the natural resources oversight 

here is another thing that makes me worry. 

 

And specifically there is a comment in here that there is no 

public servant to serve on any of these councils that will in 



6848 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2011 

effect be in charge of the money and in charge of the direction 

that our natural resources will be addressed. And I think that 

first of all it’s an insult to the public service. It supposes that 

they don’t have anything to contribute. But it speaks more to 

the fact that there is . . . Obviously this government, the Sask 

Party government, does not value the public service or the input 

that the public service has or the contribution that they make to 

the connection between the government and the public. 

 

And for most committees that I think we have seen historically, 

there is a connection to the ministry, to the government by 

putting a public servant — a deputy, an associate deputy, an 

executive director — on these committees to keep that 

connection and to keep the public’s, to keep the . . . Because the 

public money is being spent. So we need to have some 

accountability to the public through these councils and through 

these associations or whatever are being put in place by these 

amendments. 

 

So on the face of it, Mr. Speaker, it does look like this is 

something that would be small and inconsequential, but given 

the fact that we have seen such a lack of respect and such a lack 

of accountability and really such a lack of transparency, nobody 

believes that any more. So our scrutiny is now, the intensity of 

our scrutiny has really ratcheted up. And I think that, as I said, 

the confidence of the public has been shaken, and that’s 

reflected in the changes in our speeches to our legislation that 

we’re reviewing and debating. We now are looking at 

everything with a different set of eyes because we don’t have 

any faith or trust that this government doesn’t have something 

that they want to put through that is not exactly in the best 

interests of the public. 

 

And I know, Mr. Speaker, we have many Bills that people now 

will be speaking to at length because they’re looking at them 

with different eyes. At this point I have nothing else to remark 

on this particular Bill, and I would move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Eastview has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 155, The Natural 

Resources Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 153 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 153 — The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 

once again it gives me a great deal of pleasure to have the 

opportunity to enter into this debate on behalf of the good folks 

of Regina Northeast and to have the opportunity to bring to this 

Assembly some of their thoughts and some of their suggestions 

as it pertains to this particular Bill, Bill 153, The Provincial 

Court Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to start out by making absolutely 

clear I am not a lawyer and I don’t have a great legal 

background, and so we will dispense with getting into any pros 

and cons over legal terminologies and opinions and precedents 

and etc., etc., Mr. Speaker. What we will try to do is to provide 

you the comments based on a layman’s point of view in a very 

broad and a very superficial manner because of our lack of 

in-depth knowledge of the legal community and the process 

around it. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve done some research on this Bill and 

read some information that’s been provided by our caucus 

research staff to us, it appears that this Bill . . . [inaudible] . . . 

the civil division of the Provincial Court and appears to transfer 

the significant responsibilities currently held by Provincial 

Court judges to justices of the peace, or it has that that will be 

sort of the end result of this Bill once it does become 

proclaimed. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this of course perhaps has some merit to it. I 

think there’s some opportunity here. I think we can see where 

cases or instances where it could be applied would have a 

positive outcome or a positive effect because there are certainly 

situations which I think could probably be handled as 

adequately by a Justice of the Peace as well as a judge, and 

perhaps freeing up the judge and the judge’s time and our court 

times to do more detailed or more important cases and to have 

the opportunity to hear those cases in a more timely fashion, 

and therefore take some of the burden off of our court system 

by having expanded authority and expanded roles of the justices 

of the peace. So I think it has merit, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 

certainly worth looking into. And I think it’s worth pursuing 

that avenue and that approach. 

 

And as I said, Mr. Speaker, there may be some merit to doing 

this in some limited cases. However there are potentially some 

serious implications for the quality of service being provided to 

the people who are having hearings in court and for their rights 

to be fairly heard. And, Mr. Speaker, that is the concern and 

one of the concerns that comes to my attention and the attention 

of the good folks of Regina Northeast, is that, how is it going to 

be determined which cases are cases that can be heard by a 

Justice of the Peace and which cases are going to be heard in a 

court of law? And how is that determination going to be made? 

Who is going to be the decision maker in reviewing the cases 

and say, well okay, we’ll put this one in the justices of the 

peace hopper, and this other one will go back into the court 

system? 

 

What is going to be the criteria? What’s going to be the outline 

of that criteria? What is going to be the significance of the cases 

that’s going to identify them as cases that will be eligible to be 

heard under the Justice of the Peace system? And what will be 

the criteria that will make a case eligible to be continued down 

the court system and to be heard in court by a judge? 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, certainly has not been made clear here 

anywhere that there will be a system that will be put into place 

to determine whether or not this particular case is weighty 

enough to continue down the normal process of going through a 

court system, or has it the ability to be heard under a Justice of 



March 22, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6849 

the Peace system where I would think, Mr. Speaker, there 

would certainly be limitations to the abilities of a Justice of the 

Peace to be able to hear sensitive cases and to be able to hear 

more weightier cases. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And it would be of great interest, not only to me personally and 

not only to the opposition but I think to the people of this great 

province, to know what’s going to determine which case goes 

where and who is going to be doing this. What system will be 

put into place? Will it be a system of an individual only or will 

it be a more . . . a tribunal or some larger group that will be 

going through the cases and saying, okay this one goes to the 

Justice of the Peace; this one goes to the court system? That, 

Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated, certainly that information has 

not been made available to the opposition and/or to the great 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And what functions are being transferred, Mr. Speaker, out of 

the Provincial Court? Exactly what functions are being 

removed from the Provincial Court system and now going to be 

under the umbrella of the justices of the peace system? Those, 

you know, that’s the information, the detailed information I 

guess one may say, Mr. Speaker, but it’s certainly the type of 

information that the general public should be made aware of. I 

know that’s the kind of questions that come to the attention of 

the opposition members when the general public starts to ask 

those types of questions as to, you know, what functions are 

going to be removed from the court system that are presently in 

the court system? And there has been a long tradition of those 

functions being upheld and certainly addressed in the court 

system are now going to be removed and placed under the 

umbrella of the Justice of the Peace system. So, Mr. Speaker, 

that is once again another question that seems to be coming up 

on a regular basis when we are talking about this particular Bill. 

 

And what types of cases are going to be heard in the Justice of 

the Peace system, Mr. Speaker? What types of cases? Will they 

be more civil cases? I would certainly assume, and again I’m 

assuming, Mr. Speaker, that the criminal cases wouldn’t be. It 

would be civil matters that would be heard by the justices of the 

peace. But to what level and to what depth would those cases 

go that would still qualify to be heard under the Justice of the 

Peace system? And at what, you know, what criteria? Where is 

going to be the line saying, this case is over that line therefore it 

stays in our justice . . . in our court system. This case doesn’t 

quite make the grade, therefore it goes in the Justice of the 

Peace system. That, Mr. Speaker, has never been made clear by 

this government in any information that I have seen that would 

indicate that that forethought has gone into the proposed 

amendments to The Provincial Court Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What is the potential impact of the services to the people 

receiving these services presently in the court system and 

having these services removed from the court system and 

placed under the Justice of the Peace system? What would be 

the impact? How would this impact upon the people? 

 

What would be the system that would be in place to ensure that 

the folks that have their cases heard under the Justice of the 

Peace system certainly have fair and reasonable treatment in 

their cases? What mechanisms would be in place to ensure that, 

Mr. Speaker? What mechanisms would be in place to ensure 

that the people who are having their cases heard under the 

Justice of the Peace system would receive the same fair and 

equitable treatment as we have come to expect in our court 

system? 

 

And would they have the ability to have a lawyer present to 

represent them? Would that representation be there? Would 

they have a lawyer, somebody who is knowledgeable of the law 

and have the ability to ensure that the process of hearing their 

case is a process that’s fair and reflects the fairness of our court 

system that has been developed over decades — not only 

decades, over generations, Mr. Speaker — and that has been 

able to identify flaws and correct those flaws within the system 

to ensure that we have at the end of the day a fair hearing, and 

that the individual’s rights are fairly upheld? 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, certainly is I think the nub of the question 

here. And this is what we, I think, hopefully all desire — 

government and opposition members — desire to ensure that 

the amendments that are being proposed here to Bill 153, the 

amendments at the end of the day provide the opportunity for 

fair and reasonable outcomes to the cases that are being heard, 

whether it be heard in the court system, which has certainly 

been the tradition, but under the new proposal having some of 

the cases heard under a Justice of the Peace system, to ensure 

that the individual’s rights are being upheld. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how will their rights be impacted? How will the 

individual’s rights be impacted if we move from the hearings 

under a court system to the hearings under the Justice of the 

Peace system? Will there be any impact on those rights? Has 

the government done their homework? And has the government 

come up with a system or a proposed system of ensuring that 

the cases that are heard under the Justice of the Peace, that there 

will be no negative impacts on the rights of individuals who 

have their situations heard under the Justice of the Peace 

system? 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s I think very, very . . . The basics of 

democracy is the insurance that people have the rights, rights 

first of all to express themselves politically, to be able to have 

the rights to choose their representation, and to have the rights 

to ensure that when there’s a dispute in place that they have 

their rights upheld as individuals, their rights upheld and 

protected on both sides, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that the 

outcome is a fair and reasonable outcome. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what will be the benefits? What will be the 

benefits of this change? What will be the benefits and who will 

benefit? Will there be individuals benefit? Will the court system 

benefit? Will the people of this province benefit because of 

these changes? 

 

Those are the questions, Mr. Speaker, that have been presented 

to us, the opposition, by the general public. And that is the 

questions that I have for the government. And so far, Mr. 

Speaker, the information I have been able to review here 

doesn’t answer any of those particular questions. That’s a void 

that’s left by the government. And I think it’s something that 

certainly needs to be addressed because that’s . . . The 

fundamental principles of our court system is the insurance that 

justice will prevail and that fairness will be a part of that system 



6850 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2011 

and that individuals being heard in our court system will be 

treated fairly and their rights will be fairly upheld. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill also allows for greater public disclosure 

of the results of investigations into the conduct of judges by a 

Judicial Council. I think that’s a very important aspect of 

democracy. A very important aspect of our justice system is to 

ensure that there is full public disclosure of situations that 

reflect the public’s involvement. Mr. Speaker, certainly when 

we have judges that are being investigated certainly, for 

whatever reason, certainly the results of that investigation needs 

to be made public so that the public continues to have the 

confidence in our justice system that they should have. There’s 

no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that those investigations need to be done 

every once in a while to ensure that the guidelines are being 

met by all involved within the process. 

 

On the face of it, Mr. Speaker, greater public transparency is a 

good thing and would increase public confidence in our justice 

system. And I think that’s fair to say, that our system is only as 

strong as the people involved in it. I think our system is only as 

strong as people have the confidence in that system. 

 

So I think what we need to, on an ongoing basis, to ensure that 

that confidence is held in a high esteem, I guess you would say, 

Mr. Speaker, so that the good folks of this province know that if 

they need to use that system — whether it be the court system 

or whether it be, as it’s proposed here, the justices of the peace 

system — that at the end of the day they have a confidence in 

the system that justice will prevail and that they will be treated 

fairly and that their rights, their rights will be upheld and that 

they will be protected when it is necessary that they receive that 

protection. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of my colleagues earlier spoke on this 

particular Bill and I think made a very important point and I 

think one probably worth repeating. He suggested at that time 

that when the legislature or the executive branch of government 

deals with the Provincial Court or with anything related to any 

of the levels of the court, we have to especially be vigilant in 

what we’re doing to make sure that there are no unintended 

consequences, or that the intentions are made sure that the 

intentions are entirely clear as we proceed. 

 

And I think that’s very important, Mr. Speaker, that when we as 

legislators make adjustments to the legal system, that we do so 

after a lot of forethought but, more importantly, a lot of 

consultation to ensure that there are no unintended 

consequences and that we have done our best job to ensure that 

that is the case. And we’ve done so by not only talking to the 

immediate stakeholders involved — which would certainly be 

our justice system and those who are immediately involved in 

that justice system — but also by, I would suggest, holding 

public hearings and having the general public having the 

opportunity or be given the opportunity to share their ideas and 

their thoughts as to the proposed changes. 

 

But even broader than that, their thoughts and their ideas of 

how the changes should be brought in that would make our 

court system more reflective to the needs of the general public, 

the people who aren’t from the legal background or aren’t from 

the legal community but who, through whatever circumstances, 

find themselves in need of the use of our court system to settle a 

dispute or to settle property or to whatever the reason may be, 

and that they have the confidence within that system that they 

know in their heart of hearts that they will be treated fairly, that 

justice will prevail, and that they will be able to enter into this 

system with the knowledge that their rights, they will be 

protected, and their rights as individuals will be upheld. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that this Bill will also allow the 

government to appoint temporary judges currently serving on 

the bench in other provinces. And that, Mr. Speaker, I think is 

something certainly worth pursuing. Because we could find 

ourselves in a situation where we have a case, perhaps 

presented itself to the Saskatchewan Provincial Court, where 

the available judges find themselves in a conflict of interest 

with one party or the other. And without having some system to 

be able to address a circumstance like that, we would find a 

case that would simply sit in limbo for who knows how long 

until we’re able to find a provincial judge who was free of any 

of that conflict and that would be able to then hear the case and 

would be able to do it in a fair and just manner. 

 

And if we have the ability then, Mr. Speaker, to go outside of 

our jurisdiction here in the province of Saskatchewan to find an 

independent judge who would be able to sit in on the hearing 

and hear this particular case and be able to move the case 

forward, that would I think be beneficial to all, Mr. Speaker, 

because we wouldn’t have a backup in our court system. We 

wouldn’t have the backlog or perhaps wouldn’t contribute to 

the backlog of cases within our justice system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think there is merit to this Bill. I think there is 

parts of this Bill certainly worth considering. I think there is at 

the same time, Mr. Speaker, there is parts of this Bill that raise 

a lot of concern. And those concerns unfortunately, Mr. 

Speaker, haven’t been properly addressed by the government. 

And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that’s a sad statement to make 

because I think it would have been just so much easier, not only 

for the opposition, but so much easier for the general public to 

be able to grasp the impact of the changes and these proposed 

changes to our court system and the impact that it might have 

on individuals within this great province of ours. 

 

So there are a number of changes here, Mr. Speaker, being 

proposed in this Bill. Some appear to be worthy of support, and 

others raise certainly serious questions and require more 

information from both the government and from the people 

outside of government before the opposition is ready to support 

this Bill. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, we will — we, when I say we, I 

mean the opposition members here — will need more time to 

have the ability to talk to those people who are outside of 

government who would have interest in this Bill and give them 

the opportunity to express their thoughts and share their 

opinions with us. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move 

adjournment of debate. 

 

[15:15] 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Northeast has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 153, The Provincial 

Court Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 



March 22, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6851 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 164 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert that Bill No. 164 — The 

Police Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise in the debate on Bill 164, the Act to amend The 

Police Act, 1990, this afternoon in the Legislative Assembly. 

Again this Bill is relatively new to the Assembly. There have 

been a number of assurances given by the Minister Responsible 

for Policing when the Bill was introduced to the House as to 

consultations that have taken place and the process that sees 

this Bill coming forward in the legislature these past days. 

 

Of course we as the opposition want to make sure that the 

undertakings that have been made around what consultations 

have taken place have in fact taken place, Mr. Speaker. And 

there’s some work that we need to do in pursuit of that due 

diligence and are undertaking at present. So we’re doing our 

own consultation on this, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure that those 

consultations will inform further remarks on the part of my 

colleagues on this Bill in the days and weeks to come. 

 

That being said, the government has stated they brought this 

Bill forward after consultation with various members of the 

police community and enumerate the following goals. First of 

all, heading this up is a largely procedural change to the 

legislation. But the changes in the Bill focus on the following: 

changes that relate to disciplinary procedures, and in particular 

moving the boards that are responsible for the cost of mediation 

and matters related to that, as well as protection for 

whistle-blowing police officers who accuse the police chiefs of 

different misdemeanours wherein whistle-blowing cannot be a 

disciplinary matter unless vexatious or in bad faith as outlined 

in section 11, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s another requirement in this legislation that calls for the 

training of members of municipal police boards. There are also 

changes that relate to the relationship between the Ministry of 

Justice and the Attorney General and the Public Complaints 

Commission. And again, Mr. Speaker, when governments 

move to make these kind of changes, we want to be very certain 

that the changes are as they seem and that . . . that the Deputy 

Speaker is not being called off to the races or anything like that. 

But I guess, I guess we’ll find out what happens with the 

Deputy Speaker, Mr. Speaker, in the moments ahead. But 

apparently his starting trumpet has gone off. 

 

According to the government, the financial implications of 

these changes are in the range of 55,000 to $85,000 and are 

principally related to the costs surrounding disciplinary and 

oversight provisions. Again, Mr. Speaker, we’ll see how the 

Bill really adds up here, but for the time being we’ll take the 

minister at his word in that estimate. 

 

One principal area of concern that has caught the attention of 

the official opposition as it relates to this legislation is the 

change in Section 23(1) of the current legislation wherein the 

cap on the size of communities that can ask the Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police to act as their municipal police force is taken 

off. And currently that cap is at 20,000, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In theory the removal of the cap could permit cities that have 

their own police forces to ask the RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police] to act as their municipal force, possibly as a 

cost-saving measure, but also possibly as a threat to the 

municipal police forces during collective bargaining. So again I 

think it’s very important that a lot of men and women that 

provide services currently throughout the province to 

communities of the size and that are anticipated in this cap 

removal, and of course we see no specific mention of them 

being consulted directly in the construction of this legislation. 

So that is something that we want to find out more about. 

 

There’s also a question around which municipalities were asked 

about the change. Does this come forward as a request from 

those municipalities? And certainly, Mr. Speaker, in that 

request, was the work done to ensure that not just the 

management side of the equation was involved, but also the 

rank and file police officers themselves, were they consulted in 

these changes? And what is the intent of this change more 

specifically? 

 

Further changes in the Act include an amendment to section 17 

where they change who’s responsible for reimbursements for 

and expenses of hearing officers of the Public Complaints 

Commission, wherein the ministry assumes responsibility for 

paying hearing officers and reimbursing them for their 

expenses. Currently the boards handle these costs, and of course 

it represents an expenditure for the affected municipalities. And 

again we want to be very certain about what are the dollar 

figures involved there. 

 

There are changes to section 43 wherein the same division of 

costs is made applicable to mediation processes involving 

mediations, with the ministry assuming responsibility to 

reimburse the mediator and cover his/her expenses. Again it’s 

seeming to shift the burden of these expenditures from police 

boards and assuming that for the ministry. 

 

And there’s also the change to section 41 wherein they alter the 

way that complaints are received against police members and 

chiefs are handled. When a complaint is received about a 

member or chief, the receiver must notify the Public 

Complaints Commission, which will advise the complainant in 

writing of the status of the complaint. Currently it is the 

responsible of the receiver to notify the complainant and the 

one complained against. This measure seems aimed at requiring 

the involvement of the Public Complaints Commission when 

complaints arise so that the complainant knows this body has 

been informed of the complaint. Again if you’ve charges made 

against you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would seem only fair to 

have knowledge of those complaints. 

 

And I guess a final change in section 55 preventing 

whistle-blowing police officers from being disciplined for the 

whistle-blowing unless the matter has been found to be without 

foundation or vexatious, again there’s a very distinct balance to 



6852 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2011 

be struck here between the rights of the complainant and those 

being complained about. And it makes good sense to have that 

balance being struck to rule out things that are, again as is 

described in the law, being found without foundation or 

vexatious, but again still allowing that whistle-blowing to take 

place and those complaints to come forward. 

 

So there’s more work to be done on consultation on this 

legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There’s more work to be done 

to ensure that undertakings made by the Minister of Policing is 

as good as his word in terms of the parties involved in those 

consultations and to get a more precise understanding of the 

opinions of the affected parties. 

 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m sure that more of my 

colleagues will have more to say on this debate. Our work of 

consultation is ongoing with this proposed legislation and in 

that regard, I would now move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on The Police 

Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 165 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 165 — The Adult 

Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2011 
be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure today to speak not only on the heels of the hon. 

member from Regina Elphinstone who just spoke to Bill 164, 

but who spoke to this very Bill, Bill 165, An Act to amend The 

Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Act and to make 

consequential amendments to The Public Guardian and Trustee 

Act and The Public Trustee Amendment Act, 2001. And that 

hon. member spoke to this very Act just yesterday in the 

Assembly, and he had some very interesting comments to 

make, starting page 6806 and 6807 respecting this very Bill. I 

read his speech of yesterday with a great deal of interest, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I recall in 2001 when the Act was passed, the previous iteration 

of the Act that we’re now amending, and I want to say right off 

the hop the amendments by and large look to be positive 

amendments. They look to be ways of helping the legislation 

serve its proper function, its intended function, and enable 

things to work the way they should with respect to adult 

guardianship. And we welcome that about this very Act, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Of course, any time you are dealing with adult guardianship . . . 

Let me put it this way. Every situation has some uniqueness to 

it. There is no cookie-cutter approach that can catch all, where 

you could have, you know, one guardian that would just 

automatically make the proper decisions or the decisions that 

we would all want made given the circumstances. 

 

So having said that, this Act, this Bill 165 seems to be helping 

address some of the nuances of public guardianship. Helps not 

only enable some things to be done with respect to the 

guardianship, but it also puts in place some controls and some 

oversight. 

 

For example, if you were in a situation where you applied to be 

a public guardian or have guardianship responsibilities, 

previously you had six months to file a statement of assets, of 

property and so on, with the courts. That’s now reduced to three 

months, and I view that quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, as a 

welcome change. I think this is a positive change. I don’t think 

it’s intended to be unduly hard on the guardians, but it is clearly 

something designed to help provide some assurance that the 

assets that the guardian will have huge control over are in fact 

somewhat protected or protected as far as the law can 

reasonably protect those assets. 

 

I know that individuals who are selecting a guardian would be 

very well-advised to think, make their choice very, very 

carefully because not every guardian would necessarily be in 

tune with making the right choices. And in fact some guardians 

may see it as an opportunity to be handsomely remunerated for 

doing very little for the person that the guardianship was set up 

for. 

 

In other words, in its crudest, there may be some — very 

limited, but if there’s one, it’s one too many — there may be 

some guardians that are more interested in their own pocket 

than in helping what the guardianship was set up for, and that is 

helping people who are unable to make all of the proper 

decisions or the decisions on their own. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So this Act also sets up a provision for a co-decision maker. 

You can have a personal or a property co-decision maker, and 

that’s set for someone that may be on the right track in terms of 

their decision-making ability but may for some legitimate 

reason lack the ability to necessarily connect the dots right 

through if it gets very complex, if the issue becomes complex. 

And this enables some selective guidance that we welcome, 

quite frankly, because we would not want to see a situation 

where a parent or parents put together a significant asset, you 

know, maybe in some cases much of their life savings, to leave 

for a child of theirs and then have some bad decisions made that 

took that inheritance, if I can describe it, and squandered it 

where it wasn’t intended to go. And you can just imagine all of 

the different ramifications of this. You might even have the 

parents passed on and in which case they would have absolutely 

zero ability to reach back from the grave and correct the 

situation for their loved son or daughter. And that would be 

tragic, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Act does things like it protects people by establishing 

criteria for persons applying for guardianship orders, and it 

protects adults by establishing duties for guardians, such as to 

account. And then in the regulations, there are specific tasks or 

details that the guardians have to look after. And again, Mr. 



March 22, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6853 

Speaker, we welcome that part in Bill 165, An Act to amend 

The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Act and to 

make consequential amendments to The Public Guardian and 

Trustee Act and The Public Trustee Amendment Act, 2001. 

 

The protection allows for quite a number of things, including it 

allows the court to recognize a foreign guardianship order — 

and by that, it’s from jurisdictions that might be other 

provinces, or I’m not sure about states, but certainly other 

provinces — and it enables the court to recognize where that 

guardianship has been granted. So that’s a positive part of this 

Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are amendments that clarify inventory and accounting 

provisions and make it clear when and what a property decision 

maker is required to provide. In other words, there’s an 

accounting now that is outlined in greater detail. And again this 

would provide a level of security for the maker or makers of the 

trust in the first place, the maker or makers of the guardianship 

order. This would enable a further level of security. 

 

On the downside and early in the Act, it’s a necessary evil, but 

on the downside, the first part of the Act talks about the 

necessary fees for the guardianship and the prescribed fees. 

That’s quite simply as long as they’re reasonable. And we may 

well have some questions around that in committee — the 

establishment of the fees and what they might be — but as long 

as those fees are kept at a significantly low level, we see it as 

probably a necessary evil of doing business now in 2011 and 

beyond. 

 

There didn’t used to be a need for accounting in the event of 

death, and now there’s a new provision under this Act that does 

provide for a final accounting upon the passing on of a person 

whom a guardianship order is in force. So that too is yet another 

level of security. And I’m sure that lawyers will be involved in 

helping create wills that will stand the test of time and will 

come into line with this so that what the creator of the estate 

intended, by and large, is what will happen with that estate, 

with their own estate. And that, I’m sure, is a welcome change. 

It adds a little twist, and it certainly means another level of 

thought needs to go into putting together a trusteeship. But 

that’s, again probably on balance, it’s a good thing. 

 

There’s a thorny question of gifts, Mr. Speaker. And I know 

that when someone is requiring a guardianship, in some 

instances, I suspect in a significant number of instances, Social 

Services is also involved. And I know that there is legislation in 

place, there’s rules and regulations in place respecting use of 

one’s own resources before one starts to utilize the Department 

of Social Services resources. And if only life were simply black 

and white, if only it was crystal clear and easy how that should 

work, we wouldn’t even have this thorny question. 

 

But the problem arises all too often when a parent or parents 

have been able to put together a relatively small estate. I’m 

reluctant to define relatively small. But let’s assume in an 

example that a parent or parents had more than one child but 

one required a guardianship order, and yet the parent would 

want to provide potentially, in my example, equally for all of 

the children. Well you take a $100,000 estate, and if you’ve got 

four children, there’s $25,000 each, which is a significant estate 

legacy. 

But if you were to require the person, in this case their child 

that required a guardianship, to utilize the full $25,000 instead 

of Social Services benefits . . . And some would argue that 

that’s the proper way to go, Mr. Speaker. I grant that. But if you 

did, then there would be no ability for those parents to provide 

for birthday gifts or Christmas gifts, or maybe it’s as simple as 

a warm parka every year or two or three; to see that as they 

need it, they have winter boots and mitts and some of the things 

that there’s no provision in the Department of Social Services, 

no direct provision to provide that. Instead there’s a lump of 

money that is altogether too small. But there’s a lump of 

money, and out of that, the provisions are supposed to be 

purchased. But that doesn’t allow for gifts to siblings. It doesn’t 

allow to gifts, birthday gifts for, in this case, the individual 

requiring the guardianship. And maybe the parent, the deceased 

parent would want to be remembered annually . . . or would 

want to remember their son or daughter annually with a 

birthday gift. 

 

So I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, if 25,000 is the right example for 

me to use as a dollar amount, but clearly I’m trying to establish 

a principle of some amount of money could be, should be 

allowed to be set aside so that special gifts could be arranged 

for someone requiring a guardianship. 

 

I don’t want to beat that too hard because it is an issue that I 

suspect that the current government is dealing with. And I know 

that we were trying to deal with it when we were in office 

previously, and I know that we were making progress on that. 

And in fact indeed, Mr. Speaker, I think that these amendments 

are putting the wheels under our Act of 2001. 

 

So we welcome all of that, Mr. Speaker. And we in fact are 

looking forward to having two things happen. One, I know that 

some of my colleagues have yet to speak to this recently 

introduced Bill, and I know that they will want to speak to Bill 

165, An Act to amend The Adult Guardianship and 

Co-decision-making Act and to make consequential 

amendments to The Public Guardian and Trustee Act and The 

Public Trustee Amendment Act, 2001. I know colleagues want 

to speak to that, and I’ll look forward to some of my 

colleagues’ comments on it. And I look forward to ultimately us 

getting this Bill into committee so that we can ask some of the 

questions that I think are necessary on what, on the surface of 

it, appears to be a welcome Bill. Mr. Speaker, with that, I move 

to adjourn debate on Bill 165. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Coronation 

Park has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 165, The Adult 

Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2011. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 161 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 161 — The 

Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 



6854 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2011 

Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased today to rise to enter into the debate at second reading 

of Bill No. 161, An Act to amend The Election Act, 1996. Mr. 

Speaker, to be very clear for those who are watching today, this 

is the legislation that introduces photo ID [identification] for 

voting in provincial elections in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

A number of provisions, Mr. Speaker, that appear in this 

legislation. But since this Bill was introduced in December, Mr. 

Speaker — it was prefaced by remarks in the Throne Speech 

last fall, then the legislation was introduced in December, Mr. 

Speaker — there’s been a tremendous response from the 

Saskatchewan public opposed to the introduction of photo ID in 

Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Speaker, I will focus much of my 

remarks with regards to Bill 161 on the issue of photo 

identification. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when the government introduced this 

legislation, it also introduced a companion Bill, and that was 

Bill No. 162, The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 

2010. And amongst other things, Mr. Speaker, Bill 162 

introduced photo ID provisions for municipal governments. 

You will notice, Mr. Speaker, the elections Act is Bill 161. The 

municipal elections Act or local elections Act is 162. The 

introduction of photo ID for provincial elections, and then the 

introduction of photo ID for municipal elections. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to repeat comments that I made 

previously. Members of the public should be aware that Bill 

162, that local government elections Act, was also introduced 

on December 1st of 2010, and I had the opportunity to speak at 

second reading on that legislation, Mr. Speaker. My remarks 

appear in Hansard, on page 6322 of Hansard from December 

1st, 2010. And, Mr. Speaker, I have fairly extensive comments 

about the application of photo ID at the municipal level, but, 

Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation in front of us today is 

about the introduction of photo ID at the provincial level. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice was kind enough to 

make extensive remarks prior to his moving the motion to 

introduce at second reading the Bill. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d just 

like to make a comment or two with regards to the Minister of 

Justice’s second reading comments. Mr. Speaker, I will quote 

directly from the Minister of Justice his comments made on 

December the 1st at page 6317 of Hansard. The Minister of 

Justice says, and I quote: 

 

Mr. Speaker, members will know that The Local 

Government Election Act is to be amended this session to 

require voters at local government elections to produce 

approved identification such as government-issued photo 

ID [identification]. The Bill will follow the municipal 

initiative to result in similar ID requirements being 

authorized for voters at municipal, provincial, and federal 

elections in Saskatchewan. 

 

And then he goes on to say a paragraph or two later, Mr. 

Speaker, and I quote again: 

 

. . . voters will now be required to show identification 

prior to voting. Those with approved government-issued 

photo ID and who have been enumerated will only need to 

show that ID in order to get a ballot. Those who cannot 

meet this requirement will be required to show additional 

forms of identification or have another voter with such ID 

vouch for them. A voter may vouch for only one other 

person. 

 

And then the paragraph that follows that, Mr. Speaker, and 

again I quote: 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s been some suggestion that this 

process will prevent people who want to vote from being 

able to do so. That is not the intention and in our view that 

will not . . . result. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the minister is clearly stating in his remarks 

that it is not the intention of government to disenfranchise 

anyone by the introduction of photo ID. And again I’ll quote. 

The Minister of Justice said: 

 

. . . there’s some suggestion that this process will prevent 

people who want to vote from being able to do so. That is 

not our intention and in our view that will not be the 

result. 

 

Mr. Speaker, very clear that it is not their intention. So, Mr. 

Speaker, if the public of Saskatchewan or the public in any 

other province, for that matter, Mr. Speaker, or a court 

adjudicating legislation like this in any other province, if it can 

be established that even one person is disenfranchised by that 

legislation, this legislation, Mr. Speaker, by the Minister of 

Justice’s own words since that’s not their intention, indeed this 

legislation should be rethought and perhaps even, Mr. Speaker, 

I would go so far as to say this legislation should be pulled. 

 

Now lest members think that it’s only the Minister of Justice 

who’s interpreting the Bill in this way, Mr. Speaker, let’s go to 

a debate that occurred in this legislature just a couple of days 

ago, Mr. Speaker. March the 17th, the private members’ day 

debate, something we in the legislature refer to as the 75-minute 

debate, a motion from the government, Mr. Speaker, brought 

forward a number of speakers on this legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an interesting tactic of government. No members 

of government have spoken to the legislation itself, but they 

introduce a motion so they can speak to the legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. Odd circumstance. Absolutely odd. I’ve never seen 

anything like this in any other legislature in Canada. If 

members of the legislature want to speak to the Bill, they stand 

in their place, get recognized by the Speaker, and they speak to 

the Bill. But no, government members have not spoken to this 

legislation, but they introduce a motion so that they can speak 

to the legislation. Very odd. Very odd, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the member who moved the motion is the member from 

Cannington, the Government House Leader, Mr. Speaker. And 

his remarks indicate quite clearly that he certainly shares the, he 

shares the interpretation of the Minister of Justice. The member 

from Cannington says on page 6771 of Hansard, and I quote: 

 

And the reason, Mr. Speaker, that these changes are taking 



March 22, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6855 

place across the country and in Saskatchewan . . . is to 

protect democracy, to maintain the integrity of our 

democratic process. 

 

That’s a quote, Mr. Speaker, from the member of Cannington, 

“. . . to maintain the integrity of our democratic process.” In 

other words, the intent is not to disenfranchise anyone but to 

make the system stronger, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then the member from Cannington says the following, later 

on that same page, Mr. Speaker, in that same debate. The 

member from Cannington says, and again I quote, “And, Mr. 

Speaker, I would find it highly unlikely . . .” 

 

I should preface this first, Mr. Speaker, before I do the quote. 

There’s been some concern that new Canadians may not have 

photo ID, Mr. Speaker. We have a lot of new Canadians in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The work that began prior to 2007 

about immigration in Saskatchewan and carried forward over 

the last couple of years has resulted in a large number of new 

citizens in the province of Saskatchewan, first as immigrants, 

Mr. Speaker, and then later as Canadian citizens. 

 

I was very fortunate in North Battleford just a few weeks ago, 

Mr. Speaker, to attend a new citizenship ceremony in which 52 

individuals were made new Canadians, Mr. Speaker, residents 

of northwest Saskatchewan. We’re very, very, very pleased to 

have these new Canadians, Mr. Speaker. But in terms of photo 

ID and voting, when you’re a new citizen in a country, you 

respect the right to be able to vote, Mr. Speaker. It’s one of the 

values of citizenship, is the ability to vote. So, Mr. Speaker, 

new citizens take this very seriously. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, every family is different. Every family 

circumstance is different. And what is the norm in a 

community, Mr. Speaker, may not be the norm in every 

household, and those new Canadian households are no 

different. But the member from Cannington in his speech in 

regards to the fact that some new Canadians may not have 

photo ID on election day, Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Cannington says and I quote, “I would find it highly unlikely 

that any new Canadian citizen would not have a passport or 

some other form of photo ID such as a driver’s licence.” Mr. 

Speaker, he’s making a blanket statement here that says he 

doesn’t understand that every family situation is different, 

doesn’t fully understand the nature of what’s going on in our 

communities — more importantly, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t fully 

understand the nature of the legislation in front of us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also in that debate on March the 17th here in the 

legislature, the member from Yorkton had the following to say. 

This is a quote from page 6778 of Hansard and he says, and I 

quote, “Disenfranchising people is not the intent of this 

government, nor do I think this legislation would do that.” 

Pretty much a direct quote from the Minister of Justice, Mr. 

Speaker. And the member from Yorkton goes on to say: 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, I want to refer to a comment made 

by the member from Dewdney: everyone has a right to 

vote. And I couldn’t agree with him more, Mr. Speaker. I 

agree that everybody should be able to vote once and in 

their own constituency and have that opportunity to do 

that. And this legislation clearly would help that happen. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, certainly interesting comments to say that 

the government members, through the Minister of Justice and 

through independent speeches in the legislature, indicate quite 

clearly there’s universal acceptance across the way that if the 

intent of this legislation is not to disenfranchise anyone, then it 

follows that if it does disenfranchise anyone, it should be 

withdrawn, Mr. Speaker. And I would assume that the member 

from Cannington, the member from Yorkton would agree with 

that conclusion, and the Minister of Justice would have no 

alternative but also to do that, to withdraw, to agree, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Bill should be withdrawn. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the government has said that since this 

legislation is in place in Canada, the federal system, that it’s in 

place in British Columbia and Ontario, Mr. Speaker, that 

therefore there’s no problems here. But, Mr. Speaker, it is 

interesting, and I think this is one of the key points in all of this, 

is that the legislation that exists elsewhere has been challenged 

to the Supreme Court of Canada. It’s been challenged, Mr. 

Speaker. There are groups across Canada who have made a 

case. They’ve built a presentation that’s now gone to the 

Supreme Court of Canada to say that there are individuals who 

are disenfranchised by photo ID. 

 

Some provinces like Ontario, Mr. Speaker, have mitigated this 

circumstance to some extent, and the Government of Ontario 

has made it very clear that if you don’t have photo ID, photo ID 

will be provided to you, Mr. Speaker, free of charge. The 

Government of Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Party 

government says, anybody doesn’t have it, we’ll provide it, but 

at a cost, Mr. Speaker. So whether you are a student at a college 

or a university, whether you are a northern resident, whether 

you are a First Nations person, whether you are a person with 

disabilities, whether you are an individual that has matured in 

years, Mr. Speaker, a senior who has never had a driver’s 

licence, every person currently that does not have photo ID, this 

government is saying, for only a certain amount of money, 

we’ll take care of you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there will be some people in Saskatchewan, 

somewhere in this province, who on election day, November 

the 7th, 2011, will go to the polls, will not have identification, 

will turn around and go home, and they will not have been 

allowed to vote, Mr. Speaker. They will not have been allowed 

to vote. If the intention of this legislation is not to send that 

person home, then this legislation should be withdrawn. It’s 

very clear members of government agree with that position, Mr. 

Speaker. So let’s ensure the legislation does what the members 

opposite want it to do — improve the system. 

 

The British Columbia Civil Liberties Association does not 

believe in British Columbia that photo ID improves the system. 

They argue it makes it worse, Mr. Speaker. Granted in 

Vancouver, in British Columbia there are an awful lot of 

vulnerable people, Mr. Speaker, on the streets of Vancouver, 

some of whom may want to vote, some of who have voted all 

their lives, Mr. Speaker, some of whom participate in the 

economy but from a position of vulnerability and, Mr. Speaker, 

from a position of non-participation in our economy. Mr. 

Speaker, those people have a right to participate in the choosing 

of elected representatives at the provincial, municipal, and 

federal systems. 

 



6856 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2011 

These are important matters that we’ve all got to take into 

account when we think about what it is that we want to do with 

our electoral system. 

 

The legislation, as I read from the minister’s second reading 

speech, also indicates that if somebody vouches for you and 

they have photo ID, Mr. Speaker, then that’s going to be okay. 

But only one person can vouch for one other person. If for 

example, Mr. Speaker, you are in a seniors’ home and you 

perhaps are an employee who wants to assist people with voting 

in the home . . . Very few of them have got photo ID. They’ve 

been unable to go out to the local SGI [Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance] office because of some physical 

incapacities, Mr. Speaker. They’ve been unable to go out to get 

their photo IDs, Mr. Speaker. There’s one staff person who 

helps these people get to the polling station. It might be a 

mobile poll that’s in their building, Mr. Speaker. Once one 

person has been vouched for by that one staff person, nobody 

else in the building can be vouched for. This is unfortunate, Mr. 

Speaker, and in rural Saskatchewan that’s more likely to 

happen than not. 

 

[16:00] 

 

This government has forgotten on numerous occasions some of 

the people in rural Saskatchewan. This is one piece of 

legislation that I think targets individuals in rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and says, we don’t really care if 

you can’t vote. You have to get your affairs in order. 

 

That takes me back to that second reading speech of the 

minister, the Minister of Justice, because I thought it was very 

interesting that he made it very clear in his remarks that the 

government doesn’t take responsibility for an individual’s 

participation. They simply want to ensure that the process 

exists, and then it’s up to people to make it work. Mr. Speaker, 

in the second reading speech of the Minister of Justice he said 

it’s imperative . . . And I quote. This is a direct quote: “. . . it is 

imperative that people get their affairs in order so that they are 

able to have the proper paperwork when they present 

themselves at the polling station.” Get your affairs in order, is 

what the minister says you have to do. 

 

Not a very astute comment when you think about the 

vulnerabilities that a lot of people within our economy have, 

Mr. Speaker. This is the same government that doesn’t 

understand that affordable housing is important in our 

communities, Mr. Speaker. The same government that doesn’t 

understand that roads to rural First Nations communities are 

important, Mr. Speaker. This is the same government that 

seems to have abandoned safety on secondary roads in a lot of 

rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because it’s up to everybody 

to look after themselves. But, Mr. Speaker, these are people 

who for years have been voting. They’ve gone to the poll. The 

polling clerk knows who they are. Everything is great. Now 

they’ve got to drive to the city, find some photo ID, get their 

affairs in order just so that they can do what they’ve always 

done all their lives, and that’s to vote for members of the 

legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want everybody to have an opportunity to vote for their 

Member of the Legislative Assembly, not just those who have 

“got their affairs in order,” Mr. Speaker. This is a clear, clear 

fundamental right that Saskatchewan residents have, Mr. 

Speaker. So we’ve got to ensure that the pieces all fit together, 

that they work for everybody. And that’s the intention of the 

Minister of Justice. It’s the intention of the member from 

Yorkton. It’s the intention of the member from Cannington that 

this Bill not disenfranchise anybody. They said it. It’s clear. It’s 

very clear, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One other thing, Mr. Speaker, that I wanted to refer to with 

regards to the ability of the members opposite to understand 

what it is that they are asking Saskatchewan people to do, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re back to the debate on March the 17th, the 

private members’ day debate, Mr. Speaker. There was one other 

Saskatchewan Party member who entered into that debate. That 

was the member from Regina Wascana Plains, Mr. Speaker. 

Interesting comment. She says, and I quote . . . This is just to 

give an indication of how the Saskatchewan Party understands 

the ability of Saskatchewan people to have their affairs in order. 

I quote the member from Regina Wascana Plains: 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you go to return an item at a big box 

store in this province, you have to show photo ID. We’re 

talking about returning products, and yet the members 

opposite don’t think it’s right to have to prove residency, 

prove identification when you’re voting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Wascana Plains, and members 

opposite supporting her in those comments, seem to equate 

shopping with voting. Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of vulnerable 

people in our province who don’t shop. They don’t have the 

ability to shop, Mr. Speaker. They get their food from the food 

bank, Mr. Speaker. They couch surf from one house to the next 

because they have no capacity to earn a living in our economy, 

Mr. Speaker. They’re raising children with very few dollars 

available to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are, there are people who will be 

disenfranchised. Every member of the Saskatchewan Party 

needs to understand that every family is different. And if one 

person is disenfranchised, this legislation does not improve the 

circumstances for voting in this province. Therefore we have no 

alternative, Mr. Speaker, but, as the intention of the Minister of 

Justice becomes very clear, the government has to withdraw the 

Bill. 

 

Last point before I leave the legislation and adjourn debate on 

the Bill for today, Mr. Speaker, last point, and this has been 

raised before, Mr. Speaker, but I want to make this very clear 

that I support the question that’s being asked. Who asked for 

this legislation, Mr. Speaker? Who asked for this provision? 

 

The member from Cannington talks about a single incident in 

Wood Mountain where there was a discrepancy in ballots being 

cast, Mr. Speaker. The fact of the matter is that in that specific 

case the system worked to catch the errors that were made and, 

Mr. Speaker, the system worked to correct them. So in fact to 

say there are incidences that would indicate that people are 

choosing to vote irregularly, Mr. Speaker, there isn’t a lot of 

evidence that says that we need to do something to fix the 

problem. We don’t. 

 

What’s the problem, Mr. Speaker, and who specifically is 

asking that we have photo ID in the province of Saskatchewan? 



March 22, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6857 

Some are suggesting that it’s individuals within the 

Saskatchewan Party who don’t want vulnerable people to vote, 

Mr. Speaker, that are asking for this legislation to be brought 

forward. I can’t substantiate matters like that, Mr. Speaker, but 

it sure rings true when you listen to the fact that members of the 

Saskatchewan Party don’t understand the vulnerabilities that 

exist in this province, don’t understand the nature of our 

province. 

 

Bottom line, Mr. Speaker, no one is asking for this change to be 

made. There’s no evidence that anyone outside of the Sask 

Party is asking for this change to be made. The government 

says their intention is not to disenfranchise anybody. There are 

court cases, Mr. Speaker, in this country that are saying that this 

legislation will disenfranchise individuals. And, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s a challenge from the British Columbia Civil Liberties 

Association in the province of British Columbia on very similar 

legislation. And other provinces who have dealt with this have 

brought in mitigating legislation to correct some of the 

deficiencies that the Saskatchewan Party, Saskatchewan 

legislation continues to have. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that on the evidence that’s in front of 

us, there’s no alternative but for the government to withdraw 

this legislation. I know that other members of the New 

Democratic Party will have similar arguments to make. 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that the debate on Bill 161 

be now adjourned. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill 161, The Election 

Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 162 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hickie that Bill No. 162 — The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s good to see you’re back from your federal run. I hope 

you’re not going to be announcing anything further during my 

remarks, but it’s a pleasure to join in the debate here today on 

Bill No. 162. In many ways a companion piece with the 

legislation that my colleague from The Battlefords has just 

concluded his remarks upon, but in many ways it provides a 

very interesting comparison to the piece that the member’s just 

finished speaking about. 

 

I guess the, you know, the two main measures as we can see in 

this legislation are the changes to The Local Government 

Election Act are (a) moving to the four-year terms — and I’ll 

have more to say about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and the . . . 

And this is how it started out in the Throne Speech, Mr. 

Speaker, and I quote from the Throne Speech of this past 

October: “. . . giving municipalities the authority to require 

photo ID when conducting local elections.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the way that that lines up alongside the 

requirement that is made under the legislation that the member 

from Battlefords has just been speaking about is that on the one 

hand, it’s a regime where they’re going to force the uses of 

photo identification, whereas on the other hand with the local 

elections governance, the local government elections Act, 

where it will be one of a number of options. 

 

And that is interesting, Mr. Speaker, because we saw from the 

Throne Speech to when The Local Government Election Act 

was finally introduced that changed to be more flexible, that 

changed to be more inclusive. And even then, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve seen the Minister for Municipal Affairs attend meetings 

of the New North, and when the criticism of this legislation was 

levelled fairly extensively in that session, the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs sort of throwing his hands up and saying, 

well don’t worry. We’ll work with you even further to ensure 

that people aren’t disenfranchised. 

 

And of course New North, Mr. Speaker, was one of the 

organizations that was stated as having been consulted with 

when this legislation was brought forward in the first place. So, 

I guess, again it’s an all-too-common occurrence with this 

government where they’ll say yes, yes, consultation’s been 

undertaken, but when you talk to the people that have been 

so-called consulted with, sometimes you find out that the story 

is not quite as been related back in the legislature, and the way 

that impacts things like the introduction of legislation, the 

measures in that legislation, and then the way that it’s attributed 

in second reading speeches by the ministers opposite. 

 

So again the move to the four-year term giving municipalities 

the opportunity to go in that direction, we think that’s fine. You 

know, it’s called for by the stakeholders. It’s been brought 

forward. We think, fine, that’s as it should be. There’s certainly 

a lot to recommend a four-year term. And certainly the way that 

going through the greater number of the budget cycles and the 

governance cycles of a given organization over a year, we think 

that that four years strikes a pretty fair balance in terms of not 

too long, but it’s long enough for folks to get their feet under 

them and provide the benefit of that experience that is gained 

over that period of time. 

 

But the thing that we find interesting in particular about this 

legislation is the move to provide the option to go to photo 

identification, and of course in the legislation, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

an option. And I refer to, of course, section 76.2 of the 

proposed legislation headed “Evidence of identity and 

residence”. 76.2 reads: 

 

An elector shall: 

 

(a) provide to the deputy returning officer and the poll 

clerk the following evidence to . . . [provide] his or her 

identity and residence: 

 

(i) one piece of identification issued by a Canadian 

government, whether federal, provincial or local, or an 

agency of that government, that contains a photograph 



6858 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2011 

of the elector and his or her name and address; or 

 

“Or.” And that’s a very important “or,” Mr. Speaker: 

 

(ii) two pieces of information prescribed in the 

regulations, each of which establishes the elector’s 

name and at least one of which establishes the elector’s 

address; or 

 

(b) establish his or her identity and residence in 

accordance with the procedures as prescribed in the 

regulations”. 

 

So again even there, Mr. Speaker, we see that in terms of 

actually listening to the local governments and then the way 

that this legislation was introduced in the Throne Speech, the 

way that in turn evolves in the actual legislation that was 

brought to this House, and then the further undertakings that 

have been made by ministers on that side of the chamber with 

regards to listening to concerns that have been raised around 

this legislation and its potential impact on voter turnout and the 

potential to disenfranchise individuals at the polls, it’s a fairly 

interesting evolution. 

 

[16:15] 

 

And when you stack that up alongside what happened with the 

changes brought to The Election Act and the long-established 

practice of having an all-party meeting after the election and 

then that report coming forward to Elections Saskatchewan and 

that as a general rule informing the changes that are brought to 

The Election Act, the fact that the concern around photo 

identification was nowhere near the recommendations of that 

all-party body, and then the way that this is seized upon, it’s 

fairly clear to see, Mr. Speaker, the influence of the Harper 

Conservatives at hand and the way that this is being brought 

into this House. 

 

And it’s hard not to distinguish or to discern the intent that is, I 

think, contrary to the spirit of democracy. Certainly you want to 

be able to have people that prove their residency, that prove 

their citizenship, that prove their ability to participate in the 

elections. But the idea that you would game the process so that 

you dissuade people from going to the polls or that you set the 

bar in a place where it’s difficult for people that don’t have 

photo identification, that don’t have the proper means by which 

to meet a narrowly prescribed criteria for getting to make their 

mark at the ballot box, it’s hard not to look at those kind of 

efforts and wonder what the heck is going on. 

 

So again this is very much a companion piece to other 

legislation that has been brought to this Chamber. It’s quite 

instructive, I think, to see the way that the evolution of this has 

taken place in terms of trying to respond to concerns of those 

that were supposedly consulted with in the first place, and the 

way that this government refuses to move on legislation that my 

colleague from The Battlefords, just previous to my 

intervention this afternoon, spoke very eloquently about, the 

anti-democratic nature of it and the fact that it should be 

withdrawn. 

 

I guess I don’t have much more to add than that, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ll be watching with vigilance and diligence as the 

opposition to ensure that again the intent of this legislation is 

lived up to, to make sure that those who have supposedly been 

consulted with are actually in agreement with the way that this 

government interprets the tenor of those consultations. And 

we’ll certainly be watching with vigilance to ensure that 

undertakings made by ministers on that side of the House in 

bodies such as the meeting of the New North leadership are 

lived up to. 

 

But with that, Mr. Speaker, I would anticipate that a great 

number of my other colleagues wish to participate in the debate 

and as such would move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 162, The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 160 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 160 — The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to join in the 

debate on Bill 160, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 

Amendment Act, 2010. I guess there’s been a lot of concern and 

I guess expressed by the members of the official opposition. 

And many other organizations are trying to bring their voice 

and very concerned about Bill 160 coming forward, and I guess 

the timing of it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I got a chance, you know, to talk a little bit yesterday about 

why was a certain Bill brought forward. And there are certain 

Bills that get brought forward here. And the reasons why, and 

people are wondering why certain Bills are coming here. And 

Bill 160, there’s a lot of concern. And through the notes and 

conversations having with different organizations, individuals, 

human rights . . . And I mean, if you look at where it came from 

and how we accepted this as a province, you know, it’s very 

interesting. 

 

And you listen to some of the concerns out there and why we 

have human right protection for Saskatchewan residents, but 

not only Saskatchewan residents, but all of Canada. And why 

so many countries out there that don’t have human right 

protection, the way their citizens are treated and attacked by 

their governments, it’s scary. But here we have some 

protections in the province of Saskatchewan. We should have, 

Mr. Speaker, protection for Saskatchewan residents. And it 

doesn’t matter what background they come from — their 

heritage, what ethnic group they belong to, what their views are 

— their views should be protected. 

 

You know, it’s interesting and I’m going to get into a few 

examples that, I think, would be appropriate on this Bill, Mr. 



March 22, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6859 

Speaker, that I have witnessed myself over my years out there 

and seeing how people have been treated and mistreated. And 

then to see a Bill come forward and again the Justice minister 

brings this Bill forward, and I made comments yesterday using 

examples of Bill 160. There’s different Bills, you know, that 

concern individuals, Bill 161. 

 

And I know we have an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to debate 

them and to voice our concerns which there’s 58 members 

elected and you try to do what’s best for Saskatchewan 

residents. But I don’t feel that the Sask Party government is 

truly . . . brought this Bill forward, I don’t know on what 

grounds. And if they’re trying to improve something then, if 

there’s problems with the system, then maybe it’s time to 

review it.  

 

And there’s nothing wrong with doing a review. And I see that 

the current government does not want to do a review. It just 

wants to eliminate certain things out of it and wants to actually 

get rid of the tribunal decision, that that group would have 

access to making decisions. Maybe it’s not the quickest way, 

but you know what? Putting it down to a commissioner, and we 

see that and some people have expressed that — one individual 

making a decision. And maybe that commissioner will make 

the best decision at the time, but is that a safe way? Is that the 

best way? Without looking, and I don’t believe that the 

government has consulted anyone. You know, at least I haven’t 

seen that. I haven’t heard that. And I don’t why this Bill’s 

coming forward. 

 

Many of my colleagues have expressed their concern. We have 

individuals out there very concerned about these groups. But, 

you know, Mr. Speaker, when they’re scared to come here and 

express themselves and their view — scared. And I mean that 

of their . . . To come here and express themselves to the Sask 

Party government because they’re failed that their programs 

will get cut. Their funding will be cut. It’s a sad day. And we 

wonder why we need human rights protection for individuals, 

organizations. This was a tool. And, you know, and I talked, 

Mr. Speaker, about my grandfather being a war veteran. And he 

fought hard and his brothers did for the democratic process, for 

freedoms for all of us that we have. 

 

You are the only provincial government that I’m aware of that’s 

even looking at this. You’re not moving forward; you’re going 

backwards. You’re not consulting the people. You didn’t go out 

and talk. Where’s all the meetings you had with the public? 

They didn’t do that, Mr. Speaker, because they come up with 

laws and they want to amend things and they want to change 

things. It doesn’t matter if it’s right and the people agree with it. 

Their philosophy is, this is what we’re going to do, and that’s 

the way we’re going to do it. 

 

It’s a sad day, Mr. Speaker, when a group will take away from 

another group rights. And when you see, you know, Canada and 

the way we came to have the human rights that we have, Bill of 

Rights. And then when we look at 1947, and we know who 

brought it in and the reason why before United Nations did 

agree to it. A year previous, there must have been some wisdom 

in our province, in the leadership, in the government of the day 

to say, we need a bill of rights. We have to have this to protect 

our citizens whether they’re immigrants, whether they’re 

people with disabilities. 

And you know it’s a sad day. People have many disabilities and 

they have challenges, but they try their best in this world. And 

they do a good job because I’ve witnessed many of them trying. 

And the struggle, I’m telling you, Mr. Speaker, you look at 

them and you see their struggle, and your heart has to go out to 

them because they’re trying their best. But to have a society or 

have individuals mock them and make fun of them, it’s 

embarrassing. That is wrong. And in our hearts we know it’s 

not right, but people will still do it. They will mock people. 

They will laugh. 

 

To have a disability and to move forward in life, I commend 

those individuals the challenges that they have to go through. 

Some people might think it’s easy, but I’ll tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, for the individuals that I know . . . And you see them 

out there. They have different disabilities. Some of them might 

be missing limbs but they work hard. They do all they can. 

There’s all types of disabilities — whether it’s learning, 

whether it’s physical, emotional — we have to support those 

individuals. They have a right to be heard, and they have a right 

to be heard, and they have a right to show up and have a place 

of employment and to be protected. And we give them that 

right with human rights and that process. 

 

And when you start interfering in that process and whether 

they’re Aboriginal people . . . You have Aboriginal people and 

you look at them and what they’ve gone through as a people, as 

a nation. Hasn’t been easy. Have they been discriminated 

against? I think the stories and the outcomes of human right 

trials will be very clear. Cases that have been heard before the 

tribunal and the rulings that that group has made, it has given 

protection. It has made sure that individuals have rights and 

they’re protected and they don’t have to fear their government. 

That to me says something very clearly. And to see a 

government wanting to take that away without looking at it and 

saying, have a review. There’s nothing wrong with making 

some changes, but make sure you consult people, the people 

that have a right to use the Human Rights Commission. 

 

And when you see the individuals speaking against this and 

bringing information forward, and I think about one. And he 

shared some information, very concerned where we’re going, 

you know. Secretary-general of Amnesty International Canada, 

an individual, very concerned. Sees this as going backwards, 

not forward. Very concerned where are we going as a province 

when we take away the rights of individuals to a process, and 

they have a right to that process. 

 

Is it a perfect process? There’s some challenges; we hear that. 

And maybe the government feels that’s the reason they want to 

look at this and they want to go to the process they want to use 

— a judge to hear human right cases. I don’t know if that’s the 

right process or the wrong process . . . [inaudible] . . . but I 

know the process we have in place, it may be lengthy. May take 

a long time to get through it. But there was individuals with 

their experience that heard those cases.  

 

The cost, I’m hearing different people talk about the different 

costs. And individuals, can they afford . . . And if it’s at the cost 

of the individual to bring this forward, to hire a lawyer to go to 

court? 

 

What’s in it for that individual who is probably one of the 



6860 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2011 

poorest individuals that may be bring forward a claim? To have 

a government telling them, well you know what, you might 

have a sad case and, you know, you might have a human rights 

complaint; we’ll investigate it. And the commissioner may . . . 

[inaudible] . . . yes I believe there’s something here and it 

should go forward and has a right to be heard by a judge. Or the 

commissioner may say, I don’t feel there’s grounds to have this 

case heard, so that case I guess doesn’t get to go forward. It 

stops at the commissioner’s discretion. And I’m not saying that 

this individual . . . He might be a wonderful person. He might 

understand a lot of things. But I think when you’re leaving it to 

one individual, I’m very concerned, and I think people have 

expressed that concern. 

 

[16:30] 

 

You know, at the end of the day people want to feel like they 

can come and they can approach their government. And we’ve 

seen examples, Mr. Speaker, of different Bills that have taken 

away rights from Saskatchewan people: Bill 5, Bill 6, Bill 43, 

Bill 80. Where are we going? Bill 161. People look at the 

government for leadership. And I said this yesterday and I’ll 

say this again. The members, there’s 58 of us elected here 

representing Saskatchewan people. Many of you represent First 

Nations, Métis people, immigrants. There’s many different 

nationalities. They have a right to be protected. 

 

Stand up for . . . The backbenchers of the government, speak up 

for the people that can’t be here to speak for themselves. You 

owe them that. You don’t have to always agree. You get a 

chance to share with your colleagues. Ask them, is this right? 

Search it out. And if you think at the end of the day, Mr. 

Speaker, if they really think that this is the way to go, then at 

least they’ve looked at it. And that’s all I’m asking them, to 

look at it. 

 

Because I’m telling you, once this Bill is passed and it goes into 

legislation and it’s our law, I realize that you can change it, but 

you can also withdraw this Bill. You can also say, you know, 

we’re going to take time out. We’re going to do a review. 

We’re going to make sure we consult people, Mr. Speaker. 

They can do that. The government has the power. I don’t think 

they have the will. I hope some of their members will find that 

will to say, many people gave up lots so we could have these 

rights. Don’t take those rights for granted. Don’t take those 

rights for granted because we are going backwards, not 

forward. 

 

In 1947, when Saskatchewan chose to move forward, it was a 

step forward. Many looked at us. Every other Canadian 

province followed, Mr. Speaker, followed and today have 

human right Bills. We are going backwards. We’re a leader and 

now we’re going to lead, but we’re going in the wrong direction 

to lead. I don’t think this Bill is going to protect people’s rights 

the way it has been in place. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, like I’ve said, it might not be the perfect 

system, and there might have to be changes. Maybe we have to 

provide more financing. Maybe we have to make sure we do all 

we can that cases are heard sooner and get through that system 

to be heard. But it’s been interesting to see some of the cases 

that the tribunal has to deal with and had made rulings on. And 

maybe some of those decisions didn’t favour the current 

government. The Sask Party government didn’t like that. 

 

Interesting how now this Bill comes forward and the changes 

they want to make. Right now you have a commissioner, and I 

realize those individuals might be doing what’s best for our 

province, but if the government gets to appoint the 

commissioner, who will they appoint? We’ve unfortunately 

seen some of the interesting things this current government will 

try to do. 

 

And a system that has worked for years and years in this House 

for both sides of government, they don’t like sometimes to play 

the same way when they have the decision to make. They want 

to change the rules. That’s a scary scenario to put out there to 

the public, who are very concerned. They’re wondering, where 

is the Sask Party government going, and what are their 

motives? You don’t bring in legislation the way you are and 

Bills you want to change. I mean review them. 

 

But some of the stuff that has come forward, and you know 

what? They may not agree, Mr. Speaker. Some will shake their 

heads, and that’s fine. But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, at the end of 

the day, people’s rights, people’s rights, human rights 

protection, whether they’re Aboriginal, First Nations, Métis, 

Inuit, immigrants, whether they’re people with disabilities, 

minorities, have a right to be protected. And they have that 

right, Mr. Speaker, and should be protected. And if you take a 

Bill like this and you move forward on it and you try to push it, 

at the end of day you’re the government. And we know the 

process. We’re learning. You will move this Bill forward. It 

will get through the process. It will become law. I hope at the 

end of the day it doesn’t come back to haunt some of you. Mr. 

Speaker, at the end of the day, did you do the right thing when 

you look back on this? 

 

Some of the Bills and the decisions you guys are making as a 

government, the Sask Party government, is affecting a lot of 

people. And I talked about photo ID for elections. And I’m 

going to go back and refer to different Bills: Bill 5, Bill 6, Bill 

43, Bill 80. These are taking away from individuals. These are 

taking away from individuals. And individuals have rights — 

the right to be protected, the right to be heard. 

 

And many of those individuals right now, they’re scared, scared 

to send letters. And I’m encouraging chiefs, Métis leaders, 

presidents, citizens of our province, don’t be scared. Don’t let 

them intimidate you. Send your letters forward. I know some of 

you are scared about your funding because if you say too much, 

the Sask Party government will come after you. We know that. 

People are scared out there. 

 

They can sit here, Mr. Speaker, say what they want. People are 

scared. They feel intimidated. They don’t want to bring letters. 

Say what they want, at the end of the day, there’s individuals 

that don’t want to support . . . Even though they don’t support 

this, they’re concerned for the clients, the people they serve. 

They don’t want to come here, fear of losing their funding. 

They don’t want to send letters, delegations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes to show you . . . Laugh, laugh, there you 

go. Members on the opposite side of this House think it’s 

funny, the members of the government. I don’t find it funny. 

It’s a sad day when you have individuals, Mr. Speaker, that 



March 22, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6861 

don’t take this serious, that people don’t have rights to be heard. 

They have a right, Mr. Speaker, to be here. They have a right to 

be heard. They have a right to come in this legislature and 

protest. They have a right to come on the steps. And we say to 

them, when you come into the House, you have to follow 

certain rules and show respect. And most people do that. But 

they’re frustrated. Many people are frustrated, Mr. Speaker, the 

process. 

 

Well you can make fun all you want. You can make fun all you 

want. The end of the day, you will wake up the people and 

they’ll speak. And you might talk about, oh well, nobody, 

whatever, this and that with the polls. And you can say what 

you want, but you keep doing what you’re doing, you keep 

treating the people the way you’re treating them, trust me, they 

will wake up. They will send you a message. You can’t ignore 

northern people, rural people, Aboriginal people. They have a 

right to be heard and they will be heard. You cannot, you can’t 

keep them quiet any more. They’re scared and then they 

wonder why, why, why they’re afraid to come forward and 

voice their concern and to hear their concern. 

 

I hear it so many places. Well you’ve got to be careful. You’ve 

got to be careful with the government. You’ve got to tiptoe 

around them because if you don’t, they’ll come after you. And 

the member can say all they want over there. You’re in charge. 

These are your amendments you’re trying to make with our 

Bills, with our protection of the human rights. It’s Bills that you 

have passed — Bill 5, Bill 6, 43, Bill 80. Bill 161 that you want 

to bring forward. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, I hope individuals out there will 

bring the message forward to the government. Approach your 

MLAs, any individual out there. And many are watching this 

program, and they watch it and they watch the House. You 

know, Mr. Speaker, the individuals out there, they’re concerned 

about this Bill. I encourage them — the leader, individuals — 

you have MLAs representing you. Send them a letter. Send 

them an email. Tell them the concerns. Don’t fear them. But at 

the end of the day, if you still feel that you’re fearing them and 

you can’t bring your voice forward, at election time do your 

evaluation. Follow your heart and do the right thing. Make sure 

you do the right thing. 

 

So when I look at the different individuals . . . And I have to 

give a compliment to my colleagues who have argued this and 

have got into the debate and expressed themselves really well. 

And I think of the member from North Battleford. He expressed 

it really well. He went on yesterday and he talked from the 

heart about the challenges. 

 

You know, that’s all right if you didn’t believe him. That’s 

okay. Tim, that’s okay. Yes, yes. The member opposite, that’s 

okay. You know, Mr. Speaker, you know, I shouldn’t have 

mentioned an individual’s name. I apologize. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, individuals can say what they want. 

And you know what? I understand. They want to be heard too, 

and they’ll get their chance. And maybe they’ll speak against 

this Bill. Because, you know, I encourage those members on the 

opposite side, speak your mind. When you get together in your 

caucus and you have opportunities to talk to one another, 

citizens, express your concern about the Bill. But give me this 

chance to express my views in the debate. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to go back to it. And almost like, you 

know, they start bothering me, and I forget. And I want to go 

over again because I know they want to hear it again because I 

want make sure I didn’t miss anything. So I want to go back 

and say there are Bills that give individuals protection. 

 

And you know, when you have United Nations and you have 

different bodies, you know, you have a secretary general of 

Amnesty International Canada voicing his concerns, meeting 

with individuals, expressing his concern for the direction the 

Sask Party government’s going. But we’ve had other 

individuals, United Nations comment on the road that the Sask 

Party government’s going, advising them to withdraw certain 

Bills, that you’re going down a scary road. They don’t care. Mr. 

Speaker, they go ahead anyway. We’re going with it. It’s what 

we want, and we’re going to do it. Doesn’t matter what the 

public thinks, what organizations think, what United Nations 

thinks, what Amnesty International thinks. It doesn’t matter. 

They’re going to do what they’re going to do, Mr. Speaker, 

because they are the government. And they’ll give you the 

cheering, and they give you that old, oh the people elected us 

and they want us to do this. 

 

Well you know what? Remember one thing, Mr. Speaker, that 

at the end of the day, individuals that voted for you expect you 

to listen to the people. All of us elected are supposed to 

represent the people, do the best job we can, and fight, fight for 

low-income people, fight for the individuals who live in 

poverty, who don’t have the same level playing field. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again I go back to this. We are going 

backwards, not forward, with trying to change Bill 161, or Bill 

160, Bill 5, Bill 6, Bill 43, Bill 80. We’re going backwards not 

forward. We’re not giving citizens protection, the rights they 

have. But I remind you that the people have a right, and they 

will do an evaluation, Mr. Speaker, of all 58 MLAs, and they 

will. Did you bring their concerns forward? Did you fight for 

the people? Did you hear the concerns of the organizations? 

Did you listen to the First Nations, the Métis? And when they 

find out that you haven’t, they will do the evaluation. They will 

send you a message, a clear message. And maybe they’ll elect a 

government that will repeal some of the Bills and damage you 

have done to their human rights, to their bargaining. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And you know, you think about it, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

you think about it. There’s so many challenges out there for 

Saskatchewan residents now as it is. They’re struggling some of 

them, very proud people, working hard, trying. But you know, 

Mr. Speaker, they’re seeing things not being done for them. 

And that’s challenging for individuals who just want the best 

for their families, want the best for their children, the best 

education. They want the best health care, roads. 

 

There’s a lot of different things that they want and expect from 

a government, a government that has record revenue, record 

revenue. The expectations out there are unbelievable because of 

the record revenue. And people expect things, Mr. Speaker. 

They expect good health care. They expect good education, 

whether it’s post-secondary, whether it’s K to 12 [kindergarten 



6862 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2011 

to grade 12] system. They expect certain things, roads, a quality 

of life that they expect, and they expect a government to 

provide that to them. 

 

But they also expect a government to provide leadership and 

right now with bringing Bills forward, you are not. This Sask 

Party government is not showing leadership. That’s a sad day. 

They are not showing leadership. And they can cheerlead all 

they want, and they can say all the good things they’re going to 

do, but at the end of the day, they’re affecting individual’s 

rights. 

 

And I say this, those individuals will let their voice be heard. 

And it may not be because of they’re scared to send letters, and 

they may not come to this legislature to voice their concern. But 

I hope at the voting time, if they’re allowed to vote should Bill 

161 pass, and should they be allowed to vote — and we know 

we’ve talked about that Bill; it’s another thing taking away 

people’s rights — should they get a chance to vote, Mr. 

Speaker, should they get a chance to vote, that they’ll vote 

against the current government for bringing in Bills like this, 

not respecting the people of our province, not following the 

duty to consult. That is very clear. Not talking with the public, 

not meeting, not holding public meetings, making sure that the 

public and all individuals are heard and have a right to be heard. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know there’s many individuals want to speak 

on this, and we are still getting information. And like I said, I 

encourage organizations out there, as hard as it is, send your 

letters, send them to the opposition. If you’re worried about 

sending them to your MLA, send them to the official 

opposition. If you’re a member out there and you’re thinking, 

well you know, my rights may be affected. I’m not sure what 

this Bill is going to do. How will I be affected? How will Bill 

160, how will it affect me? What is it going to take away? And 

if those individuals out there feel that way, you can contact the 

official opposition to be your voice because you’re scared to 

share it with your MLA. And we’ll do all we can to express 

their concerns and bring them forward. 

 

We’ve heard lots. We’ve had emails. I know there’s been all 

types of phone calls, letters. People are concerned, very 

concerned about where we’re going. Meetings being set up. So 

if that’s happening, Mr. Speaker, this government, the Sask 

Party government can’t tell me that it’s not hearing what 

individual members of this House are saying and the message 

we’re trying to bring to them. And different organizations, 

whether it’s United Nations, Amnesty International Canada, 

we’ve heard.  

 

There’s groups out there that are very concerned, whether 

they’re funded by the government. Individuals are nervous. 

And I don’t know why they should have to be scared to express 

themselves. You know, we’re supposed to have a Bill, a human 

rights Bill that protects them. 

 

But then we look at individuals that have disclosed and brought 

information forward, and we’ve seen how some of the 

government members and ministers have dealt with that. Some 

of the ministers have gone out . . . And you know, I think of 

one — Corrections, Public Safety and Policing — how they’ve 

handled that individual and what they’ve done when 

information that was released to the public. You know, it’s very 

concerning when you see the way they handled that file. 

 

And then they want to bring in legislation to protect the 

whistle-blowers. And you look at that legislation and you 

wonder, what’s behind that? So did they hear the people? But 

it’s interesting the process that they want to use and how they 

want to set up the opportunity to protect whistle-blowers or 

people who want to provide the official opposition or the public 

with the information. 

 

It’s very clear. It’s very clear, Mr. Speaker. People are very 

concerned, and they should be. By the action of the Sask Party 

government, they should be very concerned. Because you 

know, Mr. Speaker, they figure their government is supposed to 

protect them. 

 

And we’ve seen in some of the laws that have come in that 

when individuals want to have . . . And I think about, you 

know, some of these laws might be good and some of the 

changes . . . Bill 144, you look at that Bill and you look at 

different Bills coming forward, the legislation that this 

government will pass, and you look at why they’re passing 

them. What’s the reason? Who brought these complaints 

forward? Who asked the government to do these? What’s the 

reason? 

 

And you know, I go back and I think of the Justice minister. 

And you know, I made comments about the Justice minister and 

different debates we’ve had. And bringing a Bill like this 

forward, it’s very concerning. You would have thought he 

would have used other methods to deal with this and an 

opportunity for him to say, let’s have a review of this. He has a 

ministry. He has officials who could have assisted in going out 

and doing a proper process of consulting, finding out, is there a 

better way? Are there some better options to look at? Did they 

look at any options? 

 

I don’t believe they looked at any options. They just want to go 

ahead with what they believe. Maybe the tribunal has made 

decisions that are not favourable to their liking, Mr. Speaker, 

the Sask Party didn’t like that. So you know, maybe they want 

to say, well no, we’re going to get rid of them. We’re the 

government. We’re going to get rid of them. 

 

But I think a lot of different organizations, I hope, will bring 

their concern forward before this Bill passes. And the 

government has the opportunity at any time to withdraw it and 

actually go through a proper process to make sure that people 

feel heard, and do a review, and give some options for all 

members of this House to vote on and talk about. 

 

But I look at protecting individuals’ rights. Individual rights, 

that’s where it’s at, Mr. Speaker. The individuals’ rights are 

being taken away. And this government seems to want to do 

that more and more as they bring Bills forward. We see a 

pattern — control, intimidation. Sure, why not? People are 

scared. They’re nervous. Why should people be afraid of their 

government, that they represented them, that they elected? They 

elected them. Why should they fear them? But they do, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re scared for their funding. They’re scared for 

their livelihood for their families. There’s challenges, Mr. 

Speaker, but we’ll continue to do the, I guess, to bring their 

message forward as they’ll contact us, and their concerns. 



March 22, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6863 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, you know, I think of the children 

out there. And you think about children with, you think about 

children with disabilities, and you think about individuals, and 

you think about their rights. They have a right to certain quality 

of life, education. And when you have that right, the family 

knew that they could go to the human rights and they could 

hear their case. And they could bring their case before the 

Human Rights Tribunal and be heard. And when that tribunal 

made a decision — and sometime it was a lengthy decision — 

but when it made a decision based on the information it had 

heard, that decision was final. That was important. 

 

But you know what? I think the Sask Party doesn’t like that that 

decision’s final. And they want to be able to have a little more 

influence on who would hear those individual rights. Who will 

move cases forward? Who will say that this one has a right to 

be heard, this one doesn’t have a right to be heard? 

 

I think individuals want to make sure that they have that right. 

They want to make sure, the end of the day, the cost. Will they 

have to provide legal counsel? Who will provide their legal 

counsel should they need a lawyer? Who will provide their 

accommodations if they need to be at a place where there’s 

going to be a trial before a judge? And they’re concerned about 

this, that it’s going in the wrong direction for them. Tribunal 

had an opportunity, different people with experience. They 

went through a process. They had the experience that we 

needed for them to go forward. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You have to adjourn or we’re coming 

back tonight. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Okay. Now? At this time, Mr. Speaker, I 

know other individuals would like to get in on the debate. So at 

this time, I’m prepared to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 160, The Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Code Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move the 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 

until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:57.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6835 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6835 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6835 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6835 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6835 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6836 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Regina Citizen of the Year 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6836 

 Cervical Screening Initiative in India 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6836 

 Brighter Futures for Children 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6837 

 World Water Day 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6837 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6838 

 2011 WorkSafe Saskatchewan Awards 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6837 

 Wildwood School Diversity Dinner 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6837 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 College Governance Issues 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6838 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6838 

 Membership in the Enterprise Club 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6841 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6841 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6842 

  Yates (point of order) ............................................................................................................................................................. 6842 

  Harrison (point of order) ....................................................................................................................................................... 6843 

  The Speaker (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................. 6843 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 149 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6843 

 Bill No. 150 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2010 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6845 

 Bill No. 155 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6847 

 Bill No. 153 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6848 

 Bill No. 164 — The Police Amendment Act, 2011 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6851 

 Bill No. 165 — The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2011 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6852 

 Bill No. 161 — The Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6854 

 Bill No. 162 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6857 

 Bill No. 160 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6858 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6846 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


