




















































Hansard: May 16, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 62A  MONDAY, MAY 16, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7631 

 May 16, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. With leave to do an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 

minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Through you and to you to the members of the 

Assembly, it gives me great pleasure to introduce some of the 

members of the North American Indigenous Games bid 

committee that have successfully brought the 2014 North 

American Indigenous Games to Saskatchewan. Several 

members of the committee are in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and 

I’ll have a chance to introduce them in just a second. 

 

Last week I was thrilled to join a fantastic team in Moncton, 

New Brunswick as we presented our pitch to bring these games 

to Saskatchewan. Earlier this morning we had an event to 

announce our government’s $3.5 million contribution to these 

games. We can’t wait to welcome over 10,000 people from 

around North America to our great province. I am pleased, Mr. 

Speaker, to introduce some of the bid committee who were able 

to be here today, and those supporting the bid as well. 

 

I’ll begin with Chief Guy Lonechild, no stranger to this House. 

Chief has been very supportive all along the way of the bid. 

Also here is Vice-chief Morley Watson, FSIN [Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations] vice-chief, former chief of 

Ochapowace First Nation and was a leader instrumental in the 

bid. Mervin Brass is here. Mervin is the director of 

communications for FSIN, and he served as our emcee for the 

bid. Also here, Mike O’Donnell, councillor, city of Regina. 

Mike represented the city along with councillor Chris Szarka. 

Louis Gardiner, the minister of sport for the Métis Nation of 

Saskatchewan is here. Welcome, Louis. Daniel Longman, 

sports programming director for FSIN; Brenda Bathgate, the 

past Chair of the Saskatchewan Games Council; Joe Daniels, 

Aboriginal sport development consultant in the speciality of 

extreme sports; Courage Bear, executive director, sports and 

recreation, FSIN, and a former games athlete himself; Shelley 

Bear, senior policy advisor for the FSIN. Also joining us, Larry 

Hiles from the Regina Regional Opportunities Commission to 

show his support. 

 

Other members that weren’t able to be here this afternoon but 

were instrumental, Mr. Speaker: Dr. Craig Chamberlin. Dr. 

Craig Chamberlin from the University of Regina was able to 

articulate the great facilities that the U of R [University of 

Regina] would bring. Dawna Neilson, manager of sport and 

recreation to the city of Regina. Mr. Speaker, I just, I want to 

make sure that I’ve got everybody mentioned here. Corporal 

Tracey Dunnigan, the NCO [non-commissioned officer] of 

cultural relations for the Regina Police Services here as well. 

Also instrumental in the bid was the Littletent family. Terence 

Littletent, the world champion hoop dancer was there, along 

with Kirby as an elder, and youth representative, Jason 

Littletent. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I hope I didn’t forget anybody, but you 

know what I can say is this group worked very well together, 

some 20 individuals who had about 45 minutes to do a 

presentation, to talk about the great province that is 

Saskatchewan and our history of successfully hosting games. So 

as I said earlier, we’re looking forward to hosting the games in 

2014 and welcoming 10,000 people to Saskatchewan in that 

summer. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask all members to join us. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — It is my pleasure to join with the minister 

and welcome Chief Guy Lonechild and Vice-chief Morley 

Watson as well as the other folks who are here today. Mr. 

Gardiner, who is with the Saskatchewan Métis Association and 

the city of Regina, and friends I see from really all over the 

province who are here today to celebrate the winning of the 

North American Indigenous Games for Regina here in 2014. 

This is a big effort and one that we’re all very proud of. It will 

obviously attract many, many youth who will compete, show 

their excellence, and also as the minister says, thousands if not 

tens of thousands of people who will come out and watch, and 

also many tourists who will be here for that event. 

 

And since its inception in 1990, I believe in Edmonton, this has 

grown by leaps and bounds. These indigenous games, I 

remember back in 1993 when it was held in Prince Albert and 

the great profile that it had for the city of Prince Albert, for the 

province of Saskatchewan. And I just want to say that, job well 

done. I understand there were a couple of other cities, I think 

Halifax and Hamilton that were, London as well, competing. 

And I just want to say to the city of Regina, the province of 

Saskatchewan, and most of all to the bid committee, job well 

done. And also to the minister, thanks for the effort that I know 

you and your staff put into this bid as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I’d like to introduce a young gentleman in your gallery by 

the name of Bennet Misskey.  Bennet is my intern for the 

second term of the Saskatchewan legislative internship 

program. And I’ve asked Bennet to — you might not be 

surprised by this — to do a comparison of whips’ and House 

leaders’ and caucus Chairs’ responsibilities in the 

Commonwealth. And I look forward to his research when he’s 

done that and report back to me. So please join me in 

welcoming Bennet to his legislature. 

 



7632 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2011 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will have two 

introductions, if I may, please. First would be Lance Hammell 

who is serving as my intern in this part of the session and into 

the early summer, Mr. Speaker. Lance is from Oxbow in my 

constituency, and as I explained to my colleagues, this is 

another attempt by Cannington to take over the government, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Lance is very well versed in what’s 

going on in the Assembly, having been a student of politics for 

some period of time now and, I’d like to say, a former air cadet 

and WO2 [warrant officer second class] of the 675 Bow Valley 

Squadron in Oxbow. This session Lance is working with me in 

looking at the rules and regulations, particularly regulations, 

that we utilize in this province to see whether we’re doing them 

as well as we could. So I’d like to ask everyone to welcome 

Lance to the Assembly. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take the opportunity to 

introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, Mrs. Elva 

Nelson, 94 years young, sitting on the floor of the Assembly 

here with her family and friends, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Elva lives in Regina now at the William Albert 

House in Emerald Park, but she comes from Fillmore where her 

and her husband farmed for many years, Mr. Speaker. They 

have a newsletter that goes out through their facility, Mr. 

Speaker, and in this newsletter one of the questions was, which 

famous Canadian person, past or present, would you like to 

meet? Well Elva, Mr. Speaker, chose our Premier. So she’s here 

today meeting with the Premier. 

 

As well, with her are her nephew and his wife, Marvin and 

Lynn Chambers. Marvin is also the mayor of Fillmore. With 

them as well is some family friends, Mr. Speaker, Ray and 

Kathy Bellamy. Ray has worked in this building now for 34 

years, I believe it is, or for Government Services. And in this 

building, and a lot of the beautiful woodwork you see around 

the building is Ray’s work, Mr. Speaker. So I would ask that 

members welcome Elva and her family to their Chamber. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of the House, I’d like to 

introduce my legislative intern, Nicole Hamm. She’s a law 

student and is quite an enthusiastic intern, great sense of 

humour. She comes to us via the opera. She loves the opera, but 

here she is in politics. What a combination. And no surprise, 

she’s doing some work around housing, particularly the whole 

issue around condos. I’m looking forward to her work because 

for many people condos are their way of shelter, and it’s 

important for us all. So I’d ask all members to welcome her to 

her legislature. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I take great pride in being able to introduce to you and 

through you to the rest of the members of the Assembly, two 

grade 9 students from Campbell Collegiate, Nasra Moumin and 

Areeb Salim. Accompanying our two students is also Lorelie 

DeRoose from the Saskatchewan Elocution and Debate 

Association. Nasra and Areeb not only took part in the 2011 

junior high school National Debate Championship in Estevan 

and Regina over the weekend, they took home the honours of 

being named 2011 National Junior Champions. I would like to 

ask the rest of the members of the Assembly to welcome these 

fine people to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

want to join our leader in asking the House to pay a special 

tribute to all the people that are here to fight and lobby for the 

indigenous games. And a lot of people ought to know that some 

of the leadership that are in front of course couldn’t do it 

without a great support team in the back. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, a few notes about the support team in the 

front. I know that many of them are athletes of old. I understand 

that Morley Watson used to be quite a ballplayer and a hockey 

player as well. And a lot of people don’t know, Mr. Speaker, 

that my friend from Ile-a-la-Crosse, Mr. Gardiner, was in the 

WHL [Western Hockey League]. He actually played with the 

Bombers when they were in the WHL, and he’s a hockey hero 

from back in Ile-a-la-Crosse. 

 

And I understand that another good friend, Lonechild, was quite 

a goaltender when he was young. I understand that he went a 

long ways, our FSIN chief. And I often have this picture of him 

as he’s reaching out. And the puck, as you can see many times 

in the NHL [National Hockey League], you see these goalies 

reaching across their crease, and I seen him spread out like that. 

And of course the lights were flashing, and everybody was 

watching him. And as he’s reaching for the puck, the puck hit 

him here. And that was quite a stop at the time but deflection, 

he said. 

 

But I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, I want to join these 

leaders, these political leaders now but athletic leaders in the 

past, and their support team for the great work that they’re 

doing trying to get the games here. I commend the government 

for their effort as well, but to point out that as a former 

participant in the games it helps many Aboriginal people, young 

and old, really showcase their talent and really make them 

proud of who they are. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone, the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to the rest of the Assembly I want to introduce in 

the west gallery 16 grade 11 and 12 students from the Bert Fox 

Community High School in Fort Qu’Appelle. They’ve made the 

45-minute trip into Regina to watch the proceedings. They’re 

accompanied by their teacher Valerie Brooks and chaperones 

Arianne Muirhead and Cory Cochrane. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to meet with them after and hopefully 



May 16, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7633 

answer any of the questions, but I do know that they’ll have 

good guidance through their teacher as she had attended the 

Social Sciences Teachers’ Institute just recently. I remember 

her coming into my office, and kind of trying to answer some of 

the questions, not sure how successful I was, but I look forward 

to getting together with them after question period. I hope to 

answer any questions they may have. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I just also want to 

welcome Elva Nelson to the Legislative Assembly. Mr. 

Speaker, I can remember when I was a pretty young kid 

growing up, my parents and Elva and Norman, her husband 

Norman, were very good friends and spent a lot of time 

together. And I haven’t seen her for quite a few years, but she 

hasn’t changed much. So I want to welcome her here to her 

Legislative Assembly, as well as the grade 11 and 12 students 

as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you I’m exceedingly pleased today to be able to introduce a 

14-year-old grade 8 student from John Diefenbaker School in 

Prince Albert, Ms. Melissa Menzies, who happens also to have 

competed in the Miss Teen Saskatchewan pageant and won the 

Miss Teen Central Saskatchewan crown and now moves on to 

Toronto to a competition there in July. 

 

Ms. Menzies is active, volunteering in Prince Albert in a huge 

number of different events, charity work, and is a positive role 

model for a number of youth her age in Prince Albert. And so 

I’m pleased that she does that work for our community. And 

she’s here today to learn about the legislative process and to 

learn more about her province so that she can better represent us 

in Toronto in July. 

 

Additionally accompanying her, Mr. Speaker, is her mother, 

Nicole Rancourt, who I would argue has taught Melissa well in 

terms of volunteering for the community. She spends days 

every week volunteering her evenings in support of a number of 

different organizations in our city. So I’d like the Assembly to 

welcome both of them here to their Assembly today. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker — I know that she’ll be 

displeased that I’ve done this — but I’d like also to introduce 

my constituency assistant, Rose Rothenburger, who in my mind 

certainly is the model for a constituency assistant of all of the 

58 in our province. She again does an incredible amount of 

work, both in the constituency and for the greater good 

throughout the rest of the city and spends a lot of time in the 

arts and gender equity and in a number of other charities and 

different organizations. So I’d like each of the members of the 

Assembly to welcome her here today as well. Thank you. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

member for Athabasca is right. It’s people behind the scenes 

often who don’t get the credit they deserve. And I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you one such person in my life — 

actually, two. 

 

I’ll introduce Nola Smith who’s in your gallery. She’s my 

constituency assistant in Swift Current. Some MLAs [Member 

of the Legislative Assembly] are probably higher maintenance 

than others in terms of the work we put our constituency 

assistants through. And Nola has her work cut out for her and 

does a great job of helping constituents with their concerns and 

answering questions, and I want to acknowledge her today and 

thank her for that. She’s joined by Susan McNaughton, who’s 

in my office here at the legislature, and I also haven’t had a 

chance yet to introduce Susan. So I wonder if members would 

help me thank them and welcome them here to the Chamber 

today. 

 

While I’m on my feet, if I can, Mr. Speaker, I also want to 

acknowledge the delegation that has joined us who were 

successful, along with the minister, in Atlantic Canada last 

week in getting the Indigenous Games to our province. It’s 

going to be a very significant event obviously, as it was in 1993 

for Saskatchewan. And so to Mr. Gardiner and Chief Lonechild, 

to all of those who made this possible, to our ministry staff, we 

want to say thank you very, very much for this leadership. And 

we’re looking forward not just to the games, but to all the work, 

the planning that goes into the games. And we acknowledge the 

FSIN and the leadership role they took in this regard. 

 

And finally while I’m on my feet, if I can, just to say a few 

words to Elva Nelson. Mr. Speaker, it is I who was honoured to 

meet her. Together with her husband, Norman, they helped 

build this province, helped build that southeast corner of 

Saskatchewan. In fact the health care centre they have in 

Fillmore today, I learned, is there in no small way because of 

her work. She hosted a meeting in her basement and got some 

local people interested in meeting with MLA at the time, and 

that’s how these projects happen. And there will be countless 

other contributions she’s made to the life of this province as a 

teacher and together as farm couple with her husband, Norman, 

of 62 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, she also answered this question: if you could 

invite three people — on the survey the member for Cannington 

referenced — if you could invite three people for dinner, whom 

would you ask? And she said: Clark Gable, Betty White, and 

Charley Pride. Mr. Speaker, one of Charley Pride’s biggest hits 

was “Kiss an Angel Good Morning.” We know that her 

husband Norman had that privilege for those 62 years. 

 

And again we want to welcome her to her Legislative 

Assembly, and I want to thank her for the chance to meet her 

earlier today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to join with the minister opposite in welcoming the 

debaters that are here today and the Saskatchewan Elocution 

and Debate Association, represented here by Ms. Lorelie 

DeRoose. 

 

And I too attended the championships this weekend that were 

the nationals here in Regina, and they were conducted over a 



7634 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2011 

three-day period down in Estevan — I know the 

Comprehensive should be commended for their organization 

down there for those three days — and they concluded here in 

Regina. 

 

And what I can say is that I witnessed the two debaters that are 

here today, Nasra and Areeb, both in full debate, Mr. Speaker, 

in the championship. And these are two incredibly talented, 

bright young people who are going to be leaders, not only 

leaders here and now within our province, but I’m certain they 

will be for many years forward, not only within Saskatchewan 

but within country and possibly beyond those borders, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I’d also like to recognize Ms. Janessa Weir who’s, I believe, is 

with them here today and is a teacher and a support with them. 

 

And now these students, Mr. Speaker, had attended the Huda 

School for their elementary school and now over at Campbell 

Collegiate. We’re most proud of these students and all 

participants of the National Debate Championships and that are 

involved in elocution and debate. I ask all members of this 

Assembly to join with me in welcoming them to their 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I’d like 

to take an opportunity to welcome a person that’s important to 

my life — and I’m glad that we in this House sometimes get to 

save the best for last — and it is my wife, Sandra, who’s here 

visiting me. It is an honour to have her here and just to take part 

in the proceedings that are going to go on and see how we go 

through some of the fun times and the hard times. 

 

But I think my wife watches us quite a bit and sometimes gives 

me, I guess, comments and play-by-plays some days I get. But 

she truly is a supporter, and she’s a proud person, making sure 

that we take care of all Saskatchewan. She’s a good supporter. 

And you know, it’s nice; we have a blended family of five. We 

have our 14th grandson going to be born in another few months 

here. So we’re doing our part and our family’s doing their part 

with young numbers. But I would just like to say, Mr. Speaker, 

it is an honour to have her here visiting us. And I would like to 

ask all members to please join me in welcoming my wife to the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, again I just want to acknowledge 

FSIN Chief Lonechild and Morley Watson. I’d just like to 

welcome you, and the leadership from the MNS [Métis Nation 

of Saskatchewan] and the team. Because you truly are a team. 

You have touched many hearts. And I think you’re going to do 

us all proud as we come together. And I think I just want to say 

let’s show all of Canada and the world and the provinces that 

we are a team and we’re proud. And let’s do us good. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to bring a 

petition on behalf of residents of the province of Saskatchewan 

who wish to bring to our attention that the Saskatchewan 

Seniors Association has approximately 180 senior centres 

throughout the province, and the vast majority of them are 

located in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

These centres provide much-needed recreation and social 

activities, as well as important health clinics and workshops 

which contribute to an enhanced quality of life for the many 

seniors who use them. And that due to skyrocketing costs of 

utilities, insurance, taxes, etc., one quarter of these centres may 

close within the next 18 months. And the closure of these 

centres will lead to the deteriorating mental and physical 

well-being of seniors, which will lead to additional stress on 

long-term care facilities and hospitals: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly in Saskatchewan to 

cause the Government of Saskatchewan to provide the 

much-needed funding to assist seniors’ recreation centres 

to remain open and active within their communities. 

 

The signatures on these petitions today, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Shellbrook, Debden, and Canwood. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. And we know that freedom from poverty is an 

enshrined human right by the United Nations and that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security. And we 

know the income gap between the rich and the poor continues 

to grow, and now one in five children in Saskatchewan live in 

deepening poverty. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I do so present. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of my constituents who live in the 

neighbourhood of Hampton Village, and it’s about the need for 

a new elementary school in the area: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes, including education property tax; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to 

neighbouring communities to attend schools that are 



May 16, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7635 

typically already reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

residents of Hampton Village. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of a potash royalty review because 

the people of Saskatchewan are the owners of a 1,000-year 

strategic resource, and as the owners of that resource, they 

deserve to receive the maximum benefit of the resource. 

Additionally, Mr. Speaker, if you have been watching the news, 

the CEO [chief executive officer] of the Potash Corporation has 

said that there’s a new norm for potash moving forward in the 

world markets, and their $732 million first quarter profits, I 

think, will underscore that point. The prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to begin 

a comprehensive, transparent, and public review of 

Saskatchewan’s potash royalty system with a view to 

maximizing the return from this strategic resource for its 

owners, the people of Saskatchewan, who wish to use 

these additional potash royalty revenues for needed 

investments in health care, child care, education, 

affordable housing, infrastructure, and other social 

programs as well as initiatives such as debt repayment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by good folks from the 

cities of Moose Jaw, Regina, and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, since 

2007 too many Saskatchewan tenants have suffered monthly 

rent increases of hundreds of dollars, with average rent 

increases of over 35 per cent. The majority of Canadians now 

live in provinces with rent control guidelines, including 

Manitoba, British Columbia, Ontario, Quebec, and Prince 

Edward Island. Rent-controlled Winnipeg, for instance, 

generated more housing units from 2007 through 2009, and the 

data reveals that fewer than 300 rental unit starts were in 

Saskatchewan’s two largest cities combined while, during the 

same period, Winnipeg generated over 1,500 new rental units. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately address the deepening 

housing crisis in Saskatchewan, evidenced by the soaring, 

unaffordable increases in rent which have placed the cost 

of shelter out of reach for far too many Saskatchewan 

residents, and make known that Saskatchewan’s housing 

crisis has worsened by the extremely low vacancy rates in 

Saskatchewan’s urban centres, which has resulted in 

drastically reduced options for renters; and in so doing, 

bring to the government’s attention that the leave it to 

market approach has proven to fail Saskatchewan renters 

and now, at this present time, Saskatchewan renters need 

protection from their government to prevent further large 

rent increases. 

 

And accordingly, Saskatchewan people would be best 

protected by enacting rent control without delay to ensure 

that the basic human need of shelter is put within reach of 

Saskatchewan renters, thereby making Saskatchewan 

once again an affordable place to live, work, and raise a 

family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the residents of 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition in support of personal care home funding. 

Saskatchewan residents require different levels of care in their 

senior years, and the personal care homes play a vital role in 

providing the seniors who live in them an appropriate level of 

care. Saskatchewan’s Ministry of Health currently does not 

fund personal care homes, although it does fund special care 

homes, which provide services to seniors requiring higher levels 

of care. 

 

Therefore we, in the prayer that reads as follows, 

respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan cause the government to provide a subsidy 

to personal care homes, permitting the seniors who rely on 

them to live in dignity and independence without bearing 

an undue financial hardship. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by people in Davidson, 

Warman, and Saskatoon. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from 

across Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of our 

finances by the Sask Party. They allude to a record that includes 

both the running of deficits and increasing of debt at times of 

record highs in revenues. They point to a record that includes 

increasing that debt for three consecutive years, well over $1.3 

billion of debt being incurred to the people’s public books, and 

this year alone, Mr. Speaker, incurring more that $548 million 

in debt, adding that to the debt of the people of this province, of 

course having consequences both now but well into the future. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 



7636 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2011 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents and 

good folks from La Ronge, Moose Jaw, Regina, and Saskatoon. 

I so submit. 

 

[14:00] 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Tribute to Derek Boogaard 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to pay 

respect to a former NHL hockey player, but more importantly a 

son, brother, friend, and a teammate. Derek Boogaard’s body 

was found Friday in his Minneapolis apartment. Derek was a 

Saskatchewan boy and he called Regina home. Derek’s hockey 

career, which spanned six NHL seasons, was spent primarily 

with the Minnesota Wild. His last year was played in New 

York. Before he became a fixture in the NHL, Derek spent three 

years in the minor leagues and four as a junior in the WHL. 

 

“Derek loved sports and obviously in particular hockey, so we 

believe Derek would have liked to assist with research on a 

matter that had affected him later on in his career,” Ryan, 

Derek’s brother, told the Minneapolis Star-Tribune. This 

statement was made after it was learned that the family of the 

NHL enforcer donated his brain to research. His brain will be 

examined by researchers from Boston University studying the 

connections between repeated head injuries and degenerative 

brain disease. 

 

In closing, I would like to extend our deepest sympathies to 

Derek’s family: his siblings; Ryan, Aaron, and sister Krysten; 

his mother Joanne; and his father Len. 

 

Derek’s brother Ryan said it best when describing him, “He was 

a big man with an even bigger heart.” Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Regina to Host North American Indigenous Games 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday, it was announced 

that the city of Regina won the bid to host the 2014 North 

American Indigenous Games. That’s a tremendous honour for 

the city of Regina and the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The North American Indigenous Games attracts close to 10,000 

indigenous athletes, coaches, parents, and fans. There are 15 

sports slated for the 2014 games, with various age divisions for 

males and females. Sports range from archery and shooting to 

basketball and lacrosse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the games are expected to generate approximately 

$35 million for the province of Saskatchewan and the city of 

Regina. However, this event offers much more than positive 

economic spinoff. In addition to the economic benefits, the 

games offer an invaluable positive impact upon Saskatchewan’s 

indigenous youth. The goal of these games is to improve quality 

of life for indigenous peoples by supporting self-determined 

sports and cultural activities. The hope is to encourage equal 

access to participation in the social and cultural fabric of the 

community in which the athletes reside. The only other North 

American Indigenous Games held in Saskatchewan took place 

in Prince Albert in 1993. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, Team Saskatchewan has won the overall 

championship at six out of seven games held since their 

inception in 1990. As a former coach and a gold medal recipient 

myself at the North American Indigenous Games in Victoria in 

1997, I am exceedingly delighted to see that the games are 

returning to the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I ask 

that all members will join with me in recognizing this great 

achievement for the bid committee, the city of Regina, and the 

province of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

2011 Junior National Debate Championship 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 

weekend, I had the pleasure of attending and judging the 2011 

Junior National Debate Championship held at the Estevan 

Comprehensive school. 

 

The 2011 junior high National Debate Championships began on 

Thursday, May 12th, with the arrival of delegates in Regina. 

There were 34 teams altogether from British Columbia, 

Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, Alberta, Nova Scotia, and 

Saskatchewan. There were over 30 coaches, parents, and family 

members also attending as observers. 

 

Delegates were officially greeted by the enthusiastic and 

dedicated members of the Estevan Comprehensive school 

debate club led by former junior national attendee Shaylee 

Foord and her partner Amber Dechief, who won in 2010, and 

Adam George and Jordan Walliser, who won in 2008. 

 

The final match was exciting with the Minister for Government 

Services and the member from Regina Rosemont in attendance. 

Mr. Speaker, for the first time in the history of the Junior 

National Debate Championships, Saskatchewan was able to 

claim victory as the team of Nasra Moumin and Areeb Salim of 

Campbell Collegiate were crowned the 2011 Junior National 

Champions. 

 

I would like to thank all participants for an exciting weekend of 

debate. And, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of this Assembly, I would 

like to congratulate these two exceptional individuals seated in 

the gallery for providing their province with its first ever Junior 

National Debate Championship. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 



May 16, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7637 

Deli Celebrates 45th Anniversary 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a distinct 

pleasure to rise in the Assembly to extend best wishes and 

thanks to a venerable Regina institution, the Italian Star Deli, on 

their 45th year of operations and to wish the Giambattista 

family 100 more years of success or happiness, or cent’anni, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

As was pointed out in an excellent profile in last week’s 

Leader-Post, the Italian Star is a family affair. It got its start in 

1966 with Frank and Gina Giambattista at the helm, and Mama 

and Papa Giambattista are still going strong with the Star to this 

very day. The next generation, Carlo and Nick, pitched in early 

on, and subsequent generations of Giambattistas are 

contributing right up to this present day. As Carlo has said, his 

dad Frank was the visionary, his mom Gina was the workhorse. 

And pitching in all together, the Giambattista family name has 

become synonymous with great food from Italy, the 

Mediterranean, and indeed around the world, as well as with 

tremendously warm, friendly, and well-informed service. 

 

Carlo has emerged in many ways as the voice and face of the 

Italian Star, and there’s nothing quite like having a quick visit 

with Carlo while he whirls about making sure people are getting 

what they need in the store, all with a smile and a joke and the 

artistry of a maestro. 

 

As part of their continual drive to make a good thing even 

better, the Italian Star has teamed up with Jerry’s artisan ice 

creams and gelatos — my favourite was Gina’s Bacio, bacio 

meaning kiss in Italian, and named in honour of Gina 

Giambattista. Congratulations to Jerry Kristian and Elyse 

Proulx-Cullen of Saskatoon on making some very tasty product 

and for their success in this ideally suited partnership. 

 

So there you have it, Mr. Speaker: the Italian Star had a 

working birthday party, and Jerry brought the gelato to help 

celebrate. May the Italian Star and the Giambattista family 

continue to prosper and make Regina an even better place to 

live for many years to come. Cent’anni. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

2011 Saskatchewan Municipal Awards 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to pay tribute to 

the recipients of the 2011 Saskatchewan Municipal Awards 

presented this past Friday in Regina. 

 

Established in 2006, the Saskatchewan Municipal Awards 

celebrate the excellence and innovative practices of 

Saskatchewan municipal governments. This year dozens of 

municipalities were recognized, far too many to list in the time 

permitted here, but I would collectively like to recognize their 

efforts and initiatives that are contributing to the betterment of 

Saskatchewan communities. 

 

I would also like to acknowledge and thank all the sponsors of 

the awards, and specifically the Ministry of Municipal Affairs’ 

partners SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association], SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities], the Urban Municipal Administrators’ 

Association, and the Rural Municipal Administrators’ 

Association, and New North, all for their contributions. 

 

A special thank you to the members of the selection committee, 

chosen based on their own distinction and achievements in 

Saskatchewan. The committee included Senator Pamela Wallin, 

Jim Angus, Holly Hetherington, Bob Linner, and Murray 

Mandryk. 

 

The award recipients and all the entries exemplify the very best 

of what we can accomplish when municipalities work together 

and take a creative approach to solving problems. These are 

amazing things that are happening in the province, and the 

Municipal Awards help to shine a spotlight on the great work 

that is contributing to the Saskatchewan advantage. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Relationship with Teachers 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s teachers are back 

at the bargaining table. We are pleased that negotiations are 

continuing, however also are ongoing taxpayer-funded attack 

ads on teachers in the media. Public money is being spent to 

beat up on teachers. Instead of bargaining in good faith, this 

government is trying to bully our teachers. 

 

Saskatchewan’s health CEOs have received massive contract 

increases while high-ranking members in the Premier’s 

government inner circle have received up to 70 per cent 

increases in pay. We find that the Premier’s personal chauffeur 

makes more than four-year education graduates who are starting 

their teaching careers. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party government has set the mandate when 

it comes to negotiations and shouldn’t be surprised that teachers 

are requesting more than 5 per cent over three years. It’s no 

wonder teachers feel they have no option but to vote 98 per cent 

in favour of job action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how many other professionals take 15 years to 

reach their maximum pay levels? Mr. Speaker, teachers not 

only work incredibly hard but they donate hundreds of hours in 

volunteer service to their schools and respective communities. 

Their selfless volunteerism within our communities cannot be 

undervalued. All they request in return is a fair deal. It’s time 

for the government to step forward and ensure that teachers are 

treated with the respect they deserve and fair compensation for 

their services. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

Union Dues 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Hard-working 

union members across Saskatchewan are having their money 

pulled out of their pockets. SGEU [Saskatchewan Government 

and General Employees’ Union] members recently received a 

letter notifying them that their union dues would be increasing 

from 1.5 to 1.9 per cent to, and I quote, “increase the amount of 



7638 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2011 

public advertising and promotion we do in response to the Brad 

Wall government’s political agenda to privatize public 

services.” 

 

There are many SGEU members, Mr. Speaker, who support this 

government, and it’s unfair that their hard-earned money is 

being taken from them against their will to pay for political 

attack ads that they don’t believe in. Saskatchewan people are 

free to contribute to political parties and causes, but they 

shouldn’t have their own wages taken from them in order to pay 

for a political agenda that they don’t support. Each union 

member should have the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Members’ statements reflect 

members’ views, and we allow members to make those 

statements whether we agree with them. I recognize the member 

from Martensville. 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Each union member 

should have the right to decide if they want their union dues to 

be used to pay for political advertising. They should not have 

that dictated to them by their union leadership. Further, Mr. 

Speaker, union members also deserve to know how their union 

dues are being used. Union leaders constantly call for more 

accountability and transparency from government. They should 

be held to the same standard. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mosquito Control 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

minister in charge, I believe, of Municipal Affairs, and it deals 

with the misguided idea of getting rid of the funding for West 

Nile mosquito control program. As we know, last year this 

funding was cut and then, after a lot of discussion, the money 

was re-stated. And now we find out again from the Leader-Post 

today, and I quote from the Leader-Post. It says, 

“Saskatchewan’s city mayors, led by Regina’s Mayor Pat 

Fiacco, demanded the provincial government restore funding 

previously allocated as part of the provincial efforts to combat 

West Nile virus.” 

 

In light of the fact that we have an even wetter spring and more 

water, which is perfect area for mosquitoes to breed and 

reproduce, can the minister tell the people of Saskatchewan 

why we would choose now to put the life and health of people 

at risk by reducing and in fact, at the provincial level, ending 

the funding for the mosquito control program? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, our government is continuing with surveillance. We’re 

putting in over $300,000 to continue the surveillance of the 

mosquito that carries West Nile, the Culex tarsalis, Mr. 

Speaker. And if we see an increase of those type of mosquitoes, 

which are usually later on in the summer — not in the spring; 

later on in the summer, Mr. Speaker — we can then move and 

help deal with that infestation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, mosquito 

control, pure mosquito control is not the responsibility of the 

provincial government. It’s the responsibilities of 

municipalities, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we put in $50 million 

more into revenue sharing. For example right here in Regina, 

Mr. Speaker, $7.6 million on top of . . . That’s an increase this 

year of $7.6 million into programs that the city of Regina wants 

to cover. If it comes so that the Culex tarsalis is on the rise, Mr. 

Speaker, later on in the summer, then we’ll revisit the 

provincial program. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister: 

in light of the fact that West Nile virus cases have actually gone 

down in the province in recent years, in large part because of 

the collaboration between the province and the municipal 

government — and I think in fairness to governments in 

general, they’ve done a very good job of controlling mosquitoes 

and actually reducing the number of cases of West Nile — why 

does the minister choose to wait, as he did last year, until public 

pressure grows and people become ill from the disease? Why 

would you wait? Why wouldn’t you get in front of this and 

make a concerted effort to continue to work with municipal 

government, as suggested by the mayors through Pat Fiacco, to 

get the job done and just put the money in now so that we can 

control the mosquitoes that carry the West Nile virus? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, if you look at the cases 

of West Nile virus in the province over the last couple of years, 

the member opposite is right: there was only two last year in 

Saskatchewan in 2010 and one in 2009, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so if there is an influx of that type of mosquito, 

we’ll be there to help with programs, Mr. Speaker, like we have 

been in the past. But an overall mosquito control program, Mr. 

Speaker, is not the responsibility of a provincial government; 

it’s the responsibility of the municipalities. If a municipality 

wants to cover mosquito control in their area, they’ve got the 

funds to do it, Mr. Speaker, because this government followed 

through on 1 per cent of the PST [provincial sales tax], Mr. 

Speaker. This government followed through on revenue 

sharing, something that that former government never would 

do. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that the 

minister explains that the system is working and working well, 

and then goes on to suggest that he’s going to change it and not 

put the money in. And that at a time when we have record 

income in the province, and we have record wet areas in the 

province, it would seem to me, and I think most people would 

agree with the mayors of the province and Mayor Pat Fiacco, 

that this is not the time to withdraw the funding. 

 

And what many municipal governments worry about as well, 



May 16, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7639 

like retention and recruitment of doctors being off-loaded on to 

municipal governments . . . In some cases now, 15 per cent of 

the municipal budget has been spent on recruiting and retaining 

doctors. Municipal government is concerned that West Nile 

virus, retention and recruitment, if they move in that direction, 

what is next? What will be off-loaded on to the municipal 

government? Can the minister commit to put the money back 

today so the safety of families is not put at risk in order to make 

a point somehow that medicare in this province is not his 

responsibility? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in my opening 

question, that the over $300,000 is still there, put in by the 

provincial government to do surveillance of this type of 

mosquito, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there was money put in 

last year because we hadn’t followed through on our 1 per cent. 

And it was said at that time, it was one-time money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the municipalities want to follow through on a 

mosquito program, there is money there put in by this 

government, like 7.6 million into Regina, over $49 million 

provincial-wide, Mr. Speaker. If they so choose to use that 

money for a mosquito control program, they certainly can do it. 

We are following through with the surveillance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t quite understand the premise of the 

question when he gets talking about doctor recruitment and 

doctor retention, Mr. Speaker, when talking about mosquitoes. 

Mr. Speaker, if he’s talking about off-loading, there was 

community after community after community that was involved 

in doctor recruitment under their government. They did nothing 

about it. This government has increased the number of training 

seats, increased the number of residencies. Mr. Speaker, we’re 

going a long way to preserve a medicare system that was started 

maybe under their government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Negotiations with Health Care Workers 

and Remuneration of Chief Executive Officers 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, a week ago, many health care 

professionals went on strike in Prince Albert because of the 

government’s failure to provide over 3,000 Health Science 

Association professionals with a fair and respectful contract, 

despite being at the bargaining table for over two years. Mr. 

Speaker, those dedicated professionals from Prince Albert, 

along with the other 3,000 health care professionals, have 

decided not to hold a strike today in order to give the 

government a chance to rethink their position on binding 

arbitration. 

 

To the minister: health care professionals are doing everything 

they can to negotiate a fair and respectful deal and ensure that 

Saskatchewan people get the health care they deserve. Mr. 

Speaker, is the government going to agree to binding arbitration 

so a fair deal can finally be negotiated? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly am very 

aware of the impact that the past three days of strikes, rotating 

strikes around the province have had, Mr. Speaker, on the 

health regions, be it up in Prince Albert, Saskatoon, and Swift 

Current, Mr. Speaker. So it does have an impact, but I don’t 

believe in any way is it any time to look at binding arbitration. 

There is still work to be done at the bargaining table. The 

employer is still there. The SAHO [Saskatchewan Association 

of Health Organizations] is still there wanting to continue on 

with collective bargaining. 

 

And I’ll quote again, Mr. Speaker, what the former premier had 

to say on this very issue when this very health care union, 

Health Sciences, was on strike in 2002. “I firmly hold the view 

that the best contracts are always those negotiated at the 

bargaining table between the two parties.” I would say, Mr. 

Speaker, has the party opposite changed their mind on binding 

arbitration? That was their view in 2002, and that was after a 

strike that lasted for 28 days. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister clearly forgets that 

Bill 5 and Bill 6 have changed the bargaining atmosphere 

forever in this province under his government. And the deal 

that’s been offered to Health Sciences is less than the cost of 

living when the Prince Albert Parkland Health Region CEO is 

getting 60 per cent increase with an extra $100,000 per year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, volunteers in Prince Albert, who have shown such 

incredible commitment to the health region by fundraising for 

the dialysis unit at the Victoria Hospital, are questioning the 

double standard the government is applying to health care with 

big raises for their CEOs. Mr. Speaker, volunteers from the Elks 

and the Royal Purple are, to quote, “flabbergasted and 

disgusted” at the $100,000 a year wage increase for the CEO 

when they work tirelessly to raise money for equipment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: there is no shortage of CEOs, but 

there is a shortage of health care professionals and surely 

volunteers. When is the government going to stop disrespecting 

health care professionals and volunteers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we value the work of all health care providers in this 

system and we also value the work that so many organizations 

do when it comes to fundraising within their community. The 

philanthropy of many, many organizations is really incredible, 

Mr. Speaker, and I believe that we’ll continue to see that well 

into the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have come to an agreement with . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would ask the members 

to allow the minister to respond in the same manner that the 

members to the right of me allowed the member to place the 

question without interference. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 



7640 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2011 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve come to an 

agreement with the vast majority of health care providers. Over 

90, about 90 per cent of the health care providers have reached 

a contract through a collective bargaining process. We continue 

to hope that is the case, Mr. Speaker, between the Health 

Sciences and SAHO, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can tell you that SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses], 

SGEU, SEIU [Service Employees International Union], the 

CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees], Mr. Speaker, 

physicians, PAIRS [Professional Association of Internes and 

Residents of Saskatchewan], all have come to an agreement 

with this government. I really do believe that there is room for 

negotiations to continue on at the bargaining table and I call on 

both sides, especially the employees, to get back to the 

bargaining table and hammer out an agreement. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — So I guess, Mr. Speaker, what the minister is 

saying is the volunteers are wrong. They should not be 

flabbergasted or disgusted. This is the norm under this 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the P.A. [Prince Albert] Health Region’s CEO 

$100,000 per year salary increase, which the minister supports, 

is a reward for cutting health services to the people in Prince 

Albert. It took hard-working volunteers from the Elks Club and 

the Royal Purple Lodge 25 years to raise $500,000. But the 

government, with a stroke of a pen, gave the CEO a $100,000 a 

year wage increase. It would take volunteers five years to raise 

$100,000. That’s a lot of bake sales, donations, volunteer hours, 

and bingos, Mr. Speaker. The volunteers are frustrated and they 

feel used and disrespected. They’re going to start looking for a 

different charity to give their money to. 

 

To the minister: the hard-working volunteers want to know why 

they should continue to work and raise money when the 

government disrespects and devalues the work that they do by 

giving the CEO a $100,000 raise. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve certainly been 

through this on the floor of the Assembly. In fact the Leader of 

the Opposition raised it in Premier’s estimates in which the 

Premier answered absolutely correctly in that 65 per cent of the 

Western average is where our CEOs are at right now, Mr. 

Speaker. All the other service providers that we’ve agreed to, 

Mr. Speaker, and settled with, are certainly well above that 65 

per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what I would say when, if you go back and you look at the 

12 health regions right now and the CEOs of the 12 health 

regions, Mr. Speaker, what you’ll find is that every one of the 

health regions is at a break-even or surplus budget, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s a huge accomplishment compared to what we 

saw under the NDP, when 25 I think of 32 health regions were 

in the red, Mr. Speaker, were in deficit position, Mr. Speaker, 

under the NDP government. Under the Sask Party government, 

they are running on a break-even or a black position, Mr. 

Speaker, and providing some of the best services this province 

has ever seen. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Road Conditions 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have to assume the 

Minister of Highways has been out and about in Saskatchewan 

in the past two weeks. I also have to assume that Saskatchewan 

roads and highways, that he is aware that Saskatchewan roads 

and highways are in worse shape than they’ve ever been in. 

Right across Saskatchewan, motorists are finding that broken 

pavement, more surface failures as the government now refers 

to them, more safety problems than ever before. In fact anyone 

driving into Regina today on Highway 6 or 33 have dozens of 

stories about how bad it is out there. Mr. Speaker, how is it that 

the minister can say they are spending more money than ever 

before, but the highway system is in worse shape than it’s ever 

been before? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

there are a number of problem highways around the province 

this year. Spring is always pothole season in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. There’s been . . . This year it’s been exceptionally bad 

because there’s been an unprecedented amount of moisture this 

spring, last fall —huge runoff. We have highways that have 

been flooding. Mr. Speaker, the extra moisture even in areas 

that don’t have flooding have again, with the freezing and the 

expanding of the water in the surface cracks, has caused a large 

amount of potholes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but the premise of that question is just wrong, Mr. 

Speaker. Our government has made highways a priority. When 

we ran in election in 2007, we committed that if we were given 

the privilege of forming government that we would spend $1.8 

billion on highways over a four-year term. Mr. Speaker, with 

this budget we will have far exceeded that platform 

commitment, Mr. Speaker. We’ll have spent $2.2 billion on 

highways, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, highways are a priority to 

this government and they will continue to be so. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. A week ago we saw signs 

that said, surface failures. This week the signs will likely say, 

extreme surface failures, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The minister also has said in the media that it’s no time to 

quibble about budgets, despite the fact that the Minister of 

Finance may want him to say something different. The fact of 

the matter is the Minister of Highways has yet to outline a 

concrete plan that proves to Saskatchewan people that the roads 

and the highways they drive on today will be taken care of this 

year. The minister has provided us with a list of highway work 

he wants done this year, but the fact of the matter is there’s a lot 

more highways damaged by high water tables than he has on 

the list. What is he telling Saskatchewan people today, 

Saskatchewan people who just want to get to work, to get to 

their doctors appointments, or get their kids to school safely and 

on time? 



May 16, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7641 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

member opposite talks about problems with highways and with 

our government versus their government. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to point . . . You know what, Mr. Speaker? I would like to 

read a quote from Hansard from March 28th, just a few weeks 

ago, Mr. Speaker, from the member opposite. And he talks 

about one particular highway that’s in bad shape in his 

constituency, Mr. Speaker. And he says, “At the same time, just 

north of The Battlefords, Highway 378, Mr. Speaker, a very 

narrow, very curvy road, Mr. Speaker, [get this, Mr. Speaker] 

that’s received virtually no support over 40 years, Mr. 

Speaker.” That would include 16 years of NDP [New 

Democratic Party] neglect, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is making highways a priority, 

and we will continue to do so. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And the people along 

Highway 378 have not expected four years of neglect under the 

Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. The minister wants the 

people of Saskatchewan to applaud his spending, and yet the 

roads and highways are in worse shape than ever. 

 

In the Economy Committee the other night when the minister 

was defending his budget estimates, he talked about the public’s 

insatiable demand for highway work, and he asked people to 

have patience. Mr. Speaker, there’s only so much patience a 

person can endure. Can the minister outline his plan for getting 

the work done, for financing the work that needs to be done, 

and his plan for helping people get to work, get to school, and 

get to their doctors appointments safely and on time? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

once again the member opposite has followed this pattern of 

taking things out of context. He did it a few weeks ago with the 

member from Estevan, Mr. Speaker, and he’s doing it again 

here. What I was referring to in the media that he talked about 

the other day was the fact that when highways are flooding is 

when I was referring to budgets, Mr. Speaker. When we have 

flood damage, we will take whatever action’s necessary to get 

the travelling surface of that road back in shape as soon as 

possible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the whole premise of the argument is just simply 

wrong. We understand that there are a lot of highways that need 

to get fixed in this province. We inherited a massive 

infrastructure deficit from the members opposite. Mr. Speaker, 

do we have a lot of work to do? You bet we do. But, Mr. 

Speaker, we made a good start, and we’re going to continue. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A lot of this 

transportation infrastructure in Saskatchewan that’s been 

significantly damaged by the flood waters is in rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We’re seeing roads that are 

washed out, bridges damaged, approach roads eroded to single 

lanes, culverts blown out. We’re seeing rural municipalities 

facing some major financial obstacles in getting these roads 

back to useable condition. 

 

Despite the minister’s claim that his budget isn’t important 

when it comes to responding to flood emergencies, can the 

minister confirm that in committee the other night he and his 

officials said individual RMs [rural municipality] are 

responsible for repairing their own roads and that he and his 

ministry have not yet developed any plan that would help RMs 

with their equipment and staff, if they asked, to get the work 

done quickly, efficiently, and at less cost? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

once again taking parts of a quote, taking it out of context. Mr. 

Speaker, I find this fascinating. The member opposite is 

suddenly worried about rural municipalities in this province. 

Mr. Speaker, my entire career I was a rural municipal 

administrator, and when that member was minister, I remember 

how difficult, if not impossible, it was to even get a meeting 

with that member. Mr. Speaker, the RMs in this province are 

very, very supportive of what our government has done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fact he’s suddenly concerned about rural 

Saskatchewan is almost laughable. When the Leader of the 

Opposition was deputy premier, Mr. Speaker, let me read just a 

headline that came out of The StarPhoenix. It was, Mr. Speaker, 

“Deputy premier proposes turning more roads over to 

volunteers,” Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this government is 

getting highway projects done, unlike the members opposite 

who told people to go fill their own potholes. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Relationship with Teachers 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Saskatchewan teachers are dedicated professionals who we 

entrust our children and grandchildren to to deliver a quality 

education system, Mr. Speaker. Teachers deserve to be treated 

with respect and fairly, Mr. Speaker. To the surprise of 

everyone in this province, Mr. Speaker, over the last several 

days we have seen taxpayer-funded ads attacking teachers, Mr. 

Speaker, attacking teachers before they return to the bargaining 

table today, Mr. Speaker. Can the minister please tell the people 

of Saskatchewan why she thinks it’s appropriate to use 

taxpayers’ money to attack teachers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Education is 

a priority for our government, and that’s why we’ve increased 

funding year over year. And we do truly thank the teachers for 

the great work that they do. It’s unfortunate that the members 

opposite believe that information given to the public, 

information only, is an attack. I wonder why they think that that 

is an attack. Do they not think that the information . . . 



7642 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2011 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Allow the minister to respond 

to the question. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — That the public should not get any 

information? Is that what the members opposite believe? The 

negotiations need to take place at the table, so we’re very 

pleased that the teachers have accepted our invitation to return 

to the table. And those negotiations will take place where they 

should, Mr. Speaker, and that’s at the bargaining table. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Teachers 

are dedicated professionals that give hundreds of hours of their 

own time to extracurricular activity on behalf of our children, 

both in school, Mr. Speaker, and in the communities in which 

we all live. Mr. Speaker, teachers are at the bargaining table 

asking for a fair contract. Why should teachers have to face 

taxpayer-funded attack ads about their profession, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Again, Mr. Speaker, giving 

information that is merely factual is not an attack. We thank the 

teachers very much for the great work that they do. We have 

invited them to return to the bargaining table. As I have said in 

the past, the offer that we have, should the teachers accept it, 

will mean that they will be the second highest paid teachers in 

Western Canada. And we think that there’s other areas that need 

to be discussed, but that all has to happen, Mr. Speaker, at the 

bargaining table. So we’re very thankful the teachers are going 

to return to the bargaining table, and that’s where those 

discussions need to take place. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the facts are that the ads are not 

factual, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it takes a teacher 15 years to 

reach their maximum pay, Mr. Speaker. No other profession 

takes 15 years to reach their maximum, Mr. Speaker. Why is 

this government undertaking ads that undermines teachers, and 

is trying to bully them into taking a substandard contract? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that the 

public believes that second highest in Western Canada is 

substandard, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker. And I think that a 

number of people, most of the public value teachers. We all 

have a favourite teacher. We all know that for our own children 

how important teachers are. So therefore we need to have a fair 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I believe the minister has 

the right to be able to respond to the question without 

interference so that the people can hear what she has to say. I 

recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, 

it’s odd. In the past I know that the NDP made offers such as 

zero. Was that because they didn’t respect teachers at that time, 

Mr. Speaker? If they offered zeros and they respected teachers, 

why are they questioning our offer now or the facts that we are 

allowing the public to become aware of? So, Mr. Speaker, 

negotiations need to happen at the table. They will happen there 

and that is where they need to happen, not on the floor of the 

Assembly. Thank you. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

2014 North American Indigenous Games 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It is my great pleasure to announce that the partnership 

of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, the Métis 

Nation of Saskatchewan, the city of Regina, and the province of 

Saskatchewan has been awarded the 2014 North American 

Indigenous Games. 

 

I was honoured to be part of the final bid presentation to the 

North American Indigenous Games Council in Moncton, New 

Brunswick last week where the Saskatchewan bid was in 

competition with London, Ontario and Halifax, Nova Scotia. I 

believe that the Saskatchewan bid’s strength was its 

combination of the commitment of the partners, the venues in 

the city of Regina, and the incredible army of volunteers who 

indeed will support the games. 

 

The NAIG [North American Indigenous Games] are a 

multi-sport games format for Aboriginal youth which provides 

them with an opportunity to showcase their heritage, history, 

and culture through a variety of sport and cultural events, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The games are a two-week celebration which attracts up to 

10,000 athletes, coaches, families, and supporters. The games 

has a total budget of $10.35 million. The Government of 

Saskatchewan’s contribution of $3.5 million is matched by 

Sport Canada. The city of Regina is contributing 1.1 million, 

and the balance is raised by registration fees, destination 

marketing fees, sponsorship, and fundraising. 

 

This is a very worthwhile event for the province to participate 

in. In 2002 the NAIG event in Manitoba resulted in an 

economic impact of more than $25 million, while the 2008 

games in British Columbia resulted in an economic impact of 

more than $30 million. 

 

I’m confident that the citizens of the city of Regina and all of 

Saskatchewan will work with the NAIG partners to ensure that 

these games are indeed the best ever, and that our Aboriginal 

youth will have the opportunity to participate as athletes, as 

volunteers, and as fans. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, with leave 

to respond to the ministerial statements, and away we go. This 



May 16, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7643 

is a great day for the province of Saskatchewan and a 

particularly great day for the city of Regina. The partnership 

that was put together for the North American Indigenous Games 

bid for 2014, we want to tip our hat to the province and to the 

city of Regina, to the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations, to the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan on putting 

together what was by all reports, Mr. Speaker, an excellent bid. 

This will provide tremendous economic spinoff for the province 

and for the city of Regina, but most important is that legacy of 

striving to compete, to succeed that so many young First 

Nations and Métis and indigenous people from across North 

America will have the opportunity to participate in. 

 

This past year we saw Tony Cote inducted into the 

Saskatchewan Sports Hall of Fame, the visionary behind the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations summer games and 

winter games, and we’ve seen what kind of legacy that has 

brought going forward. A marquee event like this can have, you 

know, take that kind of impact and extend it even further. So we 

think this is a good day for the province of Saskatchewan, and 

we congratulate the partnership that made this day a possibility. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 160, The Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Code Amendment Act, 2010 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration of 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and the Bill be now read 

the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 160. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 160 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move this Bill be now read a third time 

and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved third 

reading of Bill No. 160, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 

Amendment Act, 2010 without amendment. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Those in favour of the motion say 

aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 14:42 until 14:54.] 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 160, The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 

without amendment be now read the third time. 

 

Those in favour of the motion please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 30] 

 

Wall Morgan Norris 

Draude Boyd Eagles 

McMorris Cheveldayoff Duncan 

Huyghebaert McMillan Harpauer 

D’Autremont Harrison Reiter 

Brkich Hart Schriemer 

Stewart Weekes Ross 

Wilson Gantefoer Michelson 

Wyant Ottenbreit Chisholm 

Kirsch Bradshaw Heppner 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 

 

[Nays — 19] 

 

Lingenfelter McCall Belanger 

Harper Trew Higgins 

Junor Atkinson Nilson 

Forbes Vermette Broten 

Furber Morin Yates 

Iwanchuk Taylor Quennell 

Chartier   

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 30; those 

opposed, 19. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion carries. 

 

Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 

 



7644 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2011 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by 

the Standing Committee of Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 172, The Victims of Crime Amendment 

Act, 2011. This bilingual Act is without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that this Bill be now 

read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 172. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 172 — The Victims of Crime 

Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la 

Loi de 1995 sur les victimes d’actes criminels 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved that Bill 

No. 172, The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2011 without 

amendment be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Committee on 

Human Services. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Human Services to report that it has 

considered certain estimates and to present its 10th report. I 

move: 

 

That the 10th report of the Standing Committee on 

Human Services be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 

Human Services has moved: 

 

That the 10th report of the Standing Committee on 

Human Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answer to questions 1,058 to 1,066. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1,058 through 1,066 are tabled. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move this 

House do now adjourn to facilitate committees this afternoon. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

this House do now adjourn to facilitate the working of 

committees. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 

until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7631 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7631 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7631 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7632 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7632 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7632 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7632 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7632 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7633 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7633 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7633 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7634 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7634 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7634 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7634 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7635 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7635 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7635 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7635 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Tribute to Derek Boogaard 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7636 

 Regina to Host North American Indigenous Games 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7636 

 2011 Junior National Debate Championship 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7636 

 Deli Celebrates 45th Anniversary 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7637 

 2011 Saskatchewan Municipal Awards 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7637 

 Relationship with Teachers 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7637 

 Union Dues 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7637 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Mosquito Control 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7638 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7638 

 Negotiations with Health Care Workers and Remuneration of Chief Executive Officers 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7639 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7639 

 Road Conditions 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7640 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7640 

 Relationship with Teachers 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7641 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7641 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 2014 North American Indigenous Games 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7642 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7642 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7643 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7644 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 160 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7643 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 7643 



 

 Bill No. 172 — The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les victimes d’actes criminels 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7644 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7644 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


