




















































Hansard: March 08, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 27B  TUESDAY, MARCH 8, 2011, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6575 

 March 8, 2011 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The House is now in session. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 157 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 157 — The Oil and 

Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s good to join in this debate and talk about Bill No. 157, An 

Act to amend The Oil and Gas Conservation Act. It’s quite an 

extensive Bill. It has a lot of technical parts to it, and of course I 

don’t profess to have all that much of a background in oil and 

gas, that I could . . . [inaudible] . . . in this, but I can tell you 

that this is an important . . . When we’re talking about the oil 

and gas sector, it’s very important to the province of 

Saskatchewan, has been for many, many years. 

 

And of course, you know, it’s always interesting when we look 

back, how things were in the fall when this Bill was first 

introduced, what was happening globally, what was happening 

locally, and how things have changed over the last few months. 

And so again it’s so important that we have a chance, the way 

calendar is set out, that we can introduce the Bills in the fall. 

We have a chance to get out and talk to the sector, the people 

involved and ask them, so what do they feel about this? And 

talking to my colleagues who’ve been involved in those 

consultations, it’s been well received. It’s the kind of thing that 

they’re looking for when they take a look at the regulations and 

they say, in many ways this all makes a lot of sense. And so that 

is good, even though I know that when we get into committee, 

we’ll have some questions and we’ll want to learn more about 

this. But we’re fully supportive. 

 

This is the beauty of the legislative process, that it takes three 

readings; it takes some committee work. And that’s what 

happens so we can fully understand and fully grasp this. But we 

have been out; we have been talking to the people in the sector 

to see if they agree with the changes that have been made. And I 

understand that they have and that they see this as an important 

way to get the industry moving forward in a stronger, more 

robust way in Saskatchewan. And we see that this is an 

important thing because we know oil production in 

Saskatchewan helps our economy in so many different ways. I 

mean it really does make the wheels go round in many ways, 

doesn’t it, you know. And so it’s a good thing when we have a 

strengthening of the regulations and the Act. So we want to see 

that happen. 

We know that we’ve seen a reduction in gas production from 

2007, ironically around the time of change in government. I 

don’t know . . . People often on this side will say how things 

opened up when there was a change. Ironically this is what 

happened in the gas sector, but that is what it is. 

 

And the economy, this will help in terms of moving it forward, 

that we don’t want to see it flattened out. We want to see what’s 

happening there. 

 

We know that in the minister’s second reading speech that some 

of the changes are a result of the New West Partnership and that 

we want to make sure that while our regulations are compatible 

and comparable to those in Alberta, that it’s not a race to the 

bottom and in fact these are good regulations for all the 

partners, including the Government of Saskatchewan, including 

the people of Saskatchewan in so many ways that they’re 

getting . . . The environment is being protected, that the land, 

you know, rights are all protected, that type of thing. So it’s 

very, very important. 

 

So this is a good thing, but we need to make sure we fully 

understand the impact on our province, on our producers, and 

that the net result comes back and really helps out the economy, 

the people of Saskatchewan. So with that, I think that it’s an 

important thing. 

 

But as I said earlier, what’s interesting to understand, what has 

happened in the world in the last two or three months, you 

know . . . Particularly we see what’s happening in the Mideast 

and we think, what’s that got to do with this? Well clearly, 

when people look at the province of Saskatchewan, they look at 

a province that is stable, a stable government. It’s predictable; 

democracy here is a strong thing. We value that democracy. We 

look forward to the election in the fall, and it will be a 

straightforward thing. The Mideast, not quite so. We see what’s 

happening in Libya today, and while it has an impact on I 

understand just some 2 per cent of the world’s oil production, it 

has huge ramifications in terms of confidence of what can be 

happening in the Mideast and what will happen in other 

countries in that region. 

 

And so when we look at these kind of regulations, we think this 

is just something, business as usual. Well no, it isn’t. It’s 

something that’s very serious because it’s about stability within 

the marketplace.  

 

And we know that the producers here, I think, value the fact 

that we can have an opportunity to have frank discussions with 

the producers, i.e., when we’ve been talking about the potash 

royalty regime, that those things do come up. But it’s part of 

doing business in a province like Saskatchewan. That all those 

things when we have a good premier, the good premier will be 

taking the concerns of the people forward all the time, i.e., like 

what should be happening around the potash royalty regime. 

Are we getting our fair share? People expect that. 

 

And we see in the oil and gas sector they value that relationship 

because it’s not quite the same throughout the world. And when 

you look at what’s happening in, as I said, the Mideast, I don’t 

know if we talked about that in the fall. I’m not sure if many of 

us were experts on what was happening in the Mideast. I know I 



6576 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2011 

was quite surprised when I saw and heard about what was 

happening in Egypt. That was a bit of a wake-up call that that 

kind of stuff can happen so quickly. What was happening in 

Tunisia was happening so quickly. 

 

We didn’t realize the impact it would have on the economy in 

Saskatchewan — and it does. There’s almost a direct line, isn’t 

there, because you’ve seen the price of oil go up. I think today 

it’s over $100 a barrel. West Texas Intermediate is over $100 a 

barrel. I mean I’m sure those folks would know what a barrel of 

oil is. And they’re shaking their heads. It sounds like they don’t 

know. I’m sure they do know. 

 

But that has a huge impact on what we can do here in 

Saskatchewan, has a huge impact. And I’m looking forward to 

seeing what happens in the budget in the next couple weeks 

because oil is doing so well. I’m looking forward to hearing that 

because there is so much work that needs to be done. 

 

And I know when I stand on my feet and I often talk about 

affordable housing, a strategy around housing. This is directly 

related to this because housing, what we can do in this province 

. . . We are blessed with resources such as oil that can make our 

province so much better. Affordable housing strategy, 

particularly about developing rental stock, we’ve had a lot of 

talk about in the last couple of days — we’ll hear more about 

that — hugely important. Another area I’ve often raised, this 

whole issue around a poverty reduction strategy and making 

sure that we have adequate child care, regulated child care in 

this province. There is a direct line from the price of oil and 

what we get as our fair share in this province, and this Bill 

really speaks to that because it talks about making sure that the 

regulatory regime that the oil and gas sector sees in this 

province makes sense to those people, makes sense to them and 

they are willing to be partners with the government here and in 

a long-term way. So this is very, very important. 

 

So there is a direct line to what happened in Tunisia, Egypt, 

Libya, Saskatchewan, affordable housing, so rents . . . people 

can live in an affordable way here in Saskatchewan. And I am 

glad that we are having the time to talk about the Bill, Bill No. 

157. Somebody may not see the links, but those are the links, 

and this is good that we can be talking about it. And it is good 

that we can be moving forward. 

 

Again as I said, we have been out doing our work, talking to the 

people in this sector about what is happening and how do they 

feel about the regulations. We understand that they are largely 

supportive, and we think this is a good thing. And we hope that 

we keep consulting with them. I have to tell you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, sometimes when we talk about the consultations, and 

the other side gets a little shaky. There has been some false 

starts sometimes when we thought there were consultations. I 

think about the wildlife habitat lands last year where we thought 

there was good consultations, but clearly there wasn’t. And 

those again were hugely important. 

 

But I understand that with this case here, this is the kind of 

thing that we think is relatively straightforward. I’ll be taking 

my seat in just a few minutes here. But I think that we could 

largely get behind . . . And I think we’ve got to make sure, 

we’ve got to make sure that this sector particularly, the oil and 

gas sector, is well served by regulations. And as I said, because 

the producers look here, come here and say, this is a 

government, a regime that we can work with. 

 

The other part that I would really encourage this government, 

that’s related to this of course, is how do we move into much 

more greener, a greener, sustainable economy? And the oil and 

gas sector plays a large role as we move through the peak oil 

stage and move into a much more greener economy. And that’s 

not here right now, but will be here in the next decade or two. 

And so our regulations have to make sure we’re getting the 

most out of our existing oil wells for sure. And I think this can 

go a long way with that. 

 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again I just want to say that 

it’s a pleasure to get up here and think about things that are 

important to Saskatchewan, talk about them, the connection 

which is happening in the Middle East, and underline some 

need for this kind of work here and making sure it’s done right. 

So with that, I’d like to move adjournment at this time of Bill 

No. 157. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 157, The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 144 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 144 — The Litter 

Control Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to join the debate on Bill 

No. 144, The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 and give a 

few comments. And I know a number of my colleagues have 

spoken before me and have given information, and some of the 

information they shared, I think concerns. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to be clear to understand this. 

There’s a process and an opportunity for the government to gain 

access to a small amount of money, I guess, at a time to take 

care of, I guess, a litter problem, whether it’s containers, and 

also for the consumer to make sure that consumer has the 

opportunity to bring that container back by charging a refund 

fee and returning that fund to the purchaser. And if you look 

through the legislation here, I know the government’s trying to 

amend, and we see that there’s also a challenge to this, to the 

funds that are being paid or collected on the province’s behalf 

by, I guess, the retailer or the agent, the business. They pay that 

duty and in return the money is given over to the government of 

course, collected. And my understanding, the government use 

that on different . . . whether it’s Sarcan. And Sarcan’s a good 

program. We know that. It’s very good. 

 

We have one Sarcan location in the North. I think it’s La 

Ronge, a new facility, a brand new facility. And you know, it’s 



March 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6577 

wonderful. You know, I know it’s a good building. There’s a 

business person who made an effort to go ahead and, you know, 

build that company and actually to build a building so that 

company could utilize the asset that’s there right now. 

 

And you know, the young man that built that building, he did a 

lot of work and a lot of planning. He met with Sarcan and said, 

you know, if you would like a new building, I believe in what 

you guys are doing and I’ll build this building. And you know, 

I’m very honoured that that’s happening. And I couldn’t be 

there for the opening, but you know what? I told my son-in-law 

who built it, great job, keeping doing it. And he’s very happy to 

do that. 

 

And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a lot of issues. And 

when you talk about collecting some of the dollars that this 

government’s using and has at its discretion to use, whether it’s 

litter control program, if that’s what we’re going to call it . . . 

And there’s a lot of money in the coffers. 

 

But there seems to be a challenge, that someone’s challenging 

the government, that maybe it’s a tax. And I guess when we put 

legislation in and regulations, we hope that our senior staff and 

the people that are giving the government the advice of the day 

is the right advice and the best advice you can do to protect the 

province. But I think some of my colleagues have expressed 

concern. We’re not sure. You know, somebody’s challenging 

this, and they have a right. All our citizens have a right to 

challenge things when they feel they’re not being dealt with 

fair. 

 

And sometimes the little guy out there is very frustrated 

because he can’t challenge the big guy because the big guy, as 

they say it . . . And I’ve heard that around people’s tables and 

they’ll say, well the government, or the big guy, or the powers 

to be. And you hear different things. The government of the day 

can change the regulations, change the rule, change the 

legislation to make sure that the little guy doesn’t stand a 

chance when he’s voicing his concern and he’s feeling like he’s 

been . . . whether it’s hard done by or wronged in any way. 

 

[19:15] 

 

We’ve got to make sure that regulations and legislation that we 

pass . . . And I think we all try to debate it and we try to do our 

job, and we have an obligation to debate these Bills and make 

sure they’re the best legislation that we can for our province and 

for the people that it’s supposed to serve. But sometimes I think 

it doesn’t happen that way, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that things 

come up and there is challenges. 

 

But we have to make sure that our citizens’ rights — and I want 

to be very clear, you know, that citizens have a right — that 

their rights are being heard. And if there’s a challenge, then 

there’s a challenge, I guess. There’s something wrong, then it’s 

wrong. And sometimes you have to make amendments, which I 

believe has come forward, Bill 144, to amend this Bill. 

 

But you know, it really goes back to how people feel at the end 

of the day. We can change all the Bills we want, amend them 

and do whatever. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when people feel 

that way and they feel like they’ve been done wrong and they 

maybe hire a lawyer, or some of them send a letter to the 

minister or to their MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly], or they voice it to their mayor and council or their 

chief and council, and they’re frustrated. And that’s a process 

that they do. 

 

But sometimes they also feel that they’re not being heard by 

their government and that it is unfair, and I think they’ll 

challenge that. And I think sometimes it goes to a court, and a 

court will make a decision. 

 

But here I believe, from my understanding, the amendments 

we’re making to Bill 144 will allow I guess no — from my 

understanding and we’ll see where it goes — that there’ll be no 

challenging that piece of legislation. It will be strengthened so 

that nobody can sue or take action against that Bill or the law 

that we put on. So we’re changing that so that doesn’t happen. 

And yes, I understand that there’s a process and it has to 

happen. But at the end of the day, is the individual that’s 

brought the claim forward, that feels he’s been unjust or 

wronged and feels like he’s been taxed, that it wasn’t his 

understanding and he’s not feeling, you understand . . . And he 

might have sent letters previous and asking for clarification, and 

he may not be satisfied with the letters he got or the information 

that was shared with him from senior staff or from a minister. 

 

And I don’t know if this individual has sent that. But I 

sometimes wonder because it affects . . . The different things 

we do here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, affect our citizens of our 

province. And we’re all elected here to represent them and to 

bring their concerns. But sometimes our citizens are not 

consulted. Legislation is passed. Legislation is made that 

doesn’t allow for those citizens to be consulted, to share, or 

asked what they felt, how this will impact them. And I have to 

be honest. We’ve seen legislation passed and amendments 

brought in by the Sask Party government that have not been 

good and truly have not helped Saskatchewan residents and 

have not been a fair process of consulting and communicating 

with them, making sure that dialogue happened, making sure 

that their voice was heard. 

 

And we will always try to in opposition, myself, and I know my 

colleagues will always try to bring those concerns forward 

when they’re shared from constituents. And they may not be 

just in my constituency or in our, the official opposition’s, 

constituencies. It may be in some of the sitting government 

constituencies. Well those people bring those concerns forward 

because they truly are a concern. And this is the place where, if 

anything, they get a chance for us to ask those questions and 

debate these Bills and the changes we’re going to make. I take it 

very serious, and I think we all have to. 

 

You know, we can some days go on and on and on but I have to 

say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have to make sure that the 

concerns we hear from our constituents, from the people of the 

province, are shared here. And at the end of the day the law or 

the Bill is passed and that’s fine. That will be the law. We have 

to understand that process. 

 

Sometimes we may not agree with it. I know some of the 

legislation coming forward that we’ll debate — and some of 

them, the Bills that are there and I have concern with and I’ll 

get an opportunity to discuss them — Bill 144 is one. You 

know, we see back home in the North some of the litter that’s in 



6578 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2011 

the areas where we used to have along the highways where you 

had rest stops. And I’ve heard a number of leaders complaining 

and concerned, wondering what happened to the garbage 

disposal bins that were there. They used to be there. 

 

And you’re inviting people to come up to the North and tour 

our beautiful province. And tourism is important, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. We realize that. Tourism is important. It can make a 

big impact for northern people, for all of us in this province. It 

generates a lot of dollars to the government coffers. But when I 

see concerns that we don’t even have containers up there to 

collect the garbage for whatever reason, whether it’s cost or 

whatever, well utilize some of that money that’s sitting there to 

make sure those containers are there so that when we do invite 

people, it’s not an eyesore. 

 

And I do mean I’ve seen some of the places where there’s no 

longer a container and people just . . . It’s a rest spot. They rest. 

They put their garbage out. And I’m not going to say that 

they’re not all residents from that area. They may be travelling, 

whatever. So there’s issues to be addressed. 

 

And maybe they could use some of those, if there’s a surplus of 

money, or some of those dollars to address some of that. And I 

mean there’s something that’s positive. If you take out of 

something like this Bill and this amendment you’re trying to 

make, maybe that’s a way of showing that yes, we collect this 

for litter. But we’re spending that money and we’re making sure 

that there’s places where we’ve taken away the litter box; it’s 

now there for containing the garbage to make sure that you can 

put your litter in a box that’s not going to be ripped apart by the 

animals. It’s secure for that. And North, we have a lot of bears. 

We know that. 

 

But that’s just one area for the North. And maybe in the South 

they’re experiencing the same thing. I haven’t heard anything, 

but maybe there are areas where that’s an issue. 

 

So I guess when you see if there’s surplus of dollars that’s been 

collected, and now people are saying it’s a tax, you could utilize 

some of those dollars to deal with the problem that I’m talking 

about. I think it is a problem, and here’s an opportunity. You 

know, it’s an opportunity to do the right thing sometimes and to 

utilize the dollars you’ve collected if they’re not being utilized. 

 

And I mean you can give more to Sarcan to have more disposal 

places or more sites where you could have a bottle exchange 

and you can bring in your bottles. I know the North and 

probably rural areas don’t have much of that. It’d be nice to do 

that, if there’s that kind of money. I don’t know what’s there, 

but obviously I know that there’s a lot of containers sold in our 

province in one year — must generate a lot of resources in the 

government’s coffers. And that would be nice to see them do 

something like that. 

 

But I think like everything else, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Bill 144, 

The Litter Control Amendment Act, I’m hoping isn’t going to 

take away someone’s rights when they want to challenge things 

— you know, the government’s not going behind legislation — 

because to see that frustration, like I said before, for some of 

our individuals or residents, it shouldn’t happen. I don’t know 

all the details. I wasn’t part of the day when this Bill was 

brought forward, but now we’re asked to amend it and I want to 

be clear, ask some questions. 

 

Anyway I’d like to, at this time, I’d like to maybe make a few 

more comments if I could about different Bills and stuff that are 

coming forward to the House and the opportunity to make it 

very clear to consult with people. Because the Sask Party 

government has clearly not consulted on certain Bills with 

residents of our province, and they’re not happy about it. 

 

And we heard a lot last year. Wildlife protection, we’ve seen a 

lot of acres turned over and a lot of concern from people and 

people very clearly saying they were not consulted. They were 

not talked to. In no way were they consulted. That is a shame. 

So when we see these kind of things coming forward, it’s 

unfortunate that that’s happening. 

 

But I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ll have more, I’ll have 

more comments and more opportunity. I know my colleagues 

will have more opportunity to comment on some of the Bills 

coming forward. And we will do that, and I will take my part 

and do my part that I need to do. 

 

So at this time, at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know my 

colleagues want to join in on some of the debates on some of 

the Bills. I at this time would like to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill 144, The Litter Control 

Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 155 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 155 — The 

Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to enter into the debate on The Natural Resources 

Amendment Act, Bill 155. It’s obvious from the Bill that there’s 

very little that the Bill accomplishes other than it makes a 

committee that has been a steering committee for the Fish and 

Wildlife Development Fund. It provides that the committee is 

now the Wildlife Development Advisory Council. 

 

So in many respects, this is a housekeeping Bill. I see that the 

government has introduced a piece of legislation to change the 

terminology from department to ministry, and I see that with 

respect to the rest of the Bill, there is very little in the way of 

anything substantive. 

 

Now one of the things I do wonder about is what is going to 

happen to the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund because in 

the past this steering committee, which is now called the 

advisory council, had a lot of input into how that Fish and 

Wildlife Development Fund was allocated. And as I understand 



March 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6579 

it now, the minister will determine how that fund is going to be 

allocated. 

 

And what’s interesting is that the fund can now contract out 

services that are deemed necessary for the management of the 

fund. And the services could be contracted out to the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, the Nature Conservancy of 

Canada, or Ducks Unlimited for management of land within the 

fund. That’s interesting. We’re going to see how that works. 

 

I also note that the Bill expands the scope of activities that are 

covered by the fund to include restoration of fish or game 

populations or habitat necessary for fish or game species. Not 

quite sure what that’s going to mean. I know that there has been 

restoration of fish populations in the past. I’m not quite sure 

how they plan on restoring game populations, and I gather that 

habitat is something new, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So basically this whole Bill is housekeeping in nature. It 

formally recognizes the Fish and Wildlife Development 

Advisory Council, which was previously referred to as the 

steering committee. It provides for these groups to identify 

members who would allow their name to stand as possible 

appointees to the council. I think they had that opportunity in 

the past. 

 

And so I think really what the Bill accomplishes is twofold. 

What it does in essence is it’s referring to the ministry now 

instead of the department, and it allows for the contracting out 

of services with the use of the Fish and Wildlife Fund. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I presume that we’ll hear more from 

some of the organizations that are referred to in the Bill in the 

explanatory notes. I’m sure the critic will want to comment on 

this Bill with some rigour. And with that I would adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 155, The Natural 

Resources Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 149 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 149 — The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s good to rise in my place this evening to participate in the 

debate on Bill No. 149, The Act to amend The Income Tax Act. 

 

I guess there have been a number of criticisms raised 

concerning this piece of legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I 

guess the criticism that I am most interested in is how has this 

been booked into the budget process? What is the tax 

expenditure value attached to this item of legislation, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker? 

 

And again for planning processes, any kind of tax measure that 

is brought forward like this, the government generally has some 

kind of a nominal figure attached to what the worth of this, an 

initiative like this would amount to. And I guess the thing that I 

find concerning, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that there has been no 

information brought forward by the government of the day in 

terms of what this is going to cost the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

[19:30] 

 

It’ll be interesting to see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which of the 

corporations ultimately qualify for this initiative. It’ll be 

interesting to see what the parameters are of their participation. 

But again the main concern that I have, and has been referenced 

by a number of my colleagues on this side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker, is that essentially this brings forward a pig in a poke 

for the people of Saskatchewan to consider as they judge how 

much something is going to cost them and cost the public purse. 

 

A five-year corporate income tax incentive for corporations 

undertaking the refining of minerals imported into 

Saskatchewan; we know that iron ore is excluded, but beyond 

that it would seem that the waterfront is open for whatever. 

There’s a restriction concerning the minimum capital 

investment of $125 million in Saskatchewan operations and the 

maintenance of a minimum of incremental employment of 75 

full-time employees in Saskatchewan. But again, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, when it comes to tax expenditures by this government, 

we think they should be able to say what have they booked this 

at in terms of their planning process. 

 

There are some members that like to talk about the importance 

of planning on that side. There are some members that like to 

talk about it and do something else, but surely to goodness they 

have got some kind of nominal value that has been attached to 

this by Treasury Board and by cabinet in the finalization of the 

budget process for the years going forward.  

 

So when it comes to a measure like this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

what are the benchmarks in terms of what is the cost to the 

public purse, and what that in turn has to say about what are the 

goals that are set out to be achieved by this measure? Is this 

something where it is a light in the window that will have 

success, or do they have a game plan that rolls out behind it? Or 

is this some kind of a sop that was put out for, put out to 

Enterprise Saskatchewan so that Enterprise Saskatchewan could 

at least chalk up one recommendation that was taken up by this 

government instead of being ignored like the myriad other 

recommendations ignored by Enterprise Saskatchewan? Is this 

some way that the Premier can say that his so-called innovative 

new approach to economic development in this province is a 

big success? Again these are questions that cross the mind of 

the opposition, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But I think there is a very simple, very fundamental question 

involved in this debate and that is, what is the projected cost for 

this measure and what are the goals by which this will be 

evaluated? So I guess there have been a lot of other participants 

in this debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Of course it raises other 



6580 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2011 

questions around the adequacy and the fairness of the current 

royalty regime as it applies to the mineral sector generally but 

especially as it regards potash, which has been quite eloquently 

commented upon. And also of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

raises further concerns in terms of the approach of this 

government when it comes to managing the resources of this 

province and making sure that the people of Saskatchewan, who 

are the ultimate owners of the resource, are getting the best 

possible return from initiatives coming from the public purse 

and from natural resources that are here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So to recap, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how much is this going to 

cost and what are the benchmarks by which it’ll be evaluated? 

Beyond that, beyond emphasizing those two points, I think 

there’s been a fairly significant discussion made of this by 

various of my colleagues on this side. And I’m sure there’ll be 

others that want to add into the debate, and as such I would 

move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 149, The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 150 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 150 — The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 

very pleased this evening to stand and speak on Bill No. 150, 

The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I look at the Bill, it has two main provisions. 

One has to do with clarifying how spousal survivor benefits are 

to be calculated in the case of a person who may have been 

married more than once and how each of the spouses will claim 

benefit from that pension plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s very, very important to clarify those rules so that 

individuals know ahead of time what those provisions are and 

how they will be applied to each individual in the case of, Mr. 

Speaker, the pension plan, the pension and the two spouses. Mr. 

Speaker, we believe that on principle this has merit and this is 

good. Having these provisions in place are good for pension 

plans and in particular the government pension plans, Mr. 

Speaker, so there’s clarity so both spouses know what they 

potentially will have in the event of a separation with their 

spouse who is a member of the pension plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second provision continues this government’s, 

I would like to say, disturbing pattern of trying to keep 

information from the public. And in particular, Mr. Speaker, it 

takes away the provisions that require disclosure of information. 

And that’s a concerning or an alarming circumstance, Mr. 

Speaker, because we here are on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan and the funds that we’re dealing with, whether 

they be in government departments or pensions or public funds. 

And, Mr. Speaker, those public funds are of concern to the 

people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and this particular 

provision takes away the requirement to report whether or not 

individuals are collecting a pension. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if somebody is collecting a pension and still 

works for the government of Saskatchewan and in effect double 

dipping, this is how members of the opposition and members of 

the government or in fact members of the public could in fact 

check. And taking away those provisions, Mr. Speaker, of 

reporting makes it much more difficult for there to be 

accountability and for the law as it’s written today, which 

prevents that double-dipping, to be enforced. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have some concerns, most definite 

concerns about the second major provision within this 

legislation. But nonetheless, Mr. Speaker, the legislation that’s 

before us does make some improvements. The first provision is 

very important. The second provision, Mr. Speaker, I’d say we 

wouldn’t agree with. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at this time, this is the Bill that’s going to 

require some significant consultation with stakeholder groups, 

with some of the unions that represent employees, with 

management employees and government to see whether or not 

these changes are seen by them as beneficial, Mr. Speaker, and 

whether or not the concerns we have in regards to transparency 

and openness and accountability and the reporting mechanism 

are as serious as we think they may be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the ways to prevent people from not 

following provisions is to have a circumstance where if you are 

not following those provisions of that legislation, it’s easily 

identified or easily known. Taking away those reporting 

provisions in fact make that more difficult, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, seeing as we have several concerns about this 

particular legislation, we will want to consult. We will want to 

ensure that, we will want to ensure that we have adequate time 

to check with others. And we will want to make sure that in 

doing so we look at it from the point of view of both fairness to 

those who are in the pension plan, Mr. Speaker, and fair to the 

people of Saskatchewan at the same time. Because, Mr. 

Speaker, the legislation is for all the people of Saskatchewan 

and needs to be considered in its context as how it affects all the 

people of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the legislation before us and the very few 

changes that we have, this is going to create for us some 

challenges in the short period of time because the groups 

affected by this are quite diverse and quite large. They are 

represented by trade unions in most cases so we can talk to their 

representatives. But the impact on each and every individual 

should be considered, or the potential impacts on individuals 

should be considered before we proceed with the legislation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, looking at this from the point of view of the 



March 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6581 

division of spousal assets in regards to the divorce, or the 

separation of individuals and later divorce, and second spouse 

coming into the picture, Mr. Speaker, this has been, I think, 

long overdue. We’ve had numerous cases over the last several 

years where this issue’s been brought forward. And it takes 

some time for us to . . . It has taken some time to get these 

provisions forward. They are good provisions. We support 

them. It creates clarity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and with that 

we’re very happy that they were brought forward.  

 

On the second issue, as I indicated, we will have to do some 

significant consultation. So at this time, I would like to adjourn 

debate on this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 150, 

The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment 

Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 147 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Draude that Bill No. 147 — The Public 

Interest Disclosure Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it is truly a pleasure for me to have the opportunity to 

once again enter into a debate on a Bill in this fine Assembly on 

behalf of the good people of Regina Northeast. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s always a pleasure to have that opportunity in this 

great Assembly, although on a more personal note, this 

fulfilling my duties here has taken me away from watching a 

very interesting hockey game that’s going on as we speak. I’m 

pleased though that my team, after the first period, is leading 2 

to nothing. So that’s quite, that’s quite rewarding in itself. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it is truly a pleasure and an honour to be able 

to enter into this debate, the debate on the Bill No. 47, The 

Public Interest Disclosure Act. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

interesting that the Bill has come forward in this form. So it 

would basically, commonly, I suppose, be referred to as 

whistle-blowers legislation. And it is interesting that there has 

been, certainly, whistle-blower legislation in place in the past in 

this province. I believe it was first probably introduced I think 

back in the Allan Blakeney government. But nevertheless, it is 

an important piece of legislation and certainly one that the 

opposition is certainly supportive of the intent of the Bill. It’s 

although sometimes a huge difference between the stated 

purpose of a Bill and the actual effect of that Bill, and it is all in 

the language and all in the intent. So, Mr. Speaker, I think with 

that knowledge, one has to be careful when one looks at this 

particular Bill and suggests that it is a Bill to address the needs 

. . . It likely does address some, but it certainly comes up short. 

 

I do believe though that it is important to have this type of 

legislation in place so that we can have or give the assurance to 

the public servants, that serve us and serve this province so 

well, that assurance that they will have protection when they are 

willing to make a case known or a situation known where they 

feel that it is their duty to speak out. After all, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan people rely quite heavily on civil servants to 

provide a number of very, very critical roles and very critical 

services within this great province of ours. 

 

[19:45] 

 

And those are the men and the women who are on the front 

lines. And those are the men and women who probably have 

better knowledge of the operation, the detailed day-to-day 

operation of government, government agencies, government 

programs, government departments, and therefore certainly 

need to have the comfort to know that there’s protection there 

when they believe that it is their duty to bring forward a 

situation that perhaps is not playing out in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

So the intent, Mr. Speaker, is of course very, very important in 

this Bill, and we certainly see that the opposition in principle 

agree with that intent. Once again as I say it’s the . . . Often 

there is a great difference between the stated purpose of a Bill 

and the actual effect of the Bill. It is a little like my grandfather 

used to say: the proof of the pudding is in the eating. 

 

And that would be the case with any piece of legislation, but I 

think probably this one in particular because it is a very critical 

one to provide our civil servants . . . who do a wonderful job by 

the way. They just simply do a wonderful job, right across the 

piece, serving the people of Saskatchewan. We need to be able 

to provide them with the comfort and knowledge that there is 

protection and support for them in the situation that arises. They 

may need to bring to the attention of authorities a situation that 

is not in the best interests of Saskatchewan people. 

 

But as I said, Mr. Speaker, these men and women who serve us 

so very well and are the front-line workers and who meet the 

needs of the people of Saskatchewan on a daily basis, often, you 

know, serve in all types of situations. Sometimes an emergency 

situation will arise. And I’ve seen the case myself in the past, 

Mr. Speaker, when I had the privilege of being in government 

and on the government side of the House and a minister for a 

brief period of time. I’ve seen individuals within my ministry 

simply go that extra mile. They just didn’t look at it as a job and 

just put in the eight hours. There was a situation would arise 

where they would dedicate themselves and their time to that 

situation, to addressing it. They wouldn’t leave the job, so to 

speak, until the situation was in hand, and it didn’t matter how 

long it took. 

 

They were dedicated to the people. They were dedicated to their 

job. They were dedicated to the department, and they were 

dedicated to ensuring that the job that needed to be done got 

done. And that, Mr. Speaker, I think speaks volumes for the fine 

men and women who serve our province on a daily basis, 

sometimes in situations, Mr. Speaker, where their own health 

and safety is placed at risk. 

 

And I’ve also seen that because I’ve seen some of our workers 

in emergency situations simply stay on the job until the job . . . 



6582 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2011 

they felt comfortable in leaving that job that was under control. 

The situation was under control. And I think I would say that 

they do so certainly at the risk of, in some ways, their health 

because they just were dedicated to the job, and they put it first 

and foremost, even ahead of their own families. 

 

And I think that speaks volumes. It simply speaks volumes for 

the great people and the dedicated people that we have that 

serve us so very well in this great province of ours, these men 

and women who have the expertise that members of the 

legislature often draw on. I mean, I think probably opposition, 

you know, has that opportunity, but government perhaps even 

more so rely very heavily on the advice that they receive from 

their officials. Certainly up the chain, I guess you would say. 

The deputy ministers would look at the people below them and 

so on and so forth. 

 

And in the past, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to do, 

you know, some work, I guess you’d say, on behalf of the 

government a few years ago when the premier of the day asked 

me to do a review of a particular issue. It was called the 

northern overtime exemptions issue. And that caused me to 

travel extensively in northern Saskatchewan. But also, Mr. 

Speaker, it caused me to work very closely with a number of 

individuals within the Department of Labour. And I was really, 

really impressed with the professionalism that the individuals 

displayed, the efficiency in which they would get their work 

done. 

 

Often, Mr. Speaker, we would run into a situation while we 

were on the road — and I say we; we had a gentleman 

travelling with me, in fact two gentlemen, as support — and we 

would often run into a situation on the road in a community in 

northern Saskatchewan that we felt needed to be dealt with 

rather swiftly. We would simply report that back to the 

department and the department people who were supporting us, 

and in no time at all, the issue would be dealt with. It would be 

passed on to whichever department who had jurisdiction over it. 

 

And I can think of a number of cases where I had the 

individuals who brought the issue to my attention get back to 

me within a few weeks and say that they were actually quite 

surprised at the speed in which we were able to get a response 

for them and get action on their issue and in many cases were 

able to solve that issue in a very positive way. Not always, Mr. 

Speaker, but in most cases we were able to achieve a positive 

response and a positive outcome to the situation as it was 

presented to us. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I really can’t say enough about the quality 

of personnel that serve us here in the legislature but serve the 

people of Saskatchewan within our various government 

departments. And I can hearken back to the time when I was a 

minister for a brief period of time. It was certainly the 

knowledge, the experience, and the expertise of my officials 

that I would rely on and take their advice because these were 

the people in the front lines who had experienced a lot of these 

situations, who had a knowledge of what could be done and 

what couldn’t be done, a knowledge of what could be achieved 

and what needed to happen in order to have a positive result to 

issues as they would come forward. 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, that I think probably government and 

government members rely more heavily on the advice of their 

officials. And we in the opposition, we in the opposition 

certainly use their officials whenever they’re available to us for 

information and for providing that extra knowledge and 

in-depth detailed knowledge that they certainly have and 

they’ve been able to accumulate over years. But certainly the 

government and government ministers in particular, but I think 

all government members certainly rely quite heavily on the 

advice that they are given by their officials in their various 

departments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we rely very heavily on health care workers to 

care for us and our loved ones in a time of need, in a time of 

illness or sickness. And I think we all in this House would agree 

that we have some of the finest health care workers anywhere 

right here in this province. And not only are they very 

professional and very capable of doing a very professional job, 

Mr. Speaker, but they’re also very caring people. 

 

And I’ve experienced that myself with my own situation on 

various occasions throughout my life when we’ve had to — I 

say we; I include my family in that — and we’ve had to rely 

and call upon the health care system to provide us that support 

at a time of a crisis within the health of a family member. And 

certainly I can say without a doubt, without a doubt that we 

have received the finest service available anywhere. 

 

Certainly the professionalism was there. Certainly the expertise 

was there. But as importantly, the compassion and the 

understanding was there, Mr. Speaker. And I think in situations 

like that, in crisis like that, that’s so very, very important to 

have family and the members of the family and our loved ones 

when they’re experiencing some very serious medical problems 

and some serious illness. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is just one example of how we rely on our 

civil servants to provide us with the service, the quality of 

service that we require and a timely manner in which we require 

it. And, Mr. Speaker, this is why we need to ensure that they 

have that comfort, comfort and knowledge that in a case where 

it’s brought to their attention that perhaps a situation is ongoing, 

perhaps, or a situation does exist that is not in the best interest 

of Saskatchewan people. But they need to be able to report that 

forward, Mr. Speaker, so that the problem can be addressed in a 

manner that it certainly will have a positive result for the people 

of this great province. 

 

We rely very heavily, Mr. Speaker, on teachers and their 

support staff to educate our children and to give them the best 

possible start in life. And I think, Mr. Speaker, education has 

always, always been very, very important. And I think at no 

point in time in history has it been more important than it is 

today with the world in which we live today with the modern 

technologies that we have, the rapidly changing world. I think it 

is incumbent upon us to ensure that our children are given the 

tools to be able to be competitive in the world marketplace.  

 

Because that’s what it is today. It’s not a competition within a 

community. It’s no longer a competition even within the 

borders of a province. It’s no longer even competition within 

the country. Mr. Speaker, the competition today is global, 

worldwide, and we simply need to ensure that our students 

continue to graduate with the knowledge, the knowledge level 



March 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6583 

that is going to allow them to be competitive on that world 

stage. 

 

And there was an article that I read a few weeks ago when I was 

surfing the Net I guess it was, and I found it interesting. It was 

suggested there that the rapidly changing world in which we 

live today is going to cause our students today — who are in 

university and are perhaps enrolled in a four-year course — by 

the time they graduate at the end of that four years, 

approximately one third of the information that they have 

learned over that four years will now be obsolete, will be 

obsolete simply because the knowledge base is changing so 

quick. The information base is changing so quick. The 

technology that we experience today is certainly causing the 

world to change and our workplace to change. 

 

In that same article, Mr. Speaker, I read that no longer, or very 

few people will have the ability to have a long-standing career 

with one company. Often has been the case in the past where a 

person, upon graduation, would start a job in a company and a 

lot of cases stay there for the thirty-five years and retire. And 

I’m understanding that the world is changing so rapidly that that 

likely will not be the case in the future. What we may see in the 

future is the opportunity or the careers individuals will enter 

into will be likely as many as five and six careers within the 

entire lifetime of an individual . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

And I’m pleased, Mr. Speaker, that my colleagues are 

concerned to keep me informed as to the ongoing score in the 

hockey game which tells me that my team is now leading 3 to 

nothing, so that’s even of greater joy for me, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we find ourselves very reliant on an ongoing 

basis. And often we just take it for granted that a lot of the civil 

servants and the duties and services that they provide to us on 

an ongoing basis, we often just take them for granted. Maybe 

it’s because they’ve always been there and they’ve always been 

good quality services, and we just accept that as the norm. 

 

For example our highway workers, Mr. Speaker, our highway 

workers are very dedicated to ensuring that those roads are in 

the best of condition, that those roads are in a safe condition for 

Saskatchewan’s motoring public to the best of their abilities. 

And that goes, Mr. Speaker, whether it be summer or winter. 

And in the winter months, we know the dedication of snowplow 

operators who are dedicated to their job, dedicated to making 

sure that those roads are in good, sound condition, good shape, 

good winter driving condition so Saskatchewan’s motor public 

can travel without cause of incidents, without having concern, 

and having the ability to have a good quality road to travel on 

that’s free of dangerous conditions. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that we need to recognize that that 

just doesn’t happen. That’s not just done by people who are 

doing a job. It’s done by people who are dedicated — dedicated 

to that job, dedicated to their department, and dedicated to this 

province. 

 

[20:00] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is truly the need, I guess you would say, that 

we ensure that those same people have the knowledge, that they 

have the safety, have the protection to give them the comfort of 

knowledge that they can speak up, they can speak up without a 

fear of reprisal in a situation where they believe that it needs to 

be brought to the attention — whether it be of their superiors or 

whether it be of somebody else in authority — that that 

situation is in existence and that situation is not in the best 

interest of Saskatchewan people and that they need to have the 

comfort and knowledge that they have the ability to speak up 

without fear of reprisals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of situations where this Bill 

seems to come up short on that — this Bill, of course, Bill No. 

147. As one of my colleagues put it here a little while ago, 

when we were talking about this particular Bill, was that it was 

a Bill that at first glance you would say it was full of good 

intentions, but it certainly didn’t have any weight, or another 

term would be, it didn’t have any teeth in it. It didn’t really have 

any ability to be able to achieve the intent of the Bill. That’s 

why I believe, Mr. Speaker, it is a situation where truly there is 

a big difference between the stated purpose of the Bill and the 

actual effect of the Bill. It seems to be short on a number of 

fronts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Certainly it doesn’t have the bite to it that is required to be able 

to provide that protection and a comfort to the fine workers and 

civil servants of this great province of ours that would give 

them the comfort and knowledge that they can report a situation 

that may not be of the best interests to Saskatchewan people, 

and they can do so without fear of reprisal. And that’s why, Mr. 

Speaker, certainly this Bill needs to be looked at a lot closer and 

needs to be a fair amount of assessment done here I suppose by 

the Opposition. 

 

And once again, Mr. Speaker, it raises a lot of questions, 

questions about what did the government do as far as 

consultation is concerned. Did the government do any 

consultation? If they did, who did they consult? Who did they 

talk to? What stakeholders were involved in that consultation? 

What formula did that consultation take? Was it just simply a 

dialogue between some individuals or were there hearings held? 

Were there public input? Was there input from all segments of 

our economy and our society? Did everyone have the 

opportunity to have their concerns known, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So there’s a lot of issues here, Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t seem to 

be covered at all by this Bill. So I think it certainly needs to be 

discussed and debated even further, as we see the need, Mr. 

Speaker, to ensure that the proper time is given to this Bill, so it 

can be analyzed properly so that, at the end of the day, 

hopefully this product can be something that will actually be 

meaningful to the civil servants of this great province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks by 

moving adjournment of debate. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Northeast has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 147, The Public 

Interest Disclosure Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 



6584 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2011 

Bill No. 153 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 153 — The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to enter 

into the debate on Bill 153 and to put some of my comments on 

the record. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is much like some of the other legislation, 

particularly on this Bill, where it’s important to know the intent 

or the changes or what was driving the changes. And again here 

we have not really heard about that — what consultations were 

done; whether this was in fact the Justice department suggesting 

some of these changes; was it the judges, the judiciary in this 

case? And again some of the suggestions we of course could 

support, but some raised some questions for us. And we would 

like some further information regarding this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill repeals the civil division of the Provincial 

Court and appears to transfer some significant responsibilities 

currently held by the provincial judges to justices of the peace. 

Now again there might be some merit in doing these things. 

And as many of my colleagues have raised the potentially 

serious implications regarding quality of service, and again here 

the questions are raised whether this is in fact just driven simply 

by financial considerations or were there some discussions or 

consultations held around these changes that would allow us to 

see the merit in these being brought forward? 

 

Again people would ask at certain times whether or not a 

Justice of the Peace would be the appropriate way. And again 

this is the public who are used to having a judge deal with their 

cases now finding themselves with the Justice of the Peace, 

which in fact perhaps all of us could agree with that and have 

those functions that are now strictly done by Provincial Court 

judges, some being transferred to justices of the peace. 

 

And what functions are being transferred? You know, what type 

of cases are we going to see going to be handled by justices of 

the peace? And again as I mentioned before, what are the 

impacts on the services that people in the province will be 

looking at? And these are questions that many people would ask 

and are asking around this. 

 

And again it all comes to . . . and is quite . . . For us it is of 

concern because it’s not like the government has a track record 

of consulting people in the province. They have been short on 

that when it comes to certain areas. And in fact then we can’t 

simply rely on them saying that these were changes that were 

brought forward, that they’re brought forward because people in 

the province, or the judiciary in this case, requested that they be 

made, and that’s what they’re following through. 

 

Again some of the other . . . We look here at what they want the 

greater public disclosure and results of investigations in conduct 

by judges. Again, transparency is something that I think we all 

in the province and us can agree that we must have more of 

that. And again it’s something that is sorely lacking when it 

comes to this government where in many cases we’ve had 

instances of in fact Superannuation trying to hide the benefits 

paid to former employees or other public disclosures that they 

have tried to hide in instances. 

 

So again, we need further consultation. Are we getting the 

transparency here that is being proposed, that is being talked 

about? And particularly because this is the justice system, we 

need to feel confident that in fact we are receiving the service 

that we require. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill also allows the appointment of temporary 

judges, currently serving on the bench to come . . . to appoint 

temporary judges from outside the province. This is now done 

by other provinces, and this seems like one way to address the 

potential of cases. And particularly where we have a conflict, it 

would be important that the department have, or the ministry 

have this availability to them. Again, it seems like a very 

sensible amendment and something that we could look at. But I 

think with some of the other things that I have mentioned, it 

does give us concern, and time perhaps for a second look here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we could support the changes to bring the 

eligibility for disability benefits to the same standard for judges 

for the three months, from one year to three months as provided 

to other provincial government employees. 

 

And again we also could support the changes of the nature of 

Law Society representation on Judicial Council, where 

currently the president of the Law Society serves on the council 

and this results in frequent turnover. This way the Bill would 

allow representatives of the Law Society to serve for a longer 

period of time and allow the Judicial Council to retain some 

experience. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the overall intent would appear to be acceptable to 

us. But again, we do have some concerns as to what some of the 

service being provided by the justices of the peace, some of the 

questions about what cases they would be handling. And these 

are important questions that we need to be answered before we 

could move on this Bill. 

 

But with that, Mr. Speaker, I would adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 153. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 154 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 154 — The 

Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, 2010/Loi de 

2010 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



March 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6585 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, my comments here will flow 

from my previous comments on Bill 153. Bill 154, The 

Provincial Court Amendment Consequential Amendment Act. 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of reading the amendments here, it 

appears that the Bill makes amendments to The Small Claims 

Act to allow the government to repeal the civil division of the 

Provincial Court and transfer significant responsibilities 

currently handled by the Provincial Court judges to justices of 

the peace. 

 

Now again, as I pointed out previously, there is some merit in 

doing this in some limited cases. However, would we encounter 

some potentially serious implications in terms of the quality of 

service provided for the people appearing in court and their 

right to a fair hearing? 

 

Again, what are the functions that are being transferred out to 

the Provincial Court, the type of cases and the service? And no 

doubt that the justices of the peace are members of our 

community who are in high standing and are appointed because 

of that, in their ability to handles these sorts of things and have 

been doing an excellent job. We would not like . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is important for every resident of Saskatchewan 

to feel that justice is done and not only seen to be done, but that 

it is to be done. And we would hope that before we would do 

this that we would have some discussion on the types of cases 

that would be put over. Would there need to be people . . . some 

understanding of legal terms, of legal rights that would not be 

trampled upon before we would just simply pass this over to the 

Justice of the Peace? 

 

But having said that, Mr. Speaker, if we could get some 

answers to some of those questions, we could look more 

favourably at passing this Bill 154 on. But at this time I would 

like to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 154. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 159 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 159 — The 

University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure tonight to rise and speak to Bill No. 159, The 

University of Regina Amendment Act. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

particularly pleased that I’m able to speak after a couple of my 

colleagues from the city of Regina who know the University of 

Regina extremely well and who, during their remarks in this 

Chamber in the previous session on this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, set out some very important arguments with regards to 

this Bill. 

 

My colleague from Regina Elphinstone-Centre spoke on 

December the 1st, Mr. Speaker, talking about being a graduate 

of the University of Regina and speaking of course highly of the 

institution. And, Mr. Speaker, also speaking prior to myself, 

Mr. Speaker, comments from the hon. member from Regina 

Lakeview who spoke . . . If I’m not mistaken, Mr. Speaker, the 

member from Regina Lakeview, I just seem to have misplaced 

my notes on his speech here for the moment, Mr. Speaker. Oh 

here it is. It is from December the 7th, Mr. Speaker, the member 

from Regina Lakeview. And I will want to quote once or twice 

from the member of Regina Lakeview, Mr. Speaker, because 

some of his remarks were particularly poignant, Mr. Speaker. It 

was incredible. 

 

[20:15] 

 

Anyway, Mr. Speaker, we know that Bill 159 is being brought 

forward by the government in response to requests from the 

University of Regina, Mr. Speaker. The University of Regina 

set about some time ago to create a strategic working plan, a 

strategic plan encompassing the years 2009 to 2014, issued in 

July of 2009. The title of the report, mâmawohkamâtowin: Our 

Work, Our People, Our Communities. Mr. Speaker, a report that 

highlight some of the direction that the University of Regina 

wants to take, Mr. Speaker. 

 

President of the University of Regina, Dr. Vianne Timmons, 

was instrumental in putting the report together, Mr. Speaker. 

And I’d just like to read briefly from the executive summary of 

the University of Regina’s report because it sheds some light on 

how this Bill came to be developed. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, the executive summary of the report 

indicates that: 

 

A facilitation team was formed and prepared to gather 

information and input from stakeholders. Consultations 

[that’s at the university, Mr. Speaker] were launched in 

January 2009. More than 100 meetings . . . held with 

faculty, staff, students, alumni, retirees, administrators, 

government officials, professional organizations, and 

educational partners. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we hear frequently in the Chamber here about the 

importance of consultation but more importantly about the lack 

of consultation undertaken by the Saskatchewan Party 

government in preparing their legislation and, Mr. Speaker, in 

delivering on that legislation. But, Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan Party government could learn a lot from the 

University of Regina strategic planning team, Mr. Speaker. 

Their consultations were quite extensive. 

 

That having been said, Mr. Speaker, we now see legislation 

that’s been brought forward for which there is, and the minister 

in presenting the Bill in second reading indicated that, there 

isn’t 100 per cent agreement. Or in the minister’s own words, 

Mr. Speaker, the minister says, it’s always . . . just a minute . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . I will. The minister says, be sure to 

get it right. I want to make sure I get it right. Anyway not 

wanting to hold things up, he says, “I wouldn’t want this 



6586 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2011 

[legislation] to be categorized as having universal support.” 

That’s a quote from the minister’s opening remarks, second 

reading on November the 30th.  

 

He says, “I wouldn’t want this to be categorized as having 

universal support,” which means, Mr. Speaker, that we in the 

opposition are going to have to look very carefully at all of the 

clauses to discover exactly where the lack of support is and why 

that is, Mr. Speaker, because of course the minister doesn’t 

share his consultations with the legislature or the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So that having been said, Mr. Speaker, let me just continue with 

some comments from the executive summary of the University 

of Regina’s strategic plan. They indicated that: 

 

Information gathered in these consultations, as well as . . . 

more than 40 written submissions and more than 1,100 

responses to a series of online surveys . . . [fed] the 

creation of this strategic plan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we know that there’s an awful lot of interest in 

what happens at the University of Regina and a lot of concern, 

dedication, and commitment to the future of this fine institution, 

Mr. Speaker. And the administrative and governing bodies at 

the University of Regina recognizes that and wants to make 

sure we do this right. Even more important, Mr. Speaker, that 

we therefore in the opposition know that we’re working with 

the university’s needs, Mr. Speaker, as opposed to what the 

Sask Party may be attempting to do. We need to have clarity on 

that, Mr. Speaker, complete clarification. 

 

The planning consultations [says the strategic plan] 

revealed a deep, widespread commitment to the future 

success of the University of Regina. They also revealed a 

call for greater engagement, an openness to change, a 

realization that . . . [the size of the institution] is an asset, 

and a conviction that sustainability, in the broadest sense, 

needs to be a major emphasis of the University. As a 

result, revised vision, values, and mission statements are 

part of the strategic plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the president of the university indicates that, as a 

result of this report, the administrative team at the University of 

Regina: 

 

. . . will position the University . . . at the centre of this 

new Saskatchewan, rooted in and responding to the needs 

and aspirations of our students, our people and our 

communities and reaching out to the world around us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this report, strategic planning report, does indeed 

outline direction that the university wishes to take forward into 

the future. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what does the legislation do for us? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, let’s look at a couple of the things that are here as we 

move through the 21st century, Mr. Speaker, and what are the 

requirements for change that are being presented to us for 

discussion here. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, something that I would imagine very 

few people in the province fully understand or recognize is a 

provision that would indeed eliminate the visitor — and I quote 

that term, Mr. Speaker, “visitor”, v-i-s-i-t-o-r — the visitor from 

the university. Mr. Speaker, this is an old term that we don’t use 

much any more, but the visitor is effectively a judge who is 

outside the whole of the structure who can make decisions 

around disputes within the university. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this visitor has, for all intents and purposes, been 

the Lieutenant Governor in the province of Saskatchewan. What 

has happened in practice, however, Mr. Speaker, is that any 

time an issue arose that was supposed to go to the Lieutenant 

Governor — the visitor in the terms of the Act — the 

Lieutenant Governor had the ability to refer it. And of course it 

was immediately referred to a court and a judge of the Court of 

Queen’s Bench. 

 

What this legislation does, Mr. Speaker, is eliminate the term 

“visitor,” the concept of visitor, and says if there are any 

disputes, it will go not through the Lieutenant Governor as a 

visitor, but they’ll go directly to a judge of the Court of Queen’s 

Bench. So in all practicality, Mr. Speaker, this change doesn’t 

actually make any real change for the people who are involved 

in disputes. So, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the first provisions in 

this piece of legislation. 

 

The second change relates to the number of people who are 

required to sign to have a special meeting of convocation. 

Convocation, Mr. Speaker, defined by the legislation and 

practice, means all the alumni of the University of Regina. And, 

Mr. Speaker, after quite a number of years, it now would appear 

that the number of those who are eligible to be a part of 

convocation, Mr. Speaker, amounts to more than 50,000 

individuals, maybe as high, I’m told, as 56,000 individuals. 

 

Well a meeting of the convocation, or potentially 56,000 

people, by legislation could be called by as few as 25 people. 

Mr. Speaker, the university has requested and the government 

has responded in this legislation to increase that number to 50. 

So if there is a petition of 50 people, now a special meeting can 

be called. Well, Mr. Speaker, it only makes sense, I think, when 

you think about the growing number of alumni at the University 

of Saskatchewan, the growing population there, the costs 

involved in all of this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Communication with the alumni is very important. And that, the 

university tells us, will be handled in a number of other ways. 

And so therefore the potential of communication or contacting 

everybody for a special meeting, the provision, the bar has been 

raised somewhat here, Mr. Speaker. And that seems to have 

general support across the piece. 

 

The challenging part of the legislation, Mr. Speaker, as we 

understand it at this point, is the provision that relates to the 

chancellor and effectively how the chancellor should be 

selected. It was traditional that, under the legislation as it sits 

right now, the chancellor would be selected by convocation or 

in fact those 56,000 alumni, Mr. Speaker. This meant that every 

time a chancellor needed to be selected, there would have to be 

a special mailing to all the people that they could locate who 

had ever been graduates of the University of Regina, and this 

mailing could be quite expensive. 

 

The proposal in this legislation is to have the job of hiring done 



March 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6587 

by the senate which is a group of about 100 people and 

reflecting a broad cross-section of graduates and geographic 

areas throughout the province, Mr. Speaker. This is an area 

where in fact, again to go back to the minister’s words, Mr. 

Speaker, where he said, I don’t want this to be categorized as 

having universal support. 

 

I think there are a number of people who believe that the 

chancellors, the way of choosing a chancellor should not be 

changed. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ll need to ensure that we 

understand exactly, as close as we can anyway, how much of a 

challenge this is for the university and its graduates. Let’s face 

it, Mr. Speaker, the selection of a chancellor is an important 

role of graduates. It has been in the past, and many people value 

that role that they’ve always played in assisting the university to 

find the right chancellor. 

 

So we know there are some people who aren’t totally at ease 

with this. And of course before we can move this Bill forward 

or before we can agree to accept all of the provisions in the Bill, 

we’ll need to have some assurances that this will really work. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, another section relates as to how the senate 

itself operates and effectively the rules that are going to be kept 

in the senate bylaws as opposed to the legislation. This will 

allow for the ability to make amendments, where that’s 

required, through the senate as opposed to coming back to the 

legislature for those kind of procedural amendments. And that’s 

very similar to much of the corporate legislation that we do in 

this legislature, and that seems to make sense as well, Mr. 

Speaker.  

 

So, you know, a number of other things that have been 

presented, by and large, Mr. Speaker, we recognize the process 

and the policy as being driven by the university — a first-class 

university, renowned nationwide and worldwide, Mr. Speaker, 

an institution with a strong administrative and governing body, 

Mr. Speaker. And we’re very supportive of the work that the 

University of Regina has done to get us to this point. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by and large, the legislation itself appears to 

reflect the express needs of those at the University of Regina. 

And, Mr. Speaker, over the next very short period of time, Mr. 

Speaker, we will be, the official opposition, in a better position 

to determine our position on the future of this legislation. So 

until that occurs, Mr. Speaker, and until others of my colleagues 

have had a chance to speak about this legislation, I would move 

that debate on this legislation be now adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 159, The University of 

Regina Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move the 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 

until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 20:30.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 157 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6575 

 Bill No. 144 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6576 

 Bill No. 155 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6578 

 Bill No. 149 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6579 

 Bill No. 150 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2010 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6580 

 Bill No. 147 — The Public Interest Disclosure Act 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6581 

 Bill No. 153 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6584 

 Bill No. 154 — The Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, 2010 

 Loi de 2010 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 
  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6585 

 Bill No. 159 — The University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6585 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


