




















































Hansard: May 04, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 56A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 4, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7495 

 May 4, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before routine proceedings and according to 

section 30 of the Ombudsman and children’s Act, I do lay on 

the Table the 2011 annual report of the child’s advocate. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through to all members of this Assembly it’s an honour to 

introduce the newly re-elected Member of Parliament for 

Regina Qu’Appelle, Andrew Scheer, who has joined us here 

today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this House will know that at dissolution and still 

today as tradition of the House of Commons, Mr. Scheer is also 

the Deputy Speaker in the House of Commons. We also know 

that the Speaker did not seek re-election. And so they will be 

choosing a new Speaker in Ottawa in the House of Commons, 

and there is a good chance that someone from the province of 

Saskatchewan will be able to be the Speaker of the House of 

Commons. 

 

So we want to, through your good offices, sir, and through the 

members’ offices here, encourage members of parliament to 

vote for Andrew Scheer as the Speaker for the House of 

Commons. Maybe some calls to Quebec and across the country 

from our colleagues across the way can also build some support 

for Mr. Scheer. But I want to introduce him to you, Mr. 

Speaker, and welcome him to his provincial Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, two quick introductions in groups 

that will be more formally introduced by other members in the 

Assembly. I want to introduce and welcome a friend from Swift 

Current, Jerry Funk. Well actually from just south of Swift 

Current. Jerry’s with one of the great firefighters in the city of 

Swift Current and been a friend for a while. And it looks like 

he’s here with a group of students from Wymark, including his 

daughter Rebecca. There she is. So we say hello to both of them 

and to all of the students. I know the member will introduce 

them more formally in a moment. 

 

And finally while I’m on my feet, in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 

with another delegation that I think will be introduced is 

Delphine Gossner, who was a bridesmaid for Tami a few years 

ago when we got married and is also a good friend. I’m grateful 

that she didn’t talk Tami out of making a terrible mistake on 

that occasion. And we want to welcome these folks as well to 

their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join 

with the Premier in welcoming Andrew here to the Assembly. 

And having been a few elections both on the winning side and 

losing side, I’d much prefer your position. But I did want to say 

congratulations to you and your team. Great job. 

 

And I also want to say that on a number of occasions, Andrew 

and I have had an opportunity to go to receptions. And I always 

find very interesting discussions, especially with your wife, 

who of course is a Ryan. And we’re very pleased that Steve 

Ryan, your brother-in-law, is running for us in Regina 

Qu’Appelle. So it is in fact a family affair. But I did want to say 

in a serious way, congratulations to you, and you’re doing a 

great job. Keep it up. And we’ll be looking to you for some 

interesting results in certain areas, so thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing, the member from 

Wood River. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 

two separate introductions I’d like to make, Mr. Speaker. To 

you and through you to the Assembly I’d like to introduce a 

very special visitor that’s seated in your gallery today. It’s my 

pleasure to welcome back to Saskatchewan, US [United States] 

federal Chief Judge Ralph Erickson. And also seated with 

Judge Erickson today are Wade Warren, chief probation officer 

for North Dakota, and Delphine Gossner who is the director of 

clinical services, Corrections, Public Safety and Policing in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you may recall that my ministry signed a historic 

memorandum of understanding with US Federal Probation and 

Pretrial Services in the District of North Dakota in August of 

2000. Later today I will be pleased to join with Chief Judge 

Erickson in signing a 12-month extension of that agreement. 

And we’ll have a little more to say on that a little bit later in a 

member’s statement, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask 

all members to join me in welcoming Judge Erickson and his 

delegation to Saskatchewan and let’s give them a warm 

welcome. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

introduce a school group from Wymark. There’s 16 grade 8 

students in the west gallery, and a long-time friend, Brad 

Gasper. Brad brings a school group here, it seems like every 

year, so it’s great to welcome Brad and his school group back to 

the Assembly. 

 

And with Brad, as mentioned by the Premier, Jerry Funk. But 

also there’s Trudi Banman and Claudia Olney. Unfortunately I 

won’t be able to meet with this group after question period, Mr. 

Speaker, because I will be busy, but the member from Cypress 

Hills has volunteered to meet with the school group and be able 

to discuss some issues and answer some questions. So I would 

ask all members to join with me in welcoming Brad and his 

school group here to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 

the minister on behalf of the official opposition to welcome 



7496 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2011 

Judge Erickson and the other guests that are in your gallery 

today and join in the introduction of them to the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

We know that crime doesn’t, and criminals do not respect 

provincial boundaries, and they don’t respect international 

boundaries. And any co-operation between our correction and 

policing services or justice systems across all those boundaries 

is welcome and invaluable, Mr. Speaker. So again, on behalf of 

the official opposition, I want to join with the minister in 

welcoming our guests here today, and I look forward to a 

renewal of current agreements and progress and advancement. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the west gallery, 

I’d like to introduce to you and through you, 32 grade 5 

students from Delisle Elementary School. Accompanying these 

32 grade 5 students are teachers, Ms. Donna Dreher and Mr. 

Brent Reis. Also a number of chaperones, and I hope the 

number of chaperones aren’t indicative of the behaviour of the 

students, but they brought quite a few down. I’d like to 

introduce them as well: Tammy Wiebe, Amanda Kemp, Dean 

Yuzik, Andrea Neufeld, Linda Keilo, Kim Smith, Dorothy 

Carnell, Udelle Milton, Laurie Gratton, Angela Wiens, and Kim 

Nickel. And we will have a photo after question period, and I 

will join them for a meeting with the students and take their 

questions at that time. So please join me in welcoming the 

students and chaperones and parents from Delisle Elementary 

School. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you some individuals seated in the 

east gallery. They come here today all the way from Red Earth 

Cree Nation, which is a fair distance to travel, Mr. Speaker. 

And they come on the heels of a fairly monumental flood 

fighting efforts which saw upwards of 250 individuals 

evacuated. A great number of families affected, and a lot of 

stress for those people certainly, but particularly on the 

leadership of the community going through something like that. 

 

So I want to extend congratulations to them on behalf of the 

official opposition for the solid effort, putting up with the stress 

in that hard time for the Red Earth Cree Nation. But I also want 

to thank Chief Ian McKay for leading the delegation here today, 

as well as Elder Abelard Nawakayas. It’s good to see them here 

in their Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and hopefully we 

can get them some answers for some questions that they have 

here today. But in closing, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say to them, 

ta wow. Welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It is indeed a pleasure to join with the member 

opposite and to welcome the group from Red Earth here today 

and to thank them and to let them know that certainly we all are 

with them as they strive to meet the challenges that Mother 

Earth has put before us. We’re working with all First Nations 

across Saskatchewan to ensure that they have the resources 

necessary to deal with this. But most importantly are the human 

resources and the people and the dedication, and I thank them 

for doing that and for being here today to set a great example. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the 

minister and the member from Elphinstone in welcoming Chief 

Ian McKay and his council and others who are here. I did have 

a chance to say just hello briefly in the hallway in the rotunda, 

but I understand our caucus members and our committee met 

on the issues of flooding and other issues. 

 

But I just want to say that to all Saskatchewan families who 

were affected by the serious flooding, along with the members 

from Red Earth that we are very, very concerned about it. And 

in saying that, also the fact that the emergency measures and 

the volunteers across the province who are working so 

extremely hard, sometimes in very adverse conditions, Katepwa 

and other places, that it’s not going unnoticed by others across 

Canada that Saskatchewan is a very unique place where, when 

we get into these difficult times, we band together and get the 

job done. And I just want to say keep up the good work, and 

we’ll be there to support. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to 

welcome the residents of Red Earth. And I know that they’ve 

had quite a few problems out there over the years, there’s been 

some diking done and obviously there’s more work to do, Mr. 

Speaker. But I know it’s a long trip down here because I make 

that trip every week, and they’re actually farther north than 

what I am. So I want to thank them for coming down to their 

Assembly and bringing their concerns with them. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

So in my own language of Cree, I just said, Mr. Speaker, that 

I’m glad that they’re here. This is their House and I’m 

especially glad that the young people are here and that they 

have to keep their struggles and their fight always at the 

forefront. So again in my own Cree language: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — Members, I note up in the gallery, Lenni 

Frohman from our Hansard and director of parliamentary 

publications is in the gallery, and so I extend an invitation to 

Lenni this afternoon. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



May 4, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7497 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present petitions on behalf of people that support quality health 

care services in the province. 

 

The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth that the Government of 

Saskatchewan ought to recognize the need for timely 

access to comprehensive and quality health care services 

for all communities within the province, including Wakaw 

and surrounding areas, and that the disruption of 

emergency services and in-patient services at Wakaw 

Hospital will not serve the needs of the residents of this 

community and surrounding areas; and 

 

That the cuts in access to timely and accurate diagnostic 

and laboratory services within the community of Wakaw 

and surrounding areas will not serve the needs of the 

residents either. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintain quality health care 

services through the commitment of necessary funding to 

address critical retention and recruitment issues. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The many signatures on these petitions today, Mr. Speaker, are 

from Wakaw, Regina, Martensville, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, 

Estevan, Cudworth, Belle Plaine, Yorkton, Bellevue, Yellow 

Creek, Middle Lake, Rosthern, and Wakaw. Thanks, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty 

here in Saskatchewan. We know that freedom from poverty is 

an enshrined human right by the United Nations, and all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security. We know 

that Saskatchewan’s income gap between the rich and the poor 

continues to grow, and one in five children in Saskatchewan 

now live in deepening poverty. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I do so present. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of a potash royalty review because 

the citizens of Saskatchewan are the owners of a thousand-year 

supply of a strategic resource, and those same people deserve to 

receive the maximum benefit for that resource or from that 

resource, Mr. Speaker. Additionally, the CEO [chief executive 

officer] of a major potash company in Saskatchewan said that 

there’s a new norm for potash moving forward in the global 

economy. And the prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to begin a 

comprehensive, transparent, and public review of 

Saskatchewan’s potash royalty system with a view to 

maximizing the return from this strategic resource for its 

owners, the people of Saskatchewan, who wish to use this 

additional potash royalty revenue for needed investments 

in health care, child care, education, affordable housing, 

infrastructure, and other social programs as well as public 

initiatives such as debt repayment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition today is signed by good folks from 

Ituna, Melville, and Fenwood, Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise yet 

again today to present a petition on restoring funding equity to 

Regina Catholic schools. Regina Catholic schools received 

$275 less than Regina public schools in the last fiscal year, 

amounting to a funding inequity of $2.7 million in total. The 

funding inequity places program delivery and staffing levels at 

risk, Mr. Speaker, and we’re already seeing program cuts for 

the fall of 2011 in terms of the students returning back to 

school. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan has denied Catholic school 

boards in the province representation on the 

government-appointed committee mandated to develop a 

long-term funding formula for Saskatchewan school boards. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to address the funding inequity between 

Regina Catholic schools and Regina public schools that 

provides $275 less per pupil funding for Regina Catholic 

school students, totalling $2.7 million, and make known 

that the continuation for another school year of funding 

inequity places program delivery and staffing levels at risk 

in Regina Catholic schools; and in so doing, immediately 

restore funding equity to ensure that every student in 

Saskatchewan, whether enrolled in a Catholic or a public 

school, receives equitable resources to ensure every 

student in Saskatchewan has access to a quality education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by residents of Regina, 

Lumsden, and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 



7498 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2011 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again 

today to present a petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan 

concerned about the detrimental effect that Bill 160 would have 

on our human rights law if enacted. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

withdraw Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public 

consultations informed by a public policy paper before 

any amendments to the Human Rights Code, the law that 

supersedes all others in our province, are even considered. 

 

And today the petition is signed by residents of Regina and I so 

present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from 

across Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of our 

finances by the Sask Party. They allude to a record that includes 

the increasing of debt and running of deficits at a time of 

unprecedented highs in revenues, Mr. Speaker, recognizing that 

there’s consequences both now and well into the future for this 

type of management, Mr. Speaker, running this year . . . piling 

up debt to the tune of $548 million, Mr. Speaker. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today, Mr. Speaker, are signed by concerned 

residents of Saskatoon and Moose Jaw. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 

 

Multiple Sclerosis Awareness Month 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May is National 

MS [multiple sclerosis] Awareness Month. Multiple sclerosis is 

a disease. It is an unpredictable, often disabling disease of the 

central nervous system. MS affects vision, hearing, memory, 

balance, and mobility. Its effects are physical, emotional, 

financial, and last a lifetime. While it is most often diagnosed in 

young adults aged 15 to 40, we know that it affects children, 

even some as young as two years old. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is following through on our 

commitment and has invested $5 million to fund clinical trial 

for the multiple sclerosis liberation procedure. Ours is the first 

province to move forward on initiating clinical trials of the 

liberation procedure. This liberation procedure is a potentially 

groundbreaking discovery for the treatment of MS. We are 

aware that it is still in the trial stages and is not yet proven as a 

scientifically valid therapy, but this funding will help determine 

its validity as a treatment for MS. 

 

MS research is extremely important to the people of 

Saskatchewan. Our government is moving forward in search for 

a cure of this deadly disease. I encourage all of my colleagues 

to keep those who are affected with multiple sclerosis in their 

thoughts and prayers. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

International Firefighters’ Day 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to 

recognize May 4th as International Firefighters’ Day. 

Firefighters dedicate their lives to protection of life and 

property. Sometimes that dedication is in the form of countless 

hours volunteered, and then again it is many selfless years 

working in the industry. In all cases, it risks the ultimate 

sacrifice of a firefighter’s life. 

 

International Firefighters’ Day is a time when the world’s 

community can recognize and honour the sacrifices that 

firefighters make to ensure that their communities and 

environment are as safe as possible. It is also a day in which 

current and past firefighters can be thanked for their 

contributions. International Firefighters’ Day is observed each 

year on the 4th of May. On this day, you’re invited to 

remember the past firefighters who have died while serving our 

community or dedicated their lives to protecting the safety of us 

all. At the same time, we can show our support and appreciation 

to the firefighters worldwide who continue to protect us so well 

throughout the year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we must also continue to protect and advocate 

these brave women and men. The firefighters are at increased 

risk for cancer because of their work. We must continue to 

monitor and expand the list of potential disease risks our 

firefighters face in the workplace. As our knowledge grows 

regarding their exposure to risks, so should our protection and 

compensation for these selfless workers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in showing our 

gratitude and recognize these brave women and men. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last Mountain 

Touchwood. 

 

Mental Health Week 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this week 

is Mental Health Week in Canada. It’s an important year for the 

Canadian Mental Health Association as this year marks the 60th 

anniversary of this organization’s improving people’s 

understanding of mental health. 

 

The CMHA [Canadian Mental Health Association] has 

launched a print advertising campaign for Mental Health Week 



May 4, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7499 

2011 designed to encourage the public to share how they 

maintain and improve their mental health. The literature 

features everyday people from diverse age groups and cultural 

backgrounds sharing their personal tips on what they do to be 

mentally healthy. 

 

Mental Health Week 2011 will focus on key topics that help the 

public have a broader understanding of mental health including: 

kids have stress too, workplace mental health, resiliency, and 

mental health is everyone’s concern. Mr. Speaker, that’s why 

this year’s theme is Mental Health for All. The CMHA is 

committed to breaking the stereotypes around mental health 

issues, and this week provides the opportunity for their 

organization to do this on a national stage. 

 

On behalf of the government, I would like to congratulate the 

Canadian Mental Health Association for work well done and 

wish them every success in the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Vote for the Sheepdogs 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon’s very own 

Sheepdogs have made it to the third round in their quest to 

make rock ’n’ roll history gracing the cover of the Rolling 

Stone. After hundreds of thousands of votes were cast online, 

only four acts remain in the hunt for one of the most coveted 

achievements in the music world — appearing on the cover. 

That final winner will also land an Atlantic Records contract 

launching their career. 

 

Mr. Speaker, voting for this round will close on May 13th, so 

our chance to influence the outcome is now. The two surviving 

bands will advance to the final round, an epic battle on stage at 

the Bonnarro festival in June. The winner of the contest will be 

announced on the August 2nd episode on Late Night with 

Jimmy Fallon where they will also make their live television 

debut. The Sheepdogs recently visited New York City where 

they recorded a hot new track with multi-platinum producers 

and also performed in front of Rolling Stone editors and 

industry insiders. 

 

Although the Sheepdogs hail from Saskatoon Nutana, they 

confess to looking south for their inspiration. This influence is 

clear on the band’s latest album, Learn & Burn, which presents 

11 songs. On “I Don’t Know,” the lead vocals shine in front of 

hard-hitting electric guitar to attain a sound that’s reminiscent 

of Creedence Clearwater Revival. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would encourage all members of the legislature 

and all citizens in Canada to vote for the Sheepdogs, and 

hopefully very soon we’ll see them on the cover of the Rolling 

Stone. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Enhancing Public Safety 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today is 

an important day for Corrections both here in Saskatchewan 

and in the state of North Dakota. In August of 2009, 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing signed a historic 

memorandum of understanding with the US Federal Probation 

and Pretrial Services, District of North Dakota. Mr. Speaker, 

later this afternoon, the Minister of Corrections, Public Safety 

and Policing and US federal Chief Judge Erickson will sign a 

12-month extension to this agreement. Mr. Speaker, the goal of 

this agreement is to enhance public safety in communities in 

North Dakota and right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The terms of the MOU [memorandum of understanding], 

Saskatchewan has provided services including training of 

clinical director in key areas including risk assessments, core 

correctional practices, and community safety planning. Over the 

next 12 months, Mr. Speaker, we will complete clinical director 

training in clinical supervision and help implement community 

safety planning by front-line probation officers. The MOU is 

also designed to promote joint research initiatives that will help 

both jurisdictions develop new approaches to rehabilitation and 

offender accountability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of this Assembly should know the 

Federal District of North Dakota was referred to us on the basis 

of Saskatchewan’s growing reputation for effective correctional 

practices. Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to join me in 

recognizing the hard work put into this historic agreement and 

the people that are here today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Missing Children and the Green Ribbon of Hope 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, May is Missing Children’s Month 

in our province. Child Find Saskatchewan wishes to raise 

awareness for the 20th annual Green Ribbon of Hope 

campaign. And this campaign started May 1st and will continue 

throughout the month. This campaign increases public 

awareness about National Missing Children’s Day on May 25th 

plus the issue of missing children generally in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Child Find does not receive annual government 

funding. They depend almost entirely on the benevolence of 

others in the manner of corporate and private donations in kind. 

Child Find has historically relied on two major fundraising 

projects, namely the annual Green Ribbon of Hope campaign in 

May and the Green Ribbon dinner. 

 

The Green Ribbon of Hope is recognized as a symbol to 

remember missing children and to seek their safe return. It is 

also used as an expression of thought for missing children, their 

families, and their friends. Proceeds generated by the campaign 

will enable Child Find Saskatchewan to continue their mandate 

of assisting in the search process for missing children. This 

organization has an incredible commitment to protect children 

and youth here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people can play a vital role in 

helping to raise awareness. I encourage all members of this 

Assembly to wear the Green Ribbon of Hope as a symbol of 

remembrance and hope for the safe return of all missing 

children in our country, in our province. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 



7500 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2011 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

Plan for Potash Taxes 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

NDP [New Democratic Party] leader’s plan to destroy 

Saskatchewan’s economy has become crystal clear. The NDP 

leader now says he will hike potash taxes up to 80 per cent. Not 

at all concerned about the fallout of his reckless position, he 

said, and I quote, “If potash companies objected to the point of 

shutting down operations and leaving the province, that 

wouldn’t pose a problem because Saskatchewan has mined 

potash before.” 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, nationalization. The NDP leader 

wants to tax business out of our province and then swoop in to 

take them over. Mr. Speaker, that would absolutely kill 

investment in Saskatchewan. It would destroy Saskatchewan’s 

economy. But that’s the NDP leader’s master plan to drag 

Saskatchewan back — back to economic decline, back to losing 

jobs and people, back to being a have-not province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today Saskatchewan is moving forward. It is a 

new era in our province, but the NDP policies will only drag us 

back, especially that NDP leader’s plan of nationalization by 

taxation. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Voting Requirements 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs and it deals with, the question 

deals with Bills 161 and 162. That would be the local elections 

and The Election Act in the province of Saskatchewan. I have 

here a letter from the president of SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association], Allan Earle, who in the letter says 

to the minister . . . And this is addressed to the hon. minister 

and signed by the mayor, Allan Earle. In the letter he says, and 

I quote: 

 

. . . we are hard pressed to identify occurrences of local 

election voter fraud, or urban election results that are 

called into question due to potentially illegal practices. 

With no obvious fraud issues to resolve, SUMA believes 

that there is no immediate need to introduce voter ID 

provisions. 

 

My question to the minister is: in light of the fact that thousands 

of Saskatchewan residents have approached you and the 

government and members of the opposition, SUMA’s opposed 

to voter photo ID [identification], why is the minister pushing 

through with this ill-conceived idea and concept? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

thank the member opposite for the question. I too have a letter 

from SUMA, from Mr. Earle, dated April 27th, and I’ll table it 

for the members today. And the letter in fact talks about 

working with the Ministry of Municipal Affairs in developing 

regulations that will work for all stakeholder groups, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And on that note, the question posed about fraud that was raised 

by the member opposite, the ministry officials have instructed 

me that every time there’s a municipal election, there are emails 

and phone calls made to the ministry staff alleging that there 

were people who shouldn’t be voting or people who were 

deceased who were actually on the voters list, Mr. Speaker. 

And on that basis, this is going to bring integrity to the process. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, in the letter that the 

president of SUMA sent to the minister, I want to quote again 

from that letter where the president says, and I quote, “appear to 

be unnecessary,” referring to the new legislation, “raise 

possibility of voter intimidation,” and “they are likely to 

negatively impact voter turnout.” 

 

In light of the fact that all across Canada we’re trying to figure 

out ways and means of getting more people involved in the 

electoral process — more youth, more First Nations, more 

seniors, more everyone — why in the world, when there’s no 

evidence of fraud according to SUMA and others in 

Saskatchewan, why would the minister push forward with this 

ill-conceived idea when the municipalities don’t want it, the 

public doesn’t want it? Why is it in the best interests of the 

Sask Party to have this legislation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from a letter 

I have here today, which I’ll table at the end of the question 

period for the members opposite. Quote: 

 

SUMA’s Chief Executive Officer and your Deputy 

Minister met on Tuesday, April 26, to discuss my letter 

and SUMA’s concerns regarding Bill 162. Based on the 

outcomes of that meeting, SUMA believes that the 

concerns raised in the April 19 letter can now be 

effectively addressed through further collaborative work 

on the associated regulations [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, stakeholders met with ministry 

officials now, working in collaboration to assure that through 

regulations concerns will be taken care of and addressed. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, in that letter that the 

minister’s quoting from — and I have that letter here; I have it 

right here — the reason that they took that approach was 

because the minister informed them that there was no way to 

amend the legislation this late in the session. And I quote from 

the letter where the president of SUMA says, and I quote, 



May 4, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7501 

“Based on our recent discussions with your officials it was our 

understanding that our interest in making changes to the 

provisions could not be accommodated within the remaining 

sitting days of the Twenty-sixth Legislative Assembly.” 

 

That’s what you said, and that’s not true. That is not true. We 

can make amendments. And my question to the minister is this: 

in light of the fact that you have told SUMA a false idea and 

concept, will you agree that today, today we can make the 

amendments that SUMA wants? We’ll give leave to move to 

that position. In fact we have the amendments ready. And in 

light of the fact that you have told them that we haven’t got 

time, will you now correct the record and realize we do have 

time and we can do it today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just 

two nights ago during the federal election . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

of Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Two nights ago 

during the federal election, they used very clear guidelines to 

have voter identification at the polling stations. What did we 

see, Mr. Speaker? The election numbers for voters went up with 

this last election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when we tie in Bill 162, Mr. Speaker, to the integrity of the 

federal Act, to what will be the integrity of Bill 161, Mr. 

Speaker, that we will see provisions in this particular Act . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Time is running out in question period. 

Members come to order. The Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I 

want to add for the record, the letter the Leader of the 

Opposition has was dated before the letter I’m going to actually 

table today. So in this letter, Mr. Speaker, the concerns 

addressed in that letter have been addressed at the meeting with 

my deputy and Mr. Allan Earle and the executive director of 

SUMA. So, Mr. Speaker, moving forward, everyone knows that 

the Act is the overlying principle behind the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The minister may conclude his 

remarks. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Act is the 

overguiding principles of what we want to do to bring integrity 

to this particular level of the election. The regulations will 

operationalize the Act, Mr. Speaker. And if we look at what we 

just got in the mail from Elections Canada, the guiding 

principles behind the voter identification requirements, we’re 

going to look at those, working with our stakeholder groups to 

ensure that we can have as many people as possible vote, be 

more inclusive versus restrictive, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister again, I have 

both letters, just to be clear. I have the letter dated April 19th in 

which the quote is that these are unnecessary, they raise the 

possibility of voter intimidation, and they are likely to 

negatively impact voter turnout. 

 

And then the following letter is dated April 27th, in which the 

president indicates that he was informed that there was no time 

to make the amendments. That’s what you said to the SUMA 

representative, and that’s not true. We’re here. We can make 

the amendments. And what I’m offering in every way to help 

out the situation is that we will move by leave to work on this 

Bill today, on Bill 161 and 162. 

 

Can the minister give a guarantee that when we sit down and 

get through question period, we can now move, because we 

have lots of time, to make the amendments that we can have the 

possibility or the option of having photo ID, but not that it be 

required in order to vote in the next election? Can you make 

that commitment? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I 

want to just quote from a letter dated April 27th and it has a few 

points: 

 

That the ministry and SUMA will continue to 

collaborate on the reworking of the draft regulations; 

 

That the regulations will be constructed to limit the 

disclosure . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker: 

 

That the regulations will be constructed to limit the 

disclosure of personal voter information to candidates 

and their aides at the polling stations; 

 

That the list of potential ID will be restructured to 

ensure the integrity of the voting process; 

 

That the ministry and SUMA collaborate to develop and 

support a plan for training Deputy Returning Officers 

regarding the new process; and 

 

That the ministry work with SUMA . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I’d ask the 

members to allow the minister to respond to the member’s 

question. Order. I recognize the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 



7502 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2011 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — 

 

That the ministry work with SUMA to develop and 

support a plan of public education regarding [the] voter 

ID requirements. 

 

Assuming you are in agreement with the principles above, 

SUMA is satisfied that the interest of urban governments 

can be addressed and we would offer our support for the 

passing of Bill 162. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s go to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Solution for Flooding at Red Earth Cree Nation 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Red Earth Cree 

Nation it’s spring, but it’s no longer known as spring on Red 

Earth. It’s now known as flooding season. And some years are 

worse than others, of course, Mr. Speaker, but this was 

certainly one of those years. This was the third large-scale 

evacuation on Red Earth since 2006. 

 

Red Earth leadership is here today looking for a long-term 

solution. They have ideas on improving the situation so these 

annual problems can be prevented. They want to begin working 

now so that flooding is not a major problem next year and every 

year after. Will the minister agree to begin working 

immediately with the Red Earth Cree Nation which wants to be 

proactive instead of reactive? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, let me begin by expressing our deepest concern for 

those people that have been flooded last year and again this 

year. It’s unprecedented in the province’s history as far as I 

know, where we’ve had this kind of disasters consecutively in 

last year and this year. So I really want to express my deep 

concern. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as members of this Assembly will know, our 

government took a proactive move by putting $22 million into 

mitigation, and we’ve discussed that in this Assembly, $22 

million for mitigation, and more if required. And the Premier 

spoke about that one day and offered to my ministry and to me 

more money if needed. 

 

So we have gone out with SWWA [Saskatchewan Water and 

Wastewater Association], Sask Water Association, and actually 

have spent a great deal of money on mitigation efforts. Now 

that includes buying equipment such as Hesco barriers, water 

barriers, a number of issues that can help out. We have 

provided assistance with our First Nations. And I’m looking 

forward to the next question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess there’s a . . . I 

guess there are two parts to this question. One has to do with 

the emergency response to the flooding, but there’s a longer 

term solution that is required for the people of Red Earth. 

They’ve got a situation now where the water table is so high 

that when they go to build housing, those houses that should be 

lasting, you know, decades last for 10 years because the water 

table is so high. So in terms of responding to houses that have 

been flooded out, it puts this First Nation behind, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In terms of what has been an emergency and an unusual 

occurrence in years past is becoming all too commonplace on 

Red Earth. So a long-term strategy is required. That requires 

certainly the Minister for Public Safety to work for this, but it 

also requires the Minister for First Nations and Métis Relations 

to get together to work in partnership with Red Earth Cree 

Nation and with the federal government. Will they commit to 

meeting with the people from Red Earth today? And will they 

commit to that long-term strategy that will help Red Earth not 

just for this year but for years to come? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker, to the hon. member for the very important question. 

Absolutely we’ll meet with the people from Red Earth. 

 

And I can tell the House as well, on April 20th, I received a call 

from Chief Lonechild, said he had a very important issue to 

discuss and asked if I would meet the next morning with the 

people from Red Earth. And he came to my office and 

members, chief and members of council came and we had a 

very good discussion. We offered help in any way we could, 

whether it was a community pasture from Agriculture, whether 

it was help from my colleague from CPSP [Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing], or anything that FNMR [First Nations and 

Métis Relations] can do. 

 

And I can tell the House as well, as recently as this morning, 

officials from FNMR have been in contact with INAC [Indian 

and Northern Affairs Canada] and examining all First Nations 

across the province and advocating on their behalf with the 

federal government. And the Premier has written to the Prime 

Minister on this as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the people from Red Earth are 

here today not to fix blame but because they want to fix the 

long-term problem of flooding on Red Earth First Nation. 

 

They were here two weeks ago, less than two weeks ago and 

they certainly had a meeting with the minister. But according to 

the folks from Red Earth, that meeting lasted five minutes. A 

subsequent meeting with officials from First Nations and Métis 

Relations again elicited a lot of sweet sounding words, but no 

commitment to work on gathering the information in terms of 

the watershed management and no commitment on a long-term 

strategy. 

 

The people from Red Earth have come back to their Legislative 

Assembly to get a commitment in terms of working in 



May 4, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7503 

partnership, not having a five-minute-long, land speed record 

kind of meeting, but a genuine meeting where they get the 

information on the table and start working to a long-term 

solution for flooding on Red Earth Cree Nation. Will the 

minister or the ministers of that government give the 

commitment to working in partnership with Red Earth on a 

long-term strategy to deal with flooding for Red Earth Cree 

Nation? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well, Mr. Speaker, absolutely the 

commitment is there, the commitment to work with, towards a 

long-term solution was there. The five-minute comment is 

absolutely ridiculous because all time that was necessary was 

given there and every courtesy was given and will continue to 

be given in that direction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier, along with the Premier of Manitoba, 

have talked to the Prime Minister, have written to the Prime 

Minister and received a response saying that long-term 

solutions will be funded by the federal government, along with 

the province. 

 

We heard very eloquently from the members from Red Earth 

about the need for long-term solutions, and we couldn’t agree 

more, Mr. Speaker. That’s indeed what we’re working towards. 

They made the case that flooding doesn’t occur just out of the 

blue on Red Earth. It has been happening year after year, and a 

long-term solution is necessary. A long-term solution will be 

the priority of this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Care of Children 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, with today’s release of the Children’s Advocate office 

report, some disturbing trends are showing up, specifically the 

number of critically injured children reported to the Children’s 

Advocate office last year, which jumped more than 300 per cent 

from 13 to 43 between the years of 2008 and 2010. 

 

To the minister: what steps are being taken to address this 

disturbing upswing in the number of Saskatchewan children 

who are being injured? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

appreciate the question because I know that the members 

opposite are also worried about the safety of our children. Mr. 

Speaker, when this advocate’s report came out, I had an 

opportunity to look at it and look at what we had done as 

government. 

 

One of the first things we have done is, with the child welfare 

review, is making sure that we no longer look at children in just 

one ministry, but we have seven ministers that are together 

looking at all the opportunities and the resources that children 

need to make sure that we can see that they can be a whole part 

of society. 

 

We are further committed to making sure that the 

recommendations, working with First Nations and Métis 

partners, will be part of an ongoing plan. We’ve also worked on 

a new automated case management system that’s being piloted 

this year. It’s called the Linkin project. For far too many years, 

Mr. Speaker, the children in our province were paper children. 

There was no way to link them with the various services that 

were available because the tracking wasn’t there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is more work to be done. I appreciate the 

work that the child advocate has done, and I’m looking forward 

to working with him in the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is about injuries. Mr. 

Speaker, one of the emerging issues that the Children’s 

Advocate has identified was rapid growth of the number of 

group homes in the past two years, specifically the ability to 

staff these new group homes with certified, trained personnel 

that’s raising a major concern. 

 

To the minister: what steps are being taken to ensure that these 

children are receiving the best and most supportive care that 

they can at these group homes and that staff needed are fully 

trained and equipped to handle their positions? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, again this is a question that 

is important to me and everybody that’s working with the 

children that are in our care. That’s why we have opened a 

number of homes, over 100 new homes in the province, Mr. 

Speaker, to make sure that there are places for our children. 

And at the same time, we recognize that the staff has to be 

trained. 

 

So in this year’s budget — I think the member opposite 

received this information when we were in estimates — but we 

have $850,000 in this budget to make sure that we can provide 

supervisory and leadership training to the people that are within 

our group homes. It’s important to make sure that when 

children are moved into our care that they can be looked at in 

an adequate way and make sure that the children can fill their 

potential. Yes, Mr. Speaker, this is an issue we’re looking into. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — And I remind the minister the Rising Stars 

group home in P.A. [Prince Albert] fell through that safety net 

that she talks about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as part of its mandate, the Children’s Advocate 

office is to investigate incidents of children who die or are 

critically injured while in care. In 2010, 34 children died, and 



7504 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2011 

43 were critically injured. Despite these growing numbers, the 

Children’s Advocate office has worked tirelessly to keep up 

with their investigations, but they are falling behind. And I 

wonder how many of these deaths and critical injuries to 

Saskatchewan children could have been avoided if the 

Children’s Advocate office had been able to keep up with the 

investigations. 

 

To the minister: when will this government take significant 

steps to help the Children’s Advocate office in their efforts to 

protect Saskatchewan children from preventable injuries and 

deaths? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, one of the 

things that I want to make sure the members opposite and the 

people in the province know is that the number of children in 

care in our ministry is actually decreasing. In March of this 

year, there was 3,217 children. Last year there were 3,348 

children. And the number of children that are in overcrowded 

foster homes is also going down as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the number of the children that die in our care is 

absolutely astounding because too many of those children have 

fragile medical issues that there’s no way that we can give them 

a life . . . And it’s nothing that, no matter what kind of hospital 

care they could have, they’re not going to be able to make it. 

It’s a feeling, Mr. Speaker, that no parent wants to hear. 

 

But I assure you that the people that are working with us in our 

group homes, in our foster homes, are looking after our children 

to the very best that they can. And we’re making sure within the 

ministry, the money that we’ve spent within the ministry, 

including 124 per cent increase in the amount of money that’s 

in child and family services, has increased since we became 

government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Mental Health Services 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, to quote from the 2010 

Saskatchewan Ombudsman’s report: 

 

Our society does not do a good job of addressing mental 

health issues. Far too many people fall through the cracks 

between government programs or have no programs 

designed to meet their needs. 

 

In March, members of the Canadian Mental Health Association 

and the Registered Psychiatric Nurses Association of 

Saskatchewan came to the Legislative Building to bring 

attention to the fact that more mental health resources are 

needed. Mr. Speaker, the Ombudsman is saying the government 

is failing people with mental health issues. And members of the 

Canadian Mental Health Association and the Saskatchewan 

Registered Psychiatric Nurses Association who came to the 

legislature to get the minister’s attention are also saying that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: when is the minister going to stop 

ignoring mental health issues and make it a priority of his 

government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we take very seriously 

the whole issue around mental health and the delivery of mental 

health services throughout the province. I can tell you that there 

are gaps within the system and we’re working to try and fill 

those gaps. 

 

I’ve talked to a number of parents that have children that have 

suffered from some mental illness issues over the last couple of 

years, or number of years, and they feel that there are certain 

places where the system can be improved. We look at where we 

can make improvements, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we, in this 

year’s budget, would increase funding to health regions by 9, 

over 9 per cent or $260 million. That’s $260 million more, Mr. 

Speaker, going into the health care system, that will try and 

address some of the problems like the member opposite or, 

more importantly, the Ombudsman identified, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because as I said, when we have one person that doesn’t get the 

care that they need, that is concerning to this government and 

this ministry, and we’ll work to try and address those situations. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, one big step the minister could 

take in addressing mental health issues and showing that it is a 

priority for his government is to commit to building the mental 

hospital in North Battleford. Instead, the minister continues to 

ignore the need for a new mental health hospital, saying he has 

to wait for funding. Yet he can say that he’s going ahead with 

13 long-term care facilities when there is no funding in the 

budget for all of those facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Sask Hospital in North Battleford is 100 years old 

and deteriorating. It is out of date therapeutically. To the 

minister: why would anyone believe he is committed to 

addressing mental health issues and the well-being of 

Saskatchewan people when he refuses to commit to a new 

mental health facility in North Battleford? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, since our government 

has come to power, we have put more into capital repairs and 

capital construction than any year under the opposition, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’ve committed the 13 long-term care 

facilities and so far over $80 million is in the budget, Mr. 

Speaker — last year’s and this year — to cover those costs as 

those projects move forward. 

 

But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t very long ago 

when the Leader of the Opposition put a circular out in 

Saskatoon to say that the children’s hospital was cancelled. Mr. 

Speaker, nothing could be further from the truth. $200 million 

has moved from our government to the Saskatoon Health 

Region to see that facility go forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That is a long cry from what the members used to do opposite. 



May 4, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7505 

Just before an election, they’d announce a hospital in 

Humboldt, they’d announce a hospital in Preeceville, Mr. 

Speaker. No money towards that hospital, just trying to buy 

votes, Mr. Speaker, when no money was there. 

 

That is not what this government will do. When the money is 

there to build a psychiatric hospital in North Battleford, Mr. 

Speaker, that hospital will be built and announced. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 173 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments Corporation. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 

173, The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2011 

be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation has moved that Bill No. 173, The 

Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2011 be now 

read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I ask the member from Regina Dewdney to 

state his point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. During 

question period today a very serious question was asked by the 

member from Elphinstone of the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. Mr. Speaker, Chief Ian McKay 

was in the gallery. He’s a very important person to his people. 

He had provided information that the meeting lasted five 

minutes in length. Mr. Speaker, we heard the Minister 

Responsible for First Nations and Métis Relations say that that 

was absolutely ridiculous. Then under his breath he used the 

word, bullshit, Mr. Speaker, an unacceptable word in this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, which members on this side heard and 

saw him mouth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a dignified leader of the First Nations in 

our province in the gallery. He deserves the respect, Mr. 

Speaker. He deserves to be treated with dignity. And that type 

of behaviour by any member of the Assembly is inappropriate, 

Mr. Speaker. This type of behaviour in front of the leader of the 

First Nations or for that matter any citizen of our province 

should not be considered acceptable by this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize and 

withdraw the comment. 

 

The Speaker: — I thank the minister for responding to the 

point of order and withdrawing it. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 1049 to 1057. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1049 through 1057 are tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 172 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 172 — The 

Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 

modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les victimes d’actes criminels be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to speak on Bill 

No. 172, An Act to amend The Victims of Crime Act. And it’s a 

piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, that deals with an important 

area of work that happens within our province. 

 

You’ll note, Mr. Speaker, that this legislation was originally 

brought to the legislature in 1995 and passed at that time, and 

so this is an amendment of the 1995 legislation. And the 

question becomes, what is the purpose of the amendment and 

are there things that are being done here that are important for 

the people of Saskatchewan, or are there some things here that 

we need to raise some questions about? 

 

[14:30] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the victims of crime legislation in this 

province and in provinces right across the country and in the 

federal government, all of these pieces of legislation have been 



7506 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2011 

introduced to provide services to people who have suffered 

because of crime. And there are a number of high profile cases 

that happened right across the country that focused attention on 

how there didn’t appear to be a mechanism within our criminal 

justice system that would provide assistance to people who had 

been affected by criminal activity, and so these pieces of 

legislation across the country were introduced to further 

develop the response that the community could have towards 

the victims of crime. 

 

And in our province, my predecessor as Attorney General, Mr. 

Bob Mitchell, brought forward this particular legislation after 

much discussion and review within the community and within 

the caucus. And I think the legislation itself has served our 

province well. Many of the members of the legislature have had 

a chance to meet with local victims’ committees, we call them, 

and they have seen the good work that’s done in assisting 

people who have been injured or in some way dealt with in the 

whole area of being a victim of crime. 

 

Now many of these committees and many of the services have 

been provided in conjunction with the local police forces 

because that’s how the structure was set up. And I know that 

the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police], who are major 

providers of police services across the province, have worked 

closely within their organization and also within the local 

groups that provide guidance to victims’ committees to make 

sure that there are the services available. 

 

And quite often, Mr. Speaker, these services are having a safe, 

quiet place at a courthouse or at a police station where victims 

can be at a time when they are required to testify in a criminal 

proceeding. Because clearly the trauma of testifying in a 

criminal proceeding sometimes is even greater than or at least 

matches some of the same kind of tension that’s there involved 

with the original crime, and this is especially true when it 

relates to a number of the assault cases or sexual assault cases. 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we have over the years been able to 

provide resources to these services across the province. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, because this structure is there, that means 

that we need to look pretty carefully at what the minister is 

proposing and why he is proposing changes to this legislation. 

Now on April 20th the Minister of Justice set out the rationale 

for this particular change that’s being introduced. And basically 

what he identifies is that there are some problems with the 

legislation as it exists now, and so as he states in his comments, 

he says: 

 

. . . victims services providers must be able to determine 

who has been the victim of crime so that they can provide 

them with the support they need. That is why this Bill 

amends The Victims of Crime Act to establish a 

requirement that police must disclose to designated local 

victims service providers certain limited identification 

information about a victim. This applies to the RCMP, 

the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, acting under a 

provincial policing contract as well as our municipal 

police officers [in Saskatoon, Regina, Weyburn, Estevan, 

Moose Jaw, and Prince Albert, and Corman Park.] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what is being done in this particular 

legislation then appears to be correcting an issue whereby 

sometimes the victim service providers were not being given 

information that would allow them to do the job that we as a 

community have given to them. 

 

And so the minister goes on to say that there’s a disclosure 

issue that’s arisen within the RCMP across Canada, and I’m not 

sure quite what this means. And I guess this is the point of my 

discussion here is the minister did not set out what the issue has 

been across the country that would generate the reason for this 

particular legislative amendment. 

 

It appears that there may have been some challenge to 

information being provided to victim service organizations, but 

it’s not clear from his comments, the minister’s comments or 

from the legislation itself as to what the specific problem is. So 

let’s take a look here to see if we can figure out what’s being 

identified. When we go to look at the actual Bill and look at the 

provisions that are here, I think we can get some sense of 

what’s being tried, although we still, I think, are going to have a 

hard time figuring out why these changes are being made.  

 

But when you go to section 3, basically you’ve created a new 

heading, a new heading which says that the title of the heading 

will be:  

 

Short title, Interpretation, Declaration of Principles 

and Victims’ Information 

 

And note that it’s victims, plural. So the change in this part 1 

relates to information for many victims across the system. 

 

So then you go and find out well, what is it that’s being 

changed? Well we see that in section 4 of the Bill, the 

legislation adds a new section 2.2 to the legislation after the 

existing section 2.1. And what 2.2 does is it sets out a number 

of definitions. And, Mr. Speaker, these definitions go into a 

more, I guess a clarification of what’s being identified here as 

victims’ information. So first off it says that in this section, 

there’s going to be something called a designated person, and 

this designated person will be identified by the minister and that 

person obviously will have some special power. And so the 

minister, through an order, will make a person a designated 

person or they will go to a whole class of people as designated 

persons. 

 

So presumably that means that there could be an individual who 

may or may not be of a certain profession or certain 

classification who could be identified as a designated person, or 

the class of persons could be police officers or could be 

lawyers, could be doctors, could be teachers. All of these 

people could be designated persons under this particular 

legislation. 

 

And so then you look at, well what or how or why are these 

people designated? Well subsection (3) goes on to say that: 

 

The [person] . . . may designate a person or a class of 

persons pursuant to subsection (2) only if that person or 

class of persons is engaged in the delivery of victims’ 

services. 

 

So Mr. Speaker, presumably the intention is to designate a 

certain group of people who now provide victim services or 



May 4, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7507 

who will provide victim services so that something special can 

happen to them. 

 

Then it goes on in subsection (4) to say a police officer. Well if 

we go back to the definition, subsection (1), we see that the 

police officer under this legislation in Saskatchewan means “a 

member of a police service as defined under The Police Act, 

1990.” Well that’s clearly Saskatoon, Regina, Weyburn, Moose 

Jaw, Estevan, Prince Albert and Corman Park. Or it can be a 

member of the RCMP if that RCMP member is providing 

policing under the provincial policing agreement whereby we 

as the province through our Government of Saskatchewan have 

contracted for the RCMP to provide the policing services, and 

therefore basically the police service for everywhere else in the 

province. 

 

So under subsection (4), we have this police officer being 

ordered to:  

 

provide to a designated person [in other words, the 

people who are providing victim services] any 

information about a victim that is prescribed in the 

regulations and that is in the possession of the police 

officer. 

 

So once again we get to a word victim which needs to be 

defined. So we go back to subsection (1), and we look and see 

how the word victim is being defined for use in this particular 

section. And here we see that victim is: 

 

. . . a person who, by reason of an act that may be in 

violation of criminal laws [so it may be in violation; in 

other words, it hasn’t been proved yet] has suffered harm, 

including: 

 

physical or mental injury; 

 

emotional suffering; or 

 

economic loss. 

 

So we have this definition of a victim which includes the 

physical and mental injury, emotional suffering, or economic 

loss. And that last one could be to cover people who have been 

scammed or people who have had their properties taken from 

them or other areas of property crime. Clearly the other issues 

relate to something that has happened to them, either directly or 

indirectly, which causes physical, mental, or emotional harm. 

 

So we have in subsection (4) a clear message to the police 

officer that they must provide information to the designated 

person, in other words the victim service person, any 

information about the victim which is one of these people and 

that that police officer has. Obviously the police officer can’t 

provide information that they don’t have. 

 

Then in subsection (5), it says that this information “must be 

provided in the form and manner prescribed in the regulations.” 

Now that makes this Bill a little bit difficult to know exactly 

how it’s going to function because obviously we don’t have the 

regulations at this point, but we’re hoping that, in the 

regulations, it would give sufficient information for the victim 

services person to do the work that is required. 

Then we go onto subsection (6), and it says what the person 

who’s providing victim services is supposed to do. It says that 

victim services provider, “shall use the victim’s information” 

which comes in the form as set out in the regulation, only. 

There’s a key word here, the word only, for “contacting the 

victim; and providing or facilitating the delivery of victims’ 

services to the victim.” 

 

[14:45] 

 

Now I suspect that that subsection (6) contains the information 

that is the reason for this whole Bill. Somewhere in Canada 

there must’ve been a problem with people getting victims’ 

information and having it go to victim services providers, and 

they were using it for something other than contacting the 

victim and other than providing and facilitating the delivery of 

victim services to this victim. 

 

We don’t know if that’s what the reason is, but it looks like 

that’s where the problem lies. And so, are we supposed to 

speculate as to what other kinds of things could be done or with 

that information or how it could be used? I think that it 

would’ve been of assistance if the minister had been clearer in 

his initial remarks as to what kinds of problems have been 

encountered and why this particular legislative change is 

needed. 

 

Now I’ll go back to subsection (6), but subsection (7) goes on 

to deal with the situation where the victim says, I don’t want 

victim services. And then in that particular situation, there’s an 

obligation on the person who’s providing victim services to 

immediately destroy the information that they’d received 

pursuant to subsection (4). Now I’m not sure what the reason 

for this particular clause is other than there must have been 

some problem once again as it relates to people holding on to 

this information or using it for other purposes that were beyond 

what was to be done in the provision of victim services. 

 

Now I know, Mr. Speaker, that working within the RCMP, it’s 

always been a big challenge for them as providers of provincial 

policing services in Saskatchewan — well, in every province in 

Canada where they provide provincial policing services — to 

make sure that the RCMP is not exposed to liability. I know 

that a number of years ago when we were working through the 

mechanics of providing the point of service for contact for 

emergency services, one of the issues for the RCMP in doing 

this was that they were not very keen to be the ones that would 

receive the initial call of concern because they could not always 

be assured that there would be some emergency service at the 

end of the line when they transferred the call on to another 

service, whether it was the fire service or emergency medical 

services or even other policing services. And so there was a 

continual discussion about how one would deal with that 

liability. 

 

It appears, Mr. Speaker, that there have been some concerns 

related around the transfer of victim information to victim 

services, from the police, that have come back to haunt the 

police service, and so they have therefore gotten into a situation 

where they’re not willing to provide information to the victims 

services providers in some communities or all communities, 

and so that appears to be what the rationale is for this particular 

legislation. But once again, Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate that 



7508 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2011 

we haven’t had some of the specific examples of the problems 

that have arisen that would require this change to be made. 

 

And as we know that there can be protections put in place for 

the police, so this is clearly what this legislation is intending to 

do, is to provide protections to the police by setting out a very 

clear procedure for transfer of sensitive information, 

information about victims of crime. I think if that’s what’s 

intended to be done here, I think it would have been of 

assistance to have that more clearly set out in the original 

description of what we’re trying to do here. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, another question that arises once we’ve 

come to an understanding of what is being planned here, which 

is a protection for the police for providing sensitive information 

to victim services organizations, is to also raise the question 

whether there are some victim services organizations which are 

not police based, which may be in some way affected by this 

legislation because clearly this legislation relates directly to 

police-based victims services. And we know that there are 

organizations within communities that do provide assistance to 

victims, and they may not be in exactly the same organizational 

format as set out in the police-based victims services. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’re not certain whether this legislation in 

fact restricts the number and the type of organizations that can 

receive this information from the police, and I think that 

particular kind of question can be answered subsequently. But 

once again, it would have been helpful to have that all set out 

here as we move forward. So it’s an interesting change that’s 

being provided here, and it clearly is addressing some issues 

that are of concern to the police. I am hoping that it does not in 

any way affect the services that are actually going to be 

received by victims and that the intent is also to protect the 

victims from being revictimized in some way as it relates to the 

use of their information. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we make changes in areas like this, I’m 

always concerned that many of the groups that are involved 

have had a chance to work through and understand what is 

being done and also to understand whether the changes do 

affect how the services are provided. And I know that the 

victims services branch has long experience within the 

government, has been working with the various groups 

involved. I know that it appears they’ve talked to the 

organizational level of all of these groups. 

 

I’m not sure and it’s not entirely clear whether individual 

victims who may or may not have had a complaint about the 

system or situations where they’ve been involved with the 

system have been consulted. It may be that we will hear about 

that later. But I think ultimately our goal has to make sure that 

we listen to the victims, that we continue to provide the best 

services possible, and that what we will do to change this 

legislation is to assist victims as opposed to . . . well maybe not 

as opposed to but in addition to assisting the police in some of 

their procedural and legal liability issues which clearly appear 

to be the impetus for this legislation. So, Mr. Speaker, with that, 

I will conclude my remarks. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

address Bill No. 172, The Victims of Crime Amendment Act. As 

the previous speaker, the member from Regina Lakeview 

alluded to, this is one of those cases where one could wish and 

perhaps some day a court might wish that the second reading 

speech was a little bit more fulsome and not necessarily longer. 

And maybe fulsome’s not the right word, Mr. Speaker, but a 

little bit more specific, a little bit more clear, a bit more precise, 

but exactly what remedy, what evil, what evil the legislation the 

Bill before us intends to remedy. 

 

It does set out, as the Bill does itself, the changes that the 

government proposes to make to The Victim of Crime Act and 

states some general reason why these changes should be made. 

And specifically what the minister said, the Minister of Justice 

said in his second reading speech is, and I quote, “These 

amendments seek to address a disclosure issue that has arisen 

with the RCMP across Canada.” 

 

It doesn’t say what disclosure issue, Mr. Speaker. As a matter 

of fact it implies that the issue has not arisen in Saskatchewan, 

that this is not a question that has arisen in Saskatchewan, that 

there’s not necessarily a problem within the province of 

Saskatchewan, but an issue has arisen somewhere across 

Canada. 

 

And it seems to imply again, Mr. Speaker, that these 

amendments are being made at the request or the initiative of 

the RCMP and whether it’s because they speculate when 

looking at this legislation that their members or the service 

itself is at risk in providing information to what we would 

consider appropriate people or whether there’s been an actual 

example or whether there’s been an abuse because legislation 

somewhere in Canada was vague or unclear and perhaps similar 

to the legislation here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and on the issue of discussions prior to the 

introduction of legislation in this House, I cannot help but 

briefly — very briefly because I want to address my remarks to 

the Bill — but very briefly comment on what has occurred in 

this Legislative Assembly today in respect to consultation on 

legislation that is before this Assembly as this Bill is before this 

Assembly. 

 

And of course I speak, Mr. Speaker, as to the, well, complete 

lack of consultation that took place on the municipal election 

voting legislation, Mr. Speaker. We have legislation before this 

House that would see a requirement for photo ID to be 

presented by citizens of Saskatchewan to vote in municipal 

elections and legislation before this House that would see photo 

ID to have to be presented by citizens before they could vote in 

provincial elections. The one is being used to justify the other, 

Mr. Speaker. If we’re going to have these rules for 

municipalities, surely we can have these rules for the province 

and vice versa. 

 

Now in respect to the requirement for photo ID in municipal 

elections that the Sask Party government is trying to force 

through this Legislative Assembly this sitting, this session, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s become clear that the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association was not consulted. And that 

becomes clear from correspondence sent in April to the 

government saying that they don’t support the photo ID. 



May 4, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7509 

Now that they are aware that this is the proposal of the 

government, they don’t support it. It will suppress voter 

turnout. It will lead perhaps to the intimidation of voters. With 

respect, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s the intention of the 

provincial legislation, to suppress voter turnout amongst groups 

that don’t vote for the government. It is legislation that they 

would not have recommended or supported if they had been 

consulted. They had not been consulted. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And there’s a second piece of correspondence that the 

government waves around in response to our concerns about 

this lack of consultation and this criticism of this legislation by 

the organization of municipalities affected by it, saying that, 

well, we would support — because they support other parts of 

the legislation, Mr. Speaker — we would support passage of the 

Bill, given our understanding that we have now got from the 

Government of Saskatchewan that nothing can be done about 

the photo ID provisions, that the train has left the station. There 

is nothing that the government can do. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, nothing could be further from the truth. The 

train has not left the station. Something can be done. When the 

letter was written after SUMA was advised that the legislation 

could not be amended, there were actually weeks in which the 

legislation could be amended. In fact now there are still two and 

a half weeks in which the legislation can be amended and the 

legislation could be amended today. 

 

People have been told before that, well it just takes too long to 

make these changes. It takes too long to makes these changes. 

We know in fact, we know in fact from this term of this 

government and of this Legislative Assembly and in fact whole 

Bills can be passed fairly quickly when the public sees the 

urgency and importance of them. 

 

I will briefly take us back to the day when there was a public 

outcry about the prospect of Colin Thatcher profiting from a 

book written about the murder, for which he was convicted, of 

his ex-wife JoAnn Wilson. And the government said a number 

of things. They said, well we can’t, we can’t pass legislation 

stopping him profiting from the book because the legislation 

would be unconstitutional. And the opposition said, I said, Mr. 

Speaker, that, well we’ll take the risk that it’ll be 

unconstitutional. Let the courts tell us that if that is the case. 

But we need to stand up for the victims of crime in that respect. 

 

And then the government’s second defence was, well we don’t 

have time; we don’t have time now to pass such legislation. It 

takes too long to pass legislation. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 

reminded the public and I reminded the government and I 

reminded members of the Legislative Assembly that just in that 

sitting the opposition had raised two issues. One is that some 

people in the real estate development area and the city of 

Saskatoon in particular and city council of Saskatoon thought 

that our condominium laws that existed at the time did not 

allow for certain developments that were taking place in 

Saskatoon. And more than one development, Mr. Speaker. 

There were a number of developments. 

 

And the opposition went to the government and said we would 

be supportive of — as a matter of fact we will initiate — 

changes to the condominium legislation if the government 

doesn’t do so. But we want to see those changes passed to 

facilitate what the city of Saskatoon wants to do. And indeed 

we did that and we did that very quickly. We did that in a 

matter of days because we had to, Mr. Speaker. We rise at a 

certain time and then there is no time. But now we’re sitting, 

and then we were sitting. 

 

The other issue that arose that the opposition brought to 

government’s attention was that the provisions for treatment of 

tax-free savings accounts, which were then new, were not 

identical or similar or was treated the same as registered 

retirement savings plan within our Queen’s Bench Act, Mr. 

Speaker. I won’t go into a lot of detail about what all that 

meant, but it was clearly intended by Parliament of Canada that 

such provisions would receive similar tax treatment, and some 

provincial legislation had to be amended to change how that 

was done. And that was done very, very quickly, and it was 

done in the same sitting. And just a few days before, the 

Minister of Justice said, well we don’t have time to draft 

legislation that might at all be constitutional in respect to this 

victim issue, this issue of profiting from a crime. 

 

Well the public wanted something done. The opposition wanted 

something done. And the opposition pointed out that when we 

can agree across this aisle, Mr. Speaker, when we can agree 

here, things can get done. When we’re here and we agree, we 

can do things that are within our jurisdiction and within our 

constitutional authority. Legislation was passed. If this was the 

United States, one might call it the JoAnn Wilson Bill. But here 

we don’t have that habit; we don’t have that tradition. But The 

Profits of Criminal Notoriety Act was passed, Mr. Speaker. And 

not only was it passed, it was passed in short order, disproving 

the Minister of Justice’s argument that there was no time to do 

it, that it couldn’t be done, that there was not time left in the 

legislature; we are only sitting for another matter of . . . another 

couple of weeks or another few days, whatever it was, and it 

could not be done. 

 

It was done, Mr. Speaker, and it was done in short order. It was 

done expeditiously. But more than that, it wasn’t just a matter 

of image management for me and everybody else calling for the 

Bill. It was not just that, because the constitutionality of that 

legislation was challenged. And I know members of the 

government, the former member from Saskatoon Northwest 

who might have felt a little threatened by the Bill, Serge 

LeClerc, Mr. LeClerc thought the Bill was unconstitutional. As 

a matter of fact, I know for a fact the Minister of Justice 

thought the Bill was unconstitutional. He was just giving in to 

public pressure. He was just giving in to our demands. 

 

And when it became clear that the arguments about 

constitutionality did not stand with the public, when it was clear 

that the arguments about not having time, not having time to 

pass this Bill, were not accurate — that we did have time — he 

gave in. And he was as surprised, I think, as anybody in this 

province when the constitutionality of that Bill was challenged 

and the Bill, the legislation, the then Act, The Profits of 

Criminal Notoriety Act, Mr. Speaker, was upheld as 

constitutional and effective and had the effect in protecting 

victims from criminals profiting from their crimes that it was 

intended to have, Mr. Speaker. 

 



7510 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2011 

That is an example of what can be done in the case of an 

entirely new piece of legislation. It needs its own definition 

section. It needs its own substantial measures. It needed to be 

crafted by the Ministry of Justice, instructions by government 

and the Minister of Justice who dragged their feet in giving 

those instructions. 

 

But once they gave in, once they gave in to public pressure and 

public demand and calls from the opposition to do so, once they 

gave in, it was done. It was done professionally. It was done 

well. It was constitutional. It was upheld by the court and it’s in 

effect and is the law of the province. And it’s a precedent. It’s a 

precedent for this country, Mr. Speaker. So these things can be 

done. 

 

So when the government says, when the government says to 

SUMA we cannot, we cannot amend — when we have weeks 

— we cannot amend legislation, Mr. Speaker, well I think . . . 

And I’ll probably have occasion to say this again and perhaps 

more relevantly when I speak specifically to that legislation if 

the government does not come to its senses and move the 

amendments that SUMA has requested and that we have 

requested day after day after day. I’ll again have time to say and 

occasion to say that this is . . . And I don’t say this lightly, and 

you can only say it once, Mr. Speaker. This is the most flagrant 

example of allowing the public and stakeholders to 

misunderstand what this Assembly is doing and what it can do, 

when you allow the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association to be working under the premise that this debate 

that we are having today — and we’ll have later today I believe, 

on Bill 162, on the municipal election changes and the photo ID 

and the other, a sister Bill in respect to provincial elections and 

photo ID — that once this has entered this stage that I’m in on 

the victim of crimes Act amendment legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

that once it enters this stage, the government is helpless. No 

amendments can be made. 

 

Well every member of this Assembly who sat in a committee 

where we’ve amended legislation knows better than that, Mr. 

Speaker. We know better than that. That’s just not acceptable. It 

is just inexcusable that the minister today would wave around a 

letter saying, well see, SUMA supports the legislation, 

knowing, if you read the letter, they support the legislation 

because they believe the part they don’t support can’t be 

removed, that it’s beyond the ability of this Assembly to amend 

the Bill that’s before this Assembly, when that’s just not the 

case. And it’s just, it is outrageous, Mr. Speaker. And that is a 

word I know some members use fairly often. Not a word I use 

very often. But it’s a word that I have to use today. 

 

And when I talk about consultation, when I talk about 

consultation on a Bill as I’m speaking about today in respect to 

victims of crime or any other legislation, I assume that — and 

I’ll assume it less often, I think — I assume that the government 

has talked to the people affected. It’s clear that in the case of 

important election legislation, they have not . . . [inaudible] . . . 

they have not. On the sister legislation, on the provincial 

legislation in respect to photo ID, it is clear from the 

discussions that were held in committee, the Chief Electoral 

Officer, the Chief Electoral Officer was not consulted. And you 

can’t tell the Chief Electoral Officer that we can’t amend 

legislation now. I think he knows better. 

 

It’s clear the opposition wasn’t consulted. And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is in violation of a longstanding precedent that 

changes are not made to election legislation without the 

agreement of the opposition and in violation of the Minister of 

Justice’s commitment made this year to follow that precedent, 

tradition, and convention. Direct breach of that. 

 

Not only is the photo ID legislation, as SUMA points out, likely 

to lead to voter suppression, it’s probably intended for that 

exact purpose, Mr. Speaker. Voter intimidation, SUMA says. 

Not only that, the municipalities weren’t consulted on the 

municipal legislation. The opposition wasn’t consulted despite 

the convention, despite the tradition on the provincial 

legislation. And of course we know why, Mr. Speaker. We 

know why. Because SUMA would have said no, we don’t need 

it. And then the argument for the provincial legislation would 

not have had that leg to stand on. That would have been 

knocked out pretty early. The Chief Electoral Officer would 

have said no, we don’t need it. And the second leg would have 

been knocked under the argument for that legislation, and that’s 

why they didn’t consult. 

 

So when I’m looking at a second reading speech on this 

legislation, on The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, and I have 

to guess, I have to guess whether it was the RCMP who came to 

the government or the government went to the RCMP; whether 

there was a disclosure issue raised in Saskatchewan or 

somewhere else in the country; whether the issue arose from 

our legislation or similar legislation, but not identical, in some 

other province; whether it’s a matter of protecting victims from 

police services that have been too liberal with information or 

it’s a case of protecting victims by allowing the RCMP to do 

what this legislature intends the RCMP to do — well I don’t 

know the answer to any of that. 

 

I don’t know that because the minister makes a very short 

second reading speech. It’s going to be the only explanation 

before we go into committee, before the very, very end of the 

process — the last half hour, hour, you know, before this 

legislation is passed — before anybody will get another 

explanation from the government as to exactly what the 

problem here is, what the evil was that was going to be 

remedied. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Now on legislation like this, the purpose of which I support . . . 

And I will want to speak to both the role of the police and the 

value of these services and to the extent that they are provided 

by the police, police-based victim services. And certainly in 

favour and strong support of the regime that’s in place — that 

was not put in place by this Sask Party government but put in 

place earlier — and I think what is the intent of the amending 

Bill. But usually I would do this, and have often done this, with 

the assumption that, you know, the government is acting in 

good faith and the government is acting in consultation. That’s 

not so clear to me anymore, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’ve mentioned the excuses the government throws up 

when it doesn’t want to do something for victims like The 

Profits of Criminal Notoriety Act, the excuses it throws up 

when it wants to ram through this Legislative Assembly voter 

suppression legislation for municipalities, when municipalities 



May 4, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7511 

don’t want it, and for the province, when the Chief Electoral 

Officer doesn’t want it. 

 

And another example, Mr. Speaker, not nearly as heinous, not 

nearly as outrageous . . . And I won’t use the word outrageous 

but just, I think, sloppy, Mr. Speaker. And I hope that this Bill 

doesn’t have disguised or hidden within it the same type of 

sloppiness both in consultation and in drafting that recent 

changes to The Police Act had when it first came before this 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Bill was introduced, distributed to members. I pick it up. I 

look at it. And the Bill as it was brought before this Assembly 

. . . which supposedly was a subject of consultation with 

municipalities having their own police services, municipal 

police services, supposedly a subject of consultation with police 

chiefs in the province, and supposedly a consultation of those 

associations, federations that represent police officers. 

 

I looked at the Bill. It seemed to suggest that a municipality, 

with cabinet approval, could dissolve a municipal police service 

and replace it with the RCMP, and that in particular cities that, 

because they had reached a threshold of 20,000, were required 

to have municipal police services, could do that as well. And 

that would be, I would think, of some concern on the plain 

reading of the legislation that’s brought before the House, of 

some concern to police associations in the province. And so I 

wrote to them and, highlighting that section of the Bill, said you 

know, this causes us some concern. We’re not sure of why this 

provision is even here. Do you have any concern? 

 

Well there was, I think, Mr. Speaker. I think, while the minister 

defended the wording, the original wording right to the end, but 

the Federation of Police Officers sought clarification. The 

government proposed an amendment. Now the government 

didn’t say to the Federation of Police Officers, which they 

apparently said to SUMA in respect to the photo ID for 

municipal elections, they didn’t say oh, this has already been 

introduced in the legislature. There’s already been second 

reading debate. We can’t amend this legislation. They didn’t 

say that. They amended the legislation. We amended it in 

committee, which is what we can do in respect to the legislation 

on municipal elections, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Just another example of how outrageous, outrageous the 

correspondence to SUMA on this subject, on this issue they 

raised, yes, because when the Federation of Police Officers says 

we have a concern about how this legislation might be 

interpreted, the government, even though the government 

doesn’t think it’s sloppy drafting — I thought maybe it was 

sloppy drafting, Mr. Speaker — even though the minister 

doesn’t think it’s sloppy drafting, they come up with better 

drafting. And we have an amendment that the government and 

the opposition can agree on and that allays any concerns of the 

Federation of Police Officers in the province. We can do that, 

and we did that. And we did that in short order. As a matter of 

fact, we did it in this sitting, and we’ve already done it. 

 

And in fact the same night in committee, we could have fixed 

the issue that SUMA has with the municipal election 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. We could have fixed that Bill that 

same night instead of the minister or somebody in his ministry 

telling them it’s too late. We can’t make these changes. It can’t 

be done. So do you support the Bill with your objection, or do 

we withdraw the whole Bill? Well SUMA says, well no, we 

support the Bill because we want other things that you have in 

the Bill, so we’ll take the thing we object to. 

 

Well the Federation of Police Officers weren’t told that. They 

weren’t told . . . do you accept the changes to The Police Act, 

the clarification around public complaints, and all these other 

good things in the Bill because if you don’t want them, you 

won’t get them. If you do want them, well you have to take the 

section that you’re concerned about, that the opposition’s 

concerned about as well. That wasn’t said to the Federation of 

Police Officers. But it was said to the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipality Association. Outrageous, just outrageous, Mr. 

Speaker — it just clearly was. 

 

So here the examples of how the government consults after the 

fact . . . I mean I could talk about the wildlife protection Act, 

Mr. Speaker, where, you know, these groups are talked to 

afterwards, Mr. Speaker. And apparently the government’s 

operandi here is we’ll tell you what the legislation is as late in 

the process as we can, and then if you have any problems with 

it, we’ll tell you it’s too late to make any changes, whether it is 

or it isn’t, Mr. Speaker. That seems to be the modus operandi. 

 

And so that raises concerns when we have legislation that it’s 

not clear whether they want to address the liberality of sharing 

information or the restrictions that are perceived to be there. 

What gives rise to the concern? Whether it’s A or it’s B? Who 

raised the concern? And were the RCMP and victims 

organizations, were they truly consulted about this legislation? 

Or is the history of this government’s lack of consultation, lack 

of discussion with stakeholders, does that infect this legislation, 

Mr. Speaker? We don’t know. We don’t know that. 

 

And again what we’ve learned today about some legislation and 

what I see . . . And I listened carefully to the minister when he 

made his second reading speech. I tell you; the printed version 

in Hansard doesn’t help me a lot either. We have a Bill that is 

vague in its explanatory notes. It’s vague in the second reading 

speech, and it addresses matter of detail in regulation. 

 

And I know. I’ve been to these discussions before, on both 

sides of the table as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker. The Justice 

minister used to be the Justice critic. And now the Justice critic, 

he’s the Justice minister. I know that the Justice minister will 

say the regulations aren’t drafted. That concerns him a lot less 

now that he’s Justice minister than it used to, Mr. Speaker. It 

used to concern him a lot if the regulations weren’t drafted yet, 

and we were going to pass legislation. But now I see the 

regulations aren’t drafted. So what the legislation actually 

means, Act and regulations, well we’ll find that out someday 

down the road, Mr. Speaker. We won’t find that out just 

because we’ve passed the Bill into law. We have to wait for the 

cabinet to decide what key terms in this legislation mean. 

 

As I have alluded to, I am supportive of the principles and the 

intent, substantive content and effects of the legislation that is 

being amended here. I expect that — given all my concerns 

about consultation and all my concerns about spin and 

marketing of legislation by the members opposite, given all my 

concerns about the vagueness of the legislation and all the gaps 

to be filled in by regulation, despite all my concerns about the 



7512 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2011 

nature of some of the second reading speeches including the 

one on this legislation that we see — that I support the intent of 

the amendment as well. But again, Mr. Speaker, just given the 

history and particularly given today’s discussions around some 

legislation, I just can’t be as comfortable as I would like to be. 

 

In respect to victims services and police-based victims services, 

Mr. Speaker, there is a conventional understanding of the role 

of police officers, and I think if you actually inquired of the 

average citizen, they would quickly realize that the role is larger 

than first comes top of mind. At first top of mind is the 

understanding that the police investigate crime, apprehend 

criminals, arrest them, detain them, and then . . . or at least 

alleged criminals. And then the circumstances of the inquiry 

into guilt or innocence or inquiry into guilty or not guilty, and if 

guilty the sentence is taken out by another part of the criminal 

justice system. 

 

But that the police are engaged in that activity and that they 

primarily reduce crime by investigating it, apprehending 

perpetrators or suspects and detaining them until the court can 

decide how they should be dealt with, that is not a significant 

part of the time, the role of any police officer. That’s not 

primarily even how police officers reduce crime. 

 

And the time that police officers spend in the community, 

driving the streets of our cities, walking the streets of our cities, 

the RCMP driving the highways of the province of 

Saskatchewan, that is not done in the investigation of crime. 

That is not done looking for suspects. That is not done chasing 

fleeing suspects from a crime scene. 

 

That is all done . . . And sometimes we resent it when we’re 

guilty of the infractions, particularly and most commonly 

driving infractions of various levels of seriousness, but that is 

all done primarily for crime control, not for crime investigation, 

and not necessarily for crime suspension or for apprehension. 

And that is a significant part of what police officers do. And a 

lot of behaviour and conduct that may or may not be criminal 

that is detected by police officers when they are doing this work 

within the community may not result in charges or 

apprehension at all. But the attention is brought to the activity 

and it is suspended, it is stopped, and we are the better for it. 

And that is called discretion, and there is nothing wrong with 

discretion. And they couldn’t do the job without it, and it exists 

at all levels of the criminal justice system. But police discretion 

is very important because a large part of what is crime control 

and crime prevention doesn’t involve detective work at all. Mr. 

Speaker, and most police officers aren’t detectives. 

 

The police are actually a fairly modern institution. They came 

into existence with industrial society. All the feudal systems of 

crime control that existed up to the 19th century were beginning 

to prove unworkable in a new urban industrial setting. Members 

will be well aware of Robert Peel and the establishment of the 

first modern police service in England which we now are the 

inheritors of. 

 

[15:30] 

 

All the police services in the province and the country, I think, 

date back to that service, Robert Peel service. The bobbies take 

their name from Robert Peel, from his name. They were his 

police service. But he laid out some principles of policing, Mr. 

Speaker, that apply to police-based victim services as well as 

other areas of policing. And one of those principles was the 

people are the police and the police are the people. That is a 

principle that the police are not, in a democratic society, a force 

imposed on people to impose order, but a group of people that 

are within the community who assist the community and are 

assisted by the community in maintaining what we call in 

Canada peace, order, and good government. 

 

And that principle speaks to what is the largest part of police 

work in crime control, crime reduction, crime prevention. The 

presence of active citizens in the community has much the same 

effect as the presence of police officers in the community in 

letting people know that this is a community that people care 

about what happens in it, that neighbours are taking care of 

each other. You don’t expect police officers or you wouldn’t 

expect citizens following that principle of Peel’s to be 

investigating crime and to be acting as detectives. When Robert 

Peel said the police are the people and the people are the police, 

that’s not what he meant. What he meant was that the police are 

part of the community caring about itself, showing that 

neighbours care about neighbours. 

 

And that’s the motivation, that’s the reason for victim services. 

That’s the reason, I think the argument for, or at least one of the 

arguments for, police-based victim services is that a community 

takes care of its own. When its own are attacked, even by 

another member of the community, the community reaches out 

and helps and, in the case of violence, in the case of crime, 

through the police but also through other neighbours, Mr. 

Speaker. And the work of the police and other neighbours can 

be seamless and invaluable, invaluable assistance to people in 

the community. 

 

Sometimes victim service volunteers have come here to the 

legislature. They’ve been introduced when they’ve received 

awards. And when I was Minister of Justice, I had the honour 

and the privilege of giving long-time service awards to people 

who’ve worked as victim service volunteers in communities for 

many, many, many years, Mr. Speaker. And I rise and I, 

sometimes in my introductions or in my remarks about victim 

services, talk about how if one visits a community that has 

been, and a family that has been, devastated by a crime . . . And 

unfortunately there’s a lot of crime in our society. And 

Saskatchewan has a particularly high crime rate which 

sometimes is a political issue, but more importantly is a 

fundamental social problem, Mr. Speaker, which we want to 

address. 

 

But when certain crimes, certain crimes of violence, are visited 

upon individuals or communities, they can be particularly 

devastating. And I suppose an analogy can be made with car 

accidents which can be annoying or fatal, Mr. Speaker, and 

there’s a big spectrum there. But when people are seriously 

hurt, whether by violence or by accident, we need to reach out. 

We need to be able to help. And that’s what victim services 

does in the case of crime and particularly in the case of 

violence. 

 

And I am thinking of one particular case, Mr. Speaker, when I 

talk about the value of victim services and the value of 

police-based victim services. And it’s a case that’s starting to 



May 4, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7513 

recede into history, happened when I was minister of Justice 

and when I was the minister responsible for Policing. Still a 

very recent memory for me. And in a community in 

Saskatchewan there were two murders. The murders, because 

of the nature of them, shocked the province. There were 

devastating. They were devastating to the entire province. We 

were shocked by, we were shocked by these crimes, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But they didn’t come out of the blue. These murders didn’t just 

happen. They were perhaps the conclusion, we would hope the 

conclusion of a history of violence in the community and a 

history of the violence in a particular family. And unfortunately 

as many crimes of violence and unfortunately as many murders 

take place, they arose from issues of domestic violence, Mr. 

Speaker. But this domestic violence flowed outside of family. It 

flowed outside of the family and eventually resulted in the 

deaths of two other people who were in a way neighbours, and 

in a way . . . well not in a way, but in a very fundamental way, 

were there to help and protect and put themselves between 

danger and where it would’ve been other innocent victims, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I went to a memorial for in respect to the two deaths, the 

murders. But then I had an occasion, Mr. Speaker, to attend, to 

meet with a woman who long before these murders took place 

had been living and dealing with violence and domestic 

violence but continual terrorizing really of her over a number of 

years. And the way that she felt, the way that she felt trying to 

live in this community, the way that she felt living in this 

community, Mr. Speaker — and able to live in this community 

very close to the person who had been oppressing her — the 

fact that she was able to do this and able to do it with comfort, 

knowing that she was surrounded by friends, the reason that 

that was the case, the light that was brought into her life, that 

was from her neighbours, her neighbours who work for the 

RCMP and her neighbours who volunteered for victim services 

in that community, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I had worked with victim services. I had met victim 

service volunteers. I had dealt with this legislation that’s being 

amended today, Mr. Speaker. I had dealt with issues of funding 

for victim services, both as minister, as a member of Treasury 

Board, and then again as a member of cabinet, Mr. Speaker. So 

I knew intellectually about the importance of these services. I 

knew intellectually about their value. 

 

But it was those meetings, and particularly the meeting with 

that woman . . . And I don’t know if any of the violence that 

was committed against her ever resulted in a conviction, Mr. 

Speaker. I can’t actually recall. I don’t know that. But she was 

the victim of violence, and she had received the support of her 

neighbours and her community. And she had received that 

support of her neighbours and her community through the 

police who are also the people in her community, and through 

the people in her community, victim services, who are also the 

police and exemplifying the principle of Robert Peel. 

 

And so this legislation addresses, we hope, Mr. Speaker, we 

hope this legislation addresses the proper provision of victim 

services through police and with the co-operation of police, to 

victims, including victims of the most horrendous violence or 

the most long-term terrorism and oppression of one person by 

another.  

 

You know, sometimes, Mr. Speaker, these things are not easily 

addressed through a criminal justice system that requires, and 

quite properly so, Mr. Speaker, requires guilt to be proved 

beyond a reasonable doubt. But if that cannot be done, we do 

not sit on our hands. We do not say, we can’t do that; we can do 

nothing. That we can only do something where somebody can 

be convicted where we have all the evidence, we have all the 

proof and no mistakes were made, procedural or otherwise, in 

respect to someone’s rights — that’s the only time we can do 

anything. That is not the case. That is not the case. And the 

safer communities and neighbourhoods initiative, which I 

introduced into this Assembly when I was Minister of Justice 

and which was passed, and the program that has been continued 

these many years shows that there is a lot we can do for 

families, for individuals, for communities, for neighbourhoods 

in crime control, whether or not we actually raise the conviction 

rate. 

 

And that is the case with victim services as well. And victim 

services speaks to after someone has become a victim, but some 

of these crimes and some of these cases of violence are not 

isolated incidents. They are patterns of behaviour, and 

strengthening the victim and strengthening the community 

around the victim prevents future victimization. 

 

So there is much we can do that is not covered by a television 

show like Law & Order, but is still the role of police, still the 

role of us as citizens, still the role of us as neighbours, and that 

is reflected in victim services programming legislation brought 

in by former governments. And as issues arise as to addressing 

the application of that legislation and making sure it works 

well, that it is efficient and effective and that things can be 

done, we in the opposition support amending, making 

amendments that allow the legislation to work effectively. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I trust that the intent of the amendments 

are to make the legislation more effective. I assume that that 

was what the government wants to do. But again we have, I 

think, two overarching concerns, putting aside the vagueness of 

the second reading speech by the minister. And I’ve spoken to 

this before, Mr. Speaker, on other legislation. It would be 

helpful I think if some of the ministers and the Crown for the 

province of Saskatchewan appreciated that not very often, but 

every now and then, what is contained within their second 

reading speech is of very great importance in deciding what is 

the intent of the legislation. 

 

And putting aside that, putting aside that, Mr. Speaker, the 

overarching concerns of course are we have some, I think, 

understandable distrust now of the government’s consultation 

on legislation. And we have some concern about the care that is 

taken in drafting legislation. And the prime example of that, 

without going back to the photo ID issues, Mr. Speaker, the 

prime example of that would be recent changes to The Police 

Act where the consultation with the police, the Federation of 

Police Officers specifically, on the drafting of one section of the 

proposed legislation was made by the opposition. The 

government clearly hadn’t done it. And when the opposition 

raised it, the Federation of Police said, yes we do have a 

concern that this is drafted badly and will have an effect that we 

would not like to have. And then the government changed it. 



7514 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2011 

But obviously there was no consultation in advance. There was 

no careful drafting to ensure that the intent of the government 

was being met. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And so it’s not evidently clear in this case that those are 

concerns, but those might very well be concerns here, Mr. 

Speaker. And so we have to have some concern that although 

we think we agree with the intent of what the government wants 

to do with the legislation, we think we understand what might 

be the evils the government seeks to remedy with this 

legislation, the government has not been clear about what the 

evils are that they want to remedy. And therefore we can’t be 

sure that we aren’t being more than optimistic about what the 

legislation will in fact do on the issue of legislative intent. 

 

And I will conclude my remarks. But it is both in the clarity of 

the legislation, the clarity of the second reading speech, it is 

important that people be able to understand what this Assembly 

intended. And an example of that that arose, again relatively 

recently, because in my history here in the Legislative 

Assembly in respect to again a policing issue, again a victims 

issue and again, as in this legislation, an issue of disclosure of 

information. With respect to victims of shootings and stabbings, 

Mr. Speaker, we thought that, the legislature thought I think, I 

think it was pretty clear in the discussions that we had at one 

point in time, this Assembly thought when it brought in The 

Health Information Protection Act that the clear exemption for 

disclosure of information for the protection of the public would 

allow, would foresee and facilitate provision of information to 

police officers about the victims of violence. And clearly that’s 

what the Legislative Assembly thought the intent was. 

 

When I was Minister of Justice, minister responsible for 

policing, police officers came to me and said, that is not the 

way this legislation’s being interpreted in emergency rooms. 

People are being stabbed. People are being shot and that 

circumstance is not being reported to the police. People who 

have shot someone or stabbed someone are out in the public 

with their gun or their knife and perhaps there will be another 

victim harmed and we are not being informed. And the reason 

we’re not being informed, we are told, is because the exemption 

within HIPA [The Health Information Protection Act] is for the 

immediate protection of nurses and whoever is in the 

emergency rooms so that they call the police if they’re under 

threat. 

 

Well I don’t think that was the legislative intent, Mr. Speaker. I 

don’t think you could go to the second reading speech for 

legislation that was quite extensive — and the second reading 

speech was probably longer than the one here — and maybe 

find any clarification of that. But in fact the matter wasn’t 

before the court in any case, Mr. Speaker. It was a matter that 

was being dealt with emergency room by emergency room by 

emergency by emergency, and not well in the opinion of the 

police, and not well in the opinion of myself as the minister 

responsible for policing, the minister responsible for Justice, 

not well in . . . by considered being treated well in the opinion 

of the government of the day, the New Democratic Party, the 

government of the day, and not, as it turns out, by any member 

of the Assembly at the time. 

 

So the government, through me, introduced legislation in 

respect to mandatory reporting of gunshots and stab wounds, 

Mr. Speaker, and again in precedent-setting legislation in the 

country. And it became quite clear that every member, both 

sides of the aisle, the NDP government of the day, the Sask 

Party opposition of the day, understood that the intent of the 

exemption within HIPA was that such crimes of violence would 

be reported to the police so further violence could be prevented. 

And so legislation was passed which had the effect of clarifying 

the legislation in HIPA, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I understand, if it’s the RCMP saying we want it clear what 

the law is, I understand why that would be the case. I 

understand why they would want that, Mr. Speaker. If that’s the 

initiative here, we want to be clear what we can do and what we 

can’t do, who we can provide information to, what information 

we can provide, who we can provide it to. If that’s the intent, 

and I think that’s the intent, if that’s the intent here is to satisfy 

concerns about what the legislature intends to be done with 

victims’ information, and we’ve had considerable discussion in 

this Legislative Assembly about what can appear to be, to us 

and to the people of Saskatchewan, the Sask Party 

government’s disregard for the privacy of health information, if 

the police want to be sure that somewhere down the road 

nobody can say you provided information that you shouldn’t 

have provided, you provided information to somebody you 

shouldn’t have provided it to, and they want to be clear about 

what the legislation says — and that’s what the opposition 

wants and that’s what the opposition would have wished for, 

more clarity about this subject from the government when the 

legislation came forward for second reading — and if that’s 

what the RCMP wants, that makes perfect sense, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On the other side of it, we don’t want a situation where, similar 

to the situation that we had prior to our legislation on the 

mandatory reporting of gunshots and stab wounds, or 

information that should be provided — in this case not from the 

police but to the police — isn’t provided because some people 

interpret the legislation to prevent that, to restrict that. 

 

And you know, some of the privacy and freedom of information 

legislation in the province may not be as clear as, say, the 

independent officer for the Legislative Assembly, the privacy 

and information access officer would like it to be. And so some 

clarity around the provision of information certainly is to be 

desired, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So all these concerns exist on the part of the opposition. I think 

we’ve heard both from the member from Regina Lakeview and 

myself on the concerns that we have concerning our support for 

the institution of police-based victim services and for providing 

that information and just that information to those and just 

those to whom it is necessary to support victims of crime, an 

important part of the role of all citizens, but particularly of the 

police. 

 

And so since we’re not going to get any answers to the 

questions that we raise about the intent and the effects of this 

legislation in second reading, Mr. Speaker, I will now take my 

seat and allow this Bill to proceed to committee. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill 172, The Victims of 



May 4, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7515 

Crime Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — To the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 162 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hickie that Bill No. 162 — The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure today to follow the hon. member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin who just gave a most thoughtful speech on a 

different Bill. My Bill is Bill 162, An Act to amend The Local 

Government Election Act and to make consequential 

amendments to other Acts. But I just want to take about 10 or 

15 seconds to congratulate my colleague, the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin, for a most thoughtful and eloquent laying 

out of some of the concerns around the victims of crime 

legislation that’s just going before committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill 162, The Local Government Election Act 

is in many ways even more important than the legislation that 

governs the provincial election Act. And the reason . . . You 

might be, people might be surprised to hear an MLA [Member 

of the Legislative Assembly] saying that, but the reason that I 

feel that way is that if you talk to people — our neighbours, our 

friends, our relatives — just talk to people in every walk of life 

and ask them which level of government most profoundly 

affects them in their day-to-day lives, and almost without 

variance it’s the municipal government. 

 

Whether it’s the RM [rural municipality] or whether it’s the 

urban municipality, but almost, almost without fail, people have 

long felt that it’s the local government that they deal with much 

more often and in a much more face-to-face way. I mean if you 

live in an RM you’re seeing . . . This winter you have met the 

snowplow. If you’re travelling at all, you’ve met the snowplow 

hundreds of times. And in the summer you can hardly drive on 

our roads through the RMs without meeting a grader or seeing 

evidence that the road grader has been working very recently. 

And of course there’s much more than that that the municipal 

governments do. 

 

But because it is such an important level of governance to the 

people of Saskatchewan, I’m arguing, Mr. Speaker, that we 

should make the effort — it’s not so much a question of taking 

the time — but we should make the effort to get this election 

amendment Act correct, to do it properly rather than to make an 

error in the passing of this Act, only to have to come back and 

revisit it at some point in the future. 

 

And part of my argument, Mr. Speaker, is an article that has 

come to my attention. This article from, well quite frankly from 

The New York Times, and it’s eight days old so it’s a relatively 

new article. And the lesson that I get out of this article . . . And 

it’s written about United States electoral process and right to 

vote, but it is almost directly transferable to the Canadian 

situation. And as I go through this article, Mr. Speaker, I think 

anyone that has an interest in this matter will see the parallels. 

And I think I just want to read parts of it. 

 

But it was April 26th, 2011, in the New York Times. And the 

title of the article is “The Republican Threat to Voting.” The 

republican threat to voting and it describes how . . . I’ll try and 

paraphrase because I know that these things are available online 

or if somebody has great difficulty with that, please to contact 

me and I’ll try and provide a photocopy of this article. It’s not 

that I’m trying to misrepresent the article but — how do I 

describe it? — it’s three pages long, and I don’t intend to read 

. . . We’ll see but I don’t intend to read every last word of it. 

But it starts: 

 

Less than a year before the 2012 presidential voting 

begins, Republican legislatures and governors across the 

country are rewriting voting laws to make it much harder 

for the young, the poor and African-Americans — groups 

that typically vote Democratic — to cast a ballot. 

 

Spreading fear of a nonexistent flood of voter fraud, they 

are demanding that citizens be required to show a 

government-issued identification before they are allowed 

to vote. Republicans have been pushing these changes for 

years, but now more than two-thirds of the states have 

adopted or are considering such laws. The Advancement 

Project, an advocacy group of civil rights lawyers, 

correctly describes the push as “the largest legislative 

effort to scale back voting rights in a century.” 

 

[16:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the parallels between this legislation that’s 

coming seems to be in vogue in the United States and the laws, 

the Bills that are being proposed in right wing Canada are all 

too similar, Mr. Speaker, because in the United States they’re 

requiring that you have a state-provided piece of ID with photo. 

In Canada we’re saying you have to have photo ID according to 

Bill 162, photo ID. I’ll get to it; there is alternatives in there, 

but instead of one piece, it’s two pieces of other identification 

and so on. I’ll get to that. 

 

Again I’m not trying to misrepresent what this Bill is about. I 

am clearly pointing out the parallels between right wing 

governments because we’re told that Bill 161, the provincial 

election Act simply flows from the federal election Act, the 

changes made by a conservative, right wing Conservative 

government. And it flows, and that subsequently the Bill 162, 

the Bill that I’m speaking on right now, simply flows from the 



7516 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2011 

provincial Act which flows from the federal Act. 

 

Both Acts calling for photo ID, both Acts trying to fix an 

imaginary problem — they’re solving a problem that is largely 

non-existent. Mr. Speaker, earlier in question period, the Leader 

of the Opposition has read a letter from SUMA. I am going to 

come to that, but he clearly described voter fraud as simply 

non-existent. That would be the best way to describe what that 

said, and I’ll get to that in a few moments. 

 

The New York Times article carries on. I am going to pick it up 

again: “Anyone who has stood on the long lines at a motor 

vehicle office knows that it isn’t easy to get such documents. 

For working people, it could mean giving up a day’s wages.” In 

this, they’re talking about getting the identification documents 

that is being proposed in the United States. So working people 

and working poor in the United States would stand in what 

sounds like a long lineup to get the photo ID that they would 

require. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, where do we get our photo ID? At our 

friendly SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] office. 

And not every village or hamlet has an SGI office, so it means 

in some instances we have to travel, hope that the camera is 

working, hope there’s someone there to operate it, hope that the 

stars are in alignment which they are most days. Absolutely, 

admittedly, the stars are in alignment most days and you can get 

the photo ID. All you have to do is travel the, you know, 20 

kilometres, 30 kilometres, 40 kilometres to the nearest SGI 

office. 

 

Well you know, Mr. Speaker, there is a saying: time is money. 

And whether it’s a farmer taking the time to go there and get 

the ID or whether it’s a working person, someone that might 

have picked up some day work . . . I know before I moved to 

Regina many years ago, Outlook was where my wife and I and 

our family called home. And there was tremendous opportunity 

for particularly young people and working people trying to get 

established in the workforce to work in the potato industry. You 

know, Barrich Farms was one of the biggest employers there at 

the time and continues to be to this very day. In fact I stopped 

in just last weekend to conduct some business there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for working people to have to go and stand in line 

or travel some distance from where their point of work is 

always means money — whether it’s gas money, whether it’s 

time away from work. And many people are paid an hourly 

rate. Well if it takes you two hours to go and get your photo ID 

and come back, well that’s two hours of pay that’s missing. 

 

And I don’t care how you slice it, you know. Essentially we’re 

talking $20 and up in terms of cost, and often much more than 

that because very few employers would say, oh sure, just go for 

two hours. More typically what they’d say is, you want the day 

off? You can have the day off and you’re welcome to it. We 

understand you have, you know, you have some personal 

business to conduct and you have to conduct it. But don’t be 

just taking an hour here and an hour there and two hours 

somewhere else. Try and bunch your personal work together. 

 

So this “Republican Threat to Voting” article out of The New 

York Times describes some of the problems in the United 

States, and I’m trying to draw the exact parallels between 

problems here. The article, getting back to the April 26 article, 

says: 

 

A survey by the Brennan Center for Justice at New York 

University School of Law found that 11 percent of citizens 

in the United States, 21 million people, do not have a 

current photo ID. That fraction [in the United States, that 

fraction] increases to 15 per cent of low-income 

voting-age citizens, 18 per cent of young eligible voters 

and 25 per cent of black eligible voters. Those 

demographic groups tend to vote Democratic, and 

Republicans are imposing requirements that they know 

many will be unable to meet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, everything that I believe about the United States 

of America and Canada, often parallel . . . I’m not standing here 

and trying to tell you that 11 per cent, exactly 11 per cent of 

Canadians do not have photo ID. But I am standing here saying 

that our numbers won’t be wildly different than that. It won’t 

likely be 22 per cent, and it certainly won’t likely be lower than 

6 per cent. How the United States functions is in many, many, 

many ways the way that Canada functions. We are cousins in so 

many ways. You talk to the people at Big Beaver where their 

port of entry is closing, and they’ll literally tell you they are 

cousins because they’re related on both sides of the border and 

consider themselves as one community as opposed to one 

country being Canada and one country being the United States, 

notwithstanding what our respective federal governments try 

and convince the locals. They know who their friends are, and 

they know who their relatives are, and they know who their 

neighbours are in places like Big Beaver. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this clearly shows that poor people, young 

people getting established in the workforce and, in the United 

States, the black community just find it, have 

disproportionately, are disproportionately under-represented in 

the photo ID situation. And I’m confident that there are 

parallels here. 

 

The article goes on. I’m referring to the April 26, 2011, article 

in The New York Times, titled, “The Republican Threat to 

Voting”. It says: 

 

Kansas’ new law was drafted by its secretary of state, Kris 

Kobach, who also wrote Arizona’s anti-immigration law. 

Voters will be required to show a photo ID at the polls. 

Before they can register, Kansans will have to produce a 

proof of citizenship, such as a birth certificate. 

 

Tough luck if you don’t happen to have one in your 

pocket when you’re at the county fair and you pass the 

voter registration booth. Or when the League of Women 

Voters brings its High School Registration Project to your 

school cafeteria. Or when you show up at your dorm at the 

University of Kansas without your birth certificate. Sorry, 

you won’t be voting in Lawrence, and probably not at all 

[the article says]. 

 

And the next sentence, the next paragraph, Mr. Speaker, I just 

find appalling, but it reads: 

 

That’s fine with Gov. Sam Brownback, who said he 

signed the bill because it’s necessary to “ensure the 



May 4, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7517 

sanctity of the vote.” Actually, Kansas has had only one 

prosecution for voter fraud in the last six years. But 

because of that vast threat to Kansas democracy, an 

estimated 620,000 Kansas residents who lack a 

government ID now stand to lose their right to vote. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that kind of puts it in context about 

what the right wing is about when it comes to voters and the 

right of voters to participate in our democracy. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, when I was in grade school, not high 

school, grade school, they taught us about the Boston Tea Party. 

They taught us about the Boston Tea Party. They taught us 

about representation before taxation. That’s what it was all 

about in the United States, and indeed it was held up as 

something honourable throughout the world — representation 

before taxation, no taxation without representation. 

 

In other words, I get to vote for somebody to set my taxation 

laws and my taxation rate. And if I don’t have a say in that, in 

who gets to put on E & H [education and health] tax or property 

taxes or school taxes or any other form of taxation, income 

taxes, if I don’t have an opportunity to vote, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

resentful as all get-out about being taxed. Give me the right to 

vote. Give me the opportunity to vote. Make that opportunity a 

reasonable opportunity to vote. Let us help people to vote. 

 

Let us not put up roadblocks such as they’re doing in Kansas 

where they’ve had one case of voter fraud in the last six years 

that was prosecuted — one case of voter fraud. And the 

situation is 620,000 people in the state of Kansas, who do not 

have the requisite photo ID, run the risk of not being able to 

vote at all in the next election which is coming up next year in 

Kansas. I’m not trying to look out just for the people of Kansas. 

I am suggesting and saying as clearly as I can, that 

Saskatchewan parallels our great friends to the South. They’re 

requiring a photo ID in Kansas. The Government of 

Saskatchewan is requiring a photo ID of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Name a situation where we’ve had voter fraud. There’s been 

allegations we found out from the minister, allegations that — 

if there is any truth to them — then it is somewhere a 

responsibility either in the ministry or in the minister himself to 

see that those are followed up and that any fraud is dealt with 

appropriately under the laws of Saskatchewan. In this case 

under Bill 162, The Local Government Election Act and, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s the governing Act. 

 

And if there’s fraud committed under that Act, the minister has 

a responsibility to uphold this Act, to help see that it is upheld. 

That’s his job. That’s the minister’s job. That’s the 

government’s job, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The job is not to drive voters away and tell voters that you’re 

not entitled to vote. The job of governments should always, 

always be, Mr. Speaker, to help people to vote. Always, at 

every turn in a democracy, we are better served to have people 

vote. They don’t have to vote for me. They just should vote. 

They just should vote. Many people don’t vote for me, and it’s 

a good thing. The minister agrees with it. It’s okay. You don’t 

have to vote for this MLA, but you should vote. You should 

vote. That’s important. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, this New York Times article, I think, has belled the 

situation. And it continues, and the parallels you will see are 

just stark, the parallels between the great country south of us 

and our own great country of Canada. The article goes on: 

 

Eight states already had photo ID laws. [Eight.] Now more 

than 30 other states are joining the bandwagon of 

disenfranchisement, as Republicans outdo each other to 

propose Bills with new voting barriers. The Wisconsin bill 

refuses to recognize college photo ID cards, even if they 

are issued by a state university, thus cutting off many 

students at the University of Wisconsin and other 

campuses. The Texas bill, so vital that Gov. Rick Perry 

declared it emergency legislation, would also reject 

student IDs . . . 

 

But get this, Mr. Speaker. The article says: 

 

. . . but would allow anyone with a handgun license to 

vote. 

 

A Florida bill would curtail early voting periods which 

have proved popular and . . . 

 

I’ll come back to the gun laws in a minute: 

 

A Florida bill [Mr. Speaker] would curtail early voting 

periods, which have proved popular and brought in new 

voters, and would limit address changes at the polls. “I’m 

going to call this bill for what it is, good-old-fashioned 

voter suppression,” Ben Wilcox of the League of Women 

Voters told The Florida Times-Union. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the article, the final paragraph of the article, and 

then I’m done quoting from this article in The New York Times, 

April 26th, “The Republican Threat to Voting,” the final 

paragraph says: 

 

Many of these bills were inspired by the American 

Legislative Exchange Council, a business-backed 

conservative group, which has circulated voter ID 

proposals in scores of state legislatures. The Supreme 

Court, unfortunately, has already upheld Indiana’s voter 

ID requirement, in a 2008 decision that helped unleash the 

stampede of new bills. Most of the bills have yet to pass, 

and many may not meet the various balancing tests 

required by the Supreme Court. There is still time for 

voters who care about democracy in their states to speak 

out against lawmakers who do not. 

 

And that’s the end of this very good article that parallels the 

situation in the United States, and I’m saying parallels the 

situation here in Canada. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is just as simple as can be. There is 

absolutely, absolutely no cogent argument that can be made to 

make it more difficult for people at the municipal level to vote. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, in the recent federal election, I voted 

where my wife and I reside. It’s a small town familiar to many 

places. My wife and I now reside in the village of Elbow, and 



7518 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2011 

that’s where we have our residence. That’s where I voted. You 

know what? They already know me there. They already know 

us, and it was fairly easy to vote. And they were embarrassed 

that I had to show, they were embarrassed at the polls that I had 

to show my voter ID. They were embarrassed because they 

knew who I was and they knew it was wrong. They knew it was 

bad legislation. They knew it didn’t, it didn’t prevent a single 

iota of voter fraud, Mr. Speaker — not one iota of voter fraud. 

 

The right wing — whether it’s the Republicans in the United 

States, the Sask Party in Saskatchewan, or the Conservative 

Party in Ottawa — want to deny people the right to vote. They 

want to cause the necessity for photo ID when it’s absolutely 

not necessary through most of, certainly of Saskatchewan. 

 

Saskatchewan is a place where, I mean, the Sask Party will tell 

us they know their neighbours. Well come on now, do you 

know your neighbours or don’t you? If you know your 

neighbours, how is a photo ID going to help you recognize your 

neighbour one bit better than you do already today or than you 

did last week or last month or last year? Mr. Speaker, tell me 

how photo ID helps one iota . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I’m having trouble 

hearing the speaker that has the floor. I recognize the member 

from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In Saskatchewan we 

know our neighbours. We know our communities, by and large. 

And there are provisions. You have to be able to provide, in the 

current legislation, proof of identity. The requirement for photo 

ID is simply an intimidation, as is pointed out in a letter dated 

April 19th, 2011. And this letter has been quoted from earlier 

today in question period when my leader, the Leader of the 

Opposition, asked questions about it. 

 

When we offered, we made the offer to the minister responsible 

that if you just take away this mischievous photo ID 

requirements, take that away as requested by the president of 

SUMA in a letter dated April 19th, if you would just take that 

bogus requirement for photo ID away, we can pass this Bill 

today, Mr. Speaker. But the minister said and has told SUMA is 

that they don’t have time in this legislature to make the 

changes. They don’t have the time to make the amendments to 

do this Bill correctly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what a pile of pooey, I don’t even know if that’s 

parliamentary. If it isn’t, Mr. Speaker, I apologize. I won’t use 

that term again. It just kind of fell out there. But it is certainly a 

pile of nonsense. It is certainly unnecessary. It certainly doesn’t 

improve our democracy in one little bit. 

 

And we had the Leader of the Opposition offer up more than 

one time today, give us a commitment you’ll change this photo 

ID requirement, and we’ll get on with the business of passing 

Bills 161 and 162 today, the provincial election Act amendment 

and the municipal amendment Act, Mr. Speaker, the one I’m 

speaking to at this moment. 

 

So we’ve lots of time for opposition to state our case repeatedly 

or as best we can. The government has got lots of time to sit on 

its hands, to wring its hands and close its ears and eyes and say, 

no we don’t have time to do it right. We introduced, we 

consulted, and we got it right they say, Mr. Speaker, they say. 

 

Well how would it be, how is it possible, Mr. Speaker, that the 

government consulted and got the municipal, The Local 

Government Election Act, and they got it right, and yet the 

president of SUMA writes April 19th, I’m quoting, it is to the 

“Honourable Darryl Hickie Minister of Municipal Affairs.” I 

will not use . . . I know I can quote. And I’m not planning to 

use the name repeatedly, but Minister of Municipal Affairs is 

how it will come, and it was a quote. But the letter starts, it 

starts like this, the very first: 

 

Dear Minister . . . [and his name]: 

 

I am writing today to express SUMA’s opposition to voter 

identification (ID) provisions contained within Bill 162, 

an Act to amend The Local Government Election Act. 

 

That’s the first sentence. Now I don’t know how the president, 

who’s Mayor Allan Earle, who signs this two-page letter, I 

don’t know how he could be any clearer than to start “Dear 

Minister . . . I am writing today to express SUMA’s opposition 

. . .” he says to these amendments. 

 

And if you read the letter in its entirety, Mr. Speaker, they’re 

trying to be supportive of The Election Act. I don’t want to 

misrepresent SUMA and say, oh they’re opposed to all of the 

changes. Not at all, Mr. Speaker. They like much of the 

changes. The voter ID, they do not like, Mr. Speaker. They say 

take it out, and they are happy campers. Take out this 

nonsensical requirement for ID, for photo ID, Mr. Speaker, we 

become pretty darn happy campers on this side too. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the president of SUMA couldn’t be any clearer. 

The minister says, oh SUMA’s all in favour of the rest of it. I 

have characterized this letter I think quite properly. But you 

can’t be any clearer than the opening sentence: “I am writing 

today to express SUMA’s opposition to voter identification 

provisions contained within Bill 162 . . . ” That’s the opening 

sentence, can’t be any clearer than that. It doesn’t beat around 

the bush. Here’s the problem, here’s the problem with the Bill 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, no. Read it later, Minister, 

absolutely. And I’ve said the rest of the Bill is fine. 

 

You’ve gone on, there’s the April 19th letter and then followed 

up with an April 27th letter to the same minister from the same 

President Earle of SUMA, Mr. Speaker. And it is quite clear in 

the second letter that SUMA was told that there was no time in 

this sitting of this legislature to make amendments to the Act. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that is so remote from reality. It is remote 

from the truth. It is simply not accurate. We have a commitment 

from my leader, earlier today, not taken up by the government. 

We have speeches time after time. We have stood, I’ve listened 

to, I’ve participated in speeches on Bill 161 and on Bill 162, 

both of which our biggest problem, the biggest concern is the 

unnecessary requirement of photo ID. 

 

What we are concerned about, Mr. Speaker, is the 

disenfranchisement of voters at every letter. And I know, I 

know I’ve got members opposite’s attention. They’re heckling, 

Mr. Speaker, and that’s their right to, and I welcome it. I think 

it’s a great democracy we have when I get to stand up and 

represent my constituents and other people throughout the 



May 4, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7519 

province of Saskatchewan to the best of my ability as I see fit 

and they get to heckle. And the government gets to propose 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, and in this case the government has. 

 

But I want to contrast this. I want to contrast this Sask Party 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, that’s saying, you don’t bring your ID, 

your proper ID, you don’t get to vote. You don’t have a proper 

ID, too bad. If you’ve just moved recently and you can’t prove 

your residence, too bad. You can be denied the right to vote. 

You don’t have a photo ID, you can be denied the right to vote. 

That’s what this legislation says. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to contrast this Sask Party legislation with 

legislation brought in in the 1970s dealing with the very same 

municipal election Act. And in the 1970s, up until that 

happened under the Al Blakeney New Democrats, up until that 

moment you had to be a property owner, owner to vote in a 

municipal election, in a local government election, school board 

or municipality. You had to own the property, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Blakeney recognized the reality, which was that renters pay the 

taxes. It flows through the landlord, but a landlord that owns a 

half a dozen — or pick a number — of properties, and pick any 

number of properties, but the people that are paying that rent 

ultimately are the renters. And they were included, and they 

were included after that because my party, in fact a great man, 

Al Blakeney, who I had the great fortune of serving with in this 

legislature when I was first elected in 1986 . . . . He sat right 

there and I sat two seats behind him. Things have changed now 

front row . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . But yes, I won’t be 

front row next time. The member for Regina South has got that 

absolutely right. He’s got that absolutely right. I will not be in 

the front row after the next election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But Allan Blakeney was a consummate believer in democracy. 

I don’t want to make this about Al Blakeney, but he passed this 

legislation including renters because he believed it was the 

proper thing to do, because he believed that a democracy with 

greater participation was a democracy that we should salute, 

and even if it meant that we would ultimately lose an election. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Incidentally I know that several elections, or the election 

leading up to the 1971 election, Al Blakeney represented a 

constituency in Regina that was more than four times the 

average size of constituencies throughout the province because 

there had been . . . We had the situation of gerrymandering of 

unequal sizes of constituencies. But because New Democrats, 

led by Al Blakeney, believed so strongly that we would get it 

right, we’ve got the situation where today we have a situation 

where every constituency with the exception of the two 

northern ones — I want to point that out, Athabasca and 

Cumberland, because they between each of them represent 

one-quarter of the geographic area of Saskatchewan — but all 

of the rest are mandated to be within 5 per cent, plus or minus 5 

per cent largest to smallest. And we have redistributions every 

two elections by law just to make sure that we stay within that 

plus or minus so that everybody’s vote essentially counts 

equally in Saskatchewan. 

 

And we did that not because it would benefit the New 

Democratic Party in particular or any individual candidate. We 

did it because it was the proper thing to do. Because we believe 

in democracy, Mr. Speaker, because we believe that the 

electorate has the right to say. And, you know, they absolutely 

have that ability. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have the April 19th letter to the minister 

from the president of SUMA, Mayor Allan Earle, and in the 

third paragraph it says, “The proposed voter identification 

amendments as they stand present numerous challenges 

including that: (1) . . .” This has been highlighted and it’s 

difficult to read. Now it’s better with glasses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, “(1) they appear to be unnecessary.” So it’s 

unnecessary. “(2) the provisions and the proposed regulations 

do not further the purpose of the amendments.” They add 

nothing to the legislation. It adds nothing, Mr. Speaker, to the 

legislation. “(3) they raise the possibility of voter intimidation.” 

Voters are being essentially told, it’s more difficult to vote so 

don’t show up at the polls. That’s what SUMA has to say. Mr. 

Speaker, the fourth thing is “they are likely to negatively impact 

voter turnout,” discouraging voters from showing up to vote, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Four reasons outlined by SUMA to just get rid of this . . . 

[inaudible] . . . voter ID requirement. It adds nothing. It doesn’t 

enhance our democracy. It doesn’t stop voter fraud. It doesn’t 

do anything other than actively discourage voters from going to 

vote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well what kind of a democracy is that? What kind of a deaf 

government is that that refuses to listen to that argument, not by 

the member for Regina Coronation Park, but by Mayor Allan 

Earle, the SUMA president? What kind of a deaf government is 

it that says, we’ve consulted? We’ve consulted, and we have 

got The Election Act, Bill 162, The Local Government Election 

Act. We got it right because we consulted first. And then 

SUMA, for heaven’s sake, says, we don’t like this. 

 

It’s hard to believe that there was a serious consultation 

undertaken. There may have been a serious reading of the tea 

leaves. There may have been a Ouija board involved. There 

may have been a discussion with mom or with dad, but I don’t 

think there was a serious discussion with SUMA. I don’t think 

there was a serious discussion likely with SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] or with any 

of the school boards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all it takes for this to end, all it takes for this to 

end and for us to pass this legislation is a commitment by the 

government that they’ll take out this unnecessary nonsense 

about photo ID, Mr. Speaker. That’s all it takes. Nobody but 

nobody but nobody has been able to say how photo ID is going 

to help us at all. There’s been no answer as to how photo ID is 

going to help us at all. Mr. Speaker, when the Bill is called, 

there’s every opportunity, equal opportunity for government 

members to stand and speak as there is for opposition members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had the minister tell the Leader of the 

Opposition in question period that SUMA knows there isn’t 

time, that SUMA’s happy with this legislation. And yet in the 

April 27th letter it is quite clear that SUMA was told, and I’m 

going to read and then . . . Pardon me. I’ll read the second 

paragraph because it’s pretty clear. 



7520 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2011 

As articulated in my letter, SUMA supported the majority 

of the content in Bill 162 and supported the intent of voter 

ID requirements. We did however have reservations 

regarding the provisions as articulated in the Bill and in 

the draft regulations. As the letter indicates, it has always 

been our intent to work with the government to improve 

these provisions. Based on our recent discussions with 

your officials it was our understanding that our interest in 

making changes to the provisions could not be 

accommodated within the remaining sitting days of the 

Twenty-sixth Legislative Assembly. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, again I say to our friends in SUMA, to our 

friends right across Saskatchewan, that is very remote from the 

truth. It is very remote from reality. We have a standing 

commitment to make these very changes that are being asked 

for. We’ve said the opposition will facilitate the passage of Bill 

161 and 162 in committee. All we need, the only thing we’re 

requiring is the government to commit to changing the photo ID 

requirements, to listening to what SUMA, the president of 

SUMA, after he met with his board, what the president of 

SUMA wrote to the minister asking for. 

 

This is not some great orange crush or socialist cause or 

anything like that. It’s a cause for democracy, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

a cause for us to help uphold the president of SUMA, the great 

SUMA organization, and just make as sure as we can that 

Saskatchewan’s municipal elections are conducted in a way that 

encourages Saskatchewan’s electorate to vote, that encourages 

a greater turnout because it is again in all of our interest. 

 

What’s not in our interest is to have a potential voter say, well 

you know, they don’t want to hear us anyway; they all do the 

same thing; they’re all alike — words to that effect. Mr. 

Speaker, I know it’s not accurate. I know there are differences 

in councillors within every village, hamlet, town, municipality, 

city. There are differences on council. And it’s a good thing, 

Mr. Speaker. There are differences in the Saskatchewan 

legislature. I’m going to go a step further. There are differences 

on this side of the House amongst ourselves and I’m sure there 

are differences — I sure hope there are anyway — on the 

government side. And the reason I say I hope so is, Mr. 

Speaker, if everyone agrees on everything absolutely all of the 

time, it means you’ve got an awful lot of people that are not 

thinking. 

 

And I believe that Saskatchewan people by and large are 

thinking people. We are respectful people. We want to have the 

best for our neighbours, our friends, our relatives. We want 

good things. We want good things not only today, but good 

things in the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that SUMA’s being told is we 

don’t have time to make amendments to Bill 162, the municipal 

election Act. We don’t have time to make changes in 

committee, notwithstanding that the very rules of this 

legislature say that you make amendments in committee. We do 

it all the time, Mr. Speaker. Many Bills, in every single session 

I have been a part of in 24 years, every session where there’s 

been Bills passed, every single session there have been 

amendments. I don’t want to quantify it, but significant 

numbers of amendments. I’m not talking one or two 

amendments a session. I’m talking lots of Bills have one, two, 

six amendments in the Bill alone and often more than that. 

Some Bills of course get passed without amendment. 

 

But to say that we don’t have time to amend Bills or that 

somehow that’s foreign to the rules of this Assembly is just 

absurd. It’s an insult to the intelligence of the president of 

SUMA, and it’s an insult to the board of directors of SUMA. 

It’s an insult to the people of Saskatchewan to say we don’t 

have the ability or the time to make amendments to the 

municipal election Act in the Saskatchewan legislature where 

we’re supposed to do that. It’s just crazy. It’s just crazy, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Nothing again could be further from the truth. We have the 

time. We can do this Act right. We can make improvements to 

the municipal election Act. That’s what we want to see. Make 

these changes we’re asking for, and you know what? We’ll say 

good things, nice things about the Sask Party government and 

the municipal election change. We’ll say nice things about the 

change in the provincial election Act too if you do the same 

thing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the nice part is it would break this nonsensical right wing 

drive to disenfranchise poor people, to disenfranchise seniors, 

and to disenfranchise, frankly, in Saskatchewan, the Aboriginal 

population — disproportionately disenfranchise. Not everyone 

from those three areas will be cut out, far from it, but too many 

will. If we disenfranchise one voter, one voter with this 

legislation, we have failed; we have been negligent in our duty. 

 

Nowhere does it say that the job of an MLA is to make sure that 

people can’t vote. Nowhere does it . . . You know, not one 

minister, not one member of the government can find 

constituents that will tell you your job is to cut people out from 

voting, disenfranchise them from voting. I defy you to find 

someone that will say that, that will say, oh no, you should cut 

out this segment or this segment or disallow that person or that 

person from voting. Mr. Speaker, that’s not our job. Our jobs, 

our jobs are to absolutely enhance the voting opportunities, to 

make it as clear as we can, and just to do things in a better and 

better way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the argument that we don’t have time to pass 

legislation, I stand before you proof that we can. And I just 

want to remind myself. I need some reminding from time to 

time. We passed the Gallenger amendment, the Gallenger Act. 

It was an amendment to The Highway Traffic Act that resulted 

from the tragic death, from the tragic death of a snowplow 

operator, Department of Highways worker, Jim Gallenger. 

 

Jim and his widow Sharon, you know, great people. We can’t 

do anything to bring Mr. Gallenger back, Mr. Speaker. But 

what this Assembly was able to do — and we did it — we 

invited the Gallenger family in. Crystal, their daughter, was 

here as well. And we passed that Act in something like 30 

minutes, start to finish, passed the Act. With consent, we 

passed. To stop that Act from passing, it would have required 

one person to say no, to stop the consent, and then it would 

have had to take a little slower path. 

 

[16:45] 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, why would we . . . I mean, we’re not even 



May 4, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7521 

talking about that. We’re talking in this Bill 162, The Local 

Government Election Act, we’re talking a regular process of . . . 

Our job is to point out the problems. The opposition’s job is to 

point out the problems in particular. The government’s job is to 

find them in the first place before they even draft the 

legislation, but they’ve missed on this one. The government 

missed. 

 

We’re pointing out that there’s an opportunity to make this 

piece of legislation one that we could all be proud of, Mr. 

Speaker. And why on earth would we pass up that opportunity? 

What reason on this wonderful world could there be to not 

agree that we want to enfranchise? We want municipal voters to 

vote as the president of SUMA has asked for, has pointed out is 

eminently reasonable. Why on earth would we not simply say 

yes, we’ll make those changes? 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s not a brand new concept that 

I’m bringing up today. I brought it up on Bill 161 just a couple 

of days ago, last week. And other colleagues on this side of the 

legislature have been bringing up the concern with photo ID for 

a good, good long time. The government has had all kinds of 

time, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got this fairly significant file. I’ve 

got the other half of the file on my seatmate’s desk. We’ve got 

this fairly significant file around this one Bill. And all of the file 

is essentially around the requirement of voter ID and photo ID 

which we find particularly offensive, which we find 

mean-spirited, and we find it as simply reprehensible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we should be looking for is ways of saying 

to SUMA and SARM, school trustees, school board 

association, we should be finding ways to say to these 

organizations, you probably know what’s right and what’s 

wrong with your municipal elections. Primarily of course I’m 

talking SUMA and SARM, Mr. Speaker, because that’s where 

the balloting transpires. 

 

But we should have a little bit of faith in our municipal 

governments when they say that voter ID doesn’t add a thing to 

the legislation, that adds absolutely no value at all. Well then it 

seems to me we should be listening to the president of SUMA 

when the president says that. When the president of SUMA 

says voter ID, the photo ID is unnecessary, we should listen. 

We should listen. He took the time, not once but twice, to write 

two thoughtful letters that we have. 

 

I have no idea how many other letters, I have no idea how many 

other attempts at communication there have been. I don’t know 

that. I just have the two letters that were carbon copied to the 

member for Moose Jaw Wakamow and that’s, I’m confident, 

that’s how we came about them. And it’s very appropriate that 

we should have it because we can make common cause on this 

issue, Mr. Speaker. We can make common cause with SUMA 

and try and get the Sask Party government to shift from the 

nonsensical notion that photo ID enhances the electoral process. 

We have quotes from the president of SUMA talking about it 

not adding any value, about them being hard-pressed to find 

any evidence of voter fraud. 

 

We have a comment that this Act will lead to voter 

intimidation. I know that one of the ways it can lead to voter 

intimidation is that the scrutineers can also be challenging 

credentials and need to see the identification of voters, and 

that’s simply a wrong-headed move. You have your electoral 

officials charged with making sure that the documents are 

appropriate. It is absolutely fair, Mr. Speaker, that if a 

scrutineer is convinced that someone is ineligible to vote, it is 

absolutely fair for that scrutineer to challenge. But then the job 

is for the paid officials at that polling station to set rules, to 

follow the law, to ensure either they are, yes, eligible or they 

are not, no. And if the answer is no, then they simply cannot 

vote, Mr. Speaker. So I just don’t understand the voter ID 

requirement that the government is so determined to have, Mr. 

Speaker. I just don’t quite get it. 

 

We’ve got a situation where the Sask Party is proposing 

changes that will disenfranchise, changes that will help drive 

voters away from the polling station. Not in droves — I don’t 

want to overstate this, Mr. Speaker. I don’t want to overstate it. 

But we have a situation where not one single voter will be 

encouraged to come and vote as a result of Bill 162. Not one 

single voter will be encouraged to show up, but according to the 

president of SUMA, voters will be discouraged, in other words, 

not invited to come and vote. 

 

And that’s at every stage a mistake, Mr. Speaker. New 

Democrats believe in the voter’s right to participate. We believe 

that you should have representation before you have taxation. 

It’s a long-standing tradition. I’ve already talked about in the 

’70s when the New Democratic Party Government of 

Saskatchewan brought in the right for renters to vote in 

municipal elections, and that was an important step forward for 

people that didn’t own property, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Along those lines, we are the party that has brought in the 

independent officers of this legislature: the Ombudsman, the 

Children’s Advocate, to name a couple; the Rentalsman. In 

workers’ compensation, we brought in the worker’s advocate’s 

office, you know, the worker advocate, and a host of workers 

that can look into claims of mishandled workers’ compensation. 

These are all things that New Democrats believe in, and we put 

the enabling legislation in place. We put the resources in place. 

 

We try to make those things happen because we firmly believe 

that good governance requires a population that is able to fairly 

readily get access to the information that enables them to make 

decisions. If you provide the ability to make decisions, this is a 

good thing. And that’s something that we have long believed, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Back to the ’70s and even before, I’m reminded of when 

Tommy Douglas — great leader of the CCF-NDP 

[Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New Democratic 

Party], Canada’s greatest Canadian — said to the chief 

librarian, your job is to keep library services accessible, 

particularly to researchers and MLAs but most especially, most 

especially, these resources have to be available to the 

opposition. 

 

That’s what he said then, Mr. Speaker, and it has everything to 

do with our democracy. It has everything to do with our belief 

that elected officials need to have the ability to get access to 

information, and it should be in as timely a manner as we can. It 

should be readily available, and then the elected officials in turn 

disseminate that information out to our respective publics. And 

it happens, certainly it happens at the federal level to some 



7522 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2011 

degree. It happens to a greater degree, I would argue, at the 

provincial level. And it happens almost constantly at the 

municipal level, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, the mayor of Regina, Pat Fiacco, can’t go anywhere 

without being recognized as the mayor of Regina. And people 

think he’s the mayor whether he’s out with his family having 

supper or whether he’s chairing a city hall meeting or whether 

he’s opening a business or whether he’s simply having a cup of 

coffee with you or I. Everyone knows he’s the mayor of Regina 

here and feels free to communicate with Pat. And I think that’s 

probably, on balance, a good thing. It’s probably a good thing. 

But that’s the reality of our lives. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this Bill 162, we have offered in question 

period, the Leader of the Opposition made an offer directly. He 

asked questions of the minister responsible and he made the 

offer that, if you just take out this bad provision for photo ID, 

Mr. Speaker, take out that bad provision and we will . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Yes. I’d ask members to 

allow the member to continue his comments. I recognize the 

member from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Leader of the 

Opposition has made it crystal clear in question period. He 

asked questions around this. He’s trying to be supportive of 

Mayor Allan Earle, the president of SUMA, who wrote not one 

but two very thoughtful letters. The first one that started with, 

quote from the letter: 

 

Dear Minister Hickie: 

 

I am writing today to express SUMA’s opposition to voter 

identification (ID) provisions contained within Bill 162, 

an Act to amend The Local Government Election Act. 

 

He started with that and then very thoughtfully outlined his 

concerns which substantially are four concerns. He was very 

clear about it. Mr. Earle was generally very supportive of the 

overall changes in the municipal election Act. 

 

And I want to be crystal clear. We are, by and large, in support 

of the changes to The Election Act. What we object to is this 

nonsensical requirement for photo ID, this requirement, Mr. 

Speaker, that makes it not easier in any way for anyone to vote. 

Not easier at all; it makes it more difficult to vote. It has people 

unable to vote. 

 

People in our democracy, Mr. Speaker, people are . . . We’re a 

law-abiding society. People just need to know what the rules 

are. We’re Canadian, eh. We’re Canadian, eh. We obey the 

laws, by and large. 

 

And it’s interesting. Now I’m getting to the crux of it. Sask 

Party members are saying, oh but they could vote twice or some 

other nonsensical thing. If there’s voter fraud, the minister 

responsible for the municipal election Act should see that The 

Election Act is followed. Voter ID does nothing to change how 

often you vote. If I vote at one place, I have to register as a 

voter. If I then go to the next place, I have to register as a voter. 

Mr. Speaker, it is crystal clear I’ve tried to vote twice then. 

 

Voter ID is nonsensically . . . It’s a nonsensical barrier put up 

and it will have, the only effect it will have is it will drive 

voters away from the polling station and that is a shame. It’s a 

right wing effort to suppress people’s right to vote. And I say 

shame on the Sask Party government for doing that — shame, 

shame, shame. This should be gone, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Being 5 p.m., the hour of adjournment, this 

Assembly stands adjourned until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7495 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7495 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7495 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7495 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7495 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7496 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7496 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7496 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7496 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7496 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7496 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7496 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7497 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7497 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7497 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7497 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7498 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7498 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Multiple Sclerosis Awareness Month 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7498 

 International Firefighters’ Day 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7498 

 Mental Health Week 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7498 

 Vote for the Sheepdogs 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7499 

 Enhancing Public Safety 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7499 

 Missing Children and the Green Ribbon of Hope 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7499 

 Plan for Potash Taxes 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7500 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Voting Requirements 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7500 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7500 

 Solution for Flooding at Red Earth Cree Nation 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7502 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7502 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7502 

 Care of Children 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7503 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7503 

 Mental Health Services 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7504 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7504 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 173 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2011 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7505 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7505 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7505 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7505 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7505 

 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 172 — The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les victimes d’actes criminels 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7505 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7508 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 7515 

 Bill No. 162 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7515 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


