




















































Hansard: March 08, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 27A  TUESDAY, MARCH 8, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6543 

 March 8, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Through you and to you to the rest of the Assembly, it 

gives me great pleasure to introduce Gail McArthur Posehn. 

Gail is seated in your gallery today. Gail is a board member 

from Family Services Regina. Their organization is hosting a 

fundraising luncheon tomorrow at Casino Regina. Sask Gaming 

is one of the event‟s proud sponsors. 

 

Gail is here today showing an amazing handmade 

Saskatchewan Roughrider quilt that she has created. The quilt is 

signed by the entire 2010 team as well as notable alumni like 

George Reed. It‟s an incredible piece of work. It‟ll be 

highlighted tomorrow at an auction at the casino. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through you to all members of the Assembly, I 

would encourage people to attend if possible to highlight the 

good work that Family Services Regina has done, and the 

important programs and services that they undertake. At this 

time I‟d like to welcome Gail to her Assembly and thank her for 

her commitment to Regina and the province of Saskatchewan. 

I‟d ask all members to help me welcome her. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I‟d like to 

introduce to this Assembly some guests who have taken time 

from their busy day to come and express through their presence 

their concerns about the present state of mental health care in 

Saskatchewan. And joining us in the gallery today is David 

Nelson. David, could you give us a wave? Is he here? Oh, he‟s 

coming. He‟s the provincial executive director of the Canadian 

Mental Health Association and he‟s brought along some other 

members of his organization. And joining us today also are 

dedicated and caring nurses of the Registered Psychiatric 

Nurses‟ Association, including Karl Mack and Mary Kay 

Renwick. And other psychiatric nurses who are here. Give a 

wave. Oh, lots. Thank you. And there‟s also representatives 

today from the Schizophrenia Society of Saskatchewan up 

there. 

 

And I‟d like everyone to join me in welcoming these dedicated 

health care workers and the community volunteers who so 

obviously illustrate their commitment to the cause for effective 

provisions of mental health care in Saskatchewan. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone, the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

I‟d like to join with the member opposite in welcoming 

members from the mental health community here to their 

Legislative Assembly, whether it‟s the Canadian mental health 

society, the psychiatric nurses‟ association or the Schizophrenia 

Society. Mr. Speaker, I want to welcome them to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

I‟ve met with many of these organizations over the past three 

and a half years and some prior to us becoming government. 

And just publicly, if I don‟t have another opportunity 

throughout the day, to thank them for the work that they do for 

the people that are challenged with mental illness. They do, 

absolutely do wonderful work and God‟s work. So thank them 

on behalf of the government for the work that they do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to do an 

extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has asked for 

leave to do an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s my privilege and 

pleasure to introduce Tom Graham, the president of CUPE 

[Canadian Union of Public Employees] Saskatchewan, who is 

seated in your gallery. And with him is translator Barbara Wood 

as well as Cheryl Stadnichuk who is a staff and researcher at 

CUPE. 

 

But also joining them, a very, very special guest who I want to 

introduce, Berenice Celeyta who is here with us. And Berenice 

is the director of an organization called the Association for 

Social Research and Action. And this is a group that does 

human rights work in the area in southwestern Colombia, 

building and defending social alternatives in that part of 

Colombia. 

 

In more than 20 years as a human rights defender, Ms. Celeyta 

has worked with indigenous people and Afro-Colombians in 

communities and in the labour movement. And in the labour 

movement, she played important roles with national mining 

unions with investigating human rights abuse and massive 

displacements related to mining concessions in foreign 

corporations. She also worked with the Cali public utilities 

union, fighting against privatization in the public utilities in that 

community. 

 

In 1988 Ms. Celeyta was recognized for her outstanding work 

with the prestigious Robert F. Kennedy Human Rights Award. 

Sadly she has also been a target of death threats and 

harassment. In 2001 the Inter-American Commission of Human 

Rights requested the Colombian government provide 

precautionary measures on her behalf, but she continues to 

receive threats on her life and to her safety. 

 

Ms. Celeyta‟s in Regina as a guest of the Canadian Union of 



6544 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2011 

Public Employees Saskatchewan, which is holding their annual 

convention this week. Ms. Celeyta has already visited the 

University of Regina to address students, as well as CUPE 

Saskatchewan in the Aboriginal conference there where she 

spoke on the rights of indigenous people around the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m sure all members will want to welcome our 

special guests here to the Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice, the 

member responsible for Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to join 

with the Opposition Leader in welcoming these individuals to 

the House. Mr. Graham and Ms. Wood and Ms. Stadnichuk are 

no strangers to Saskatchewan and to this House. So we 

welcome them here, and we thank them for their continued 

good work in this particular endeavour. This is something that‟s 

significantly above and beyond the work that would ordinarily 

be undertaken in the labour movement, so we thank them for 

their extended and expanded role that they are taking. 

 

With regard to Ms. Celeyta, we would like to welcome her to 

the province and commend her for her continuing good work. 

The work that she is undertaking, when you put your own life at 

risk for others, is something that is not something that should go 

unrecognized by all members of the House. And I think that all 

members would support any work that promotes human rights, 

promotes safety and security of individuals in the workplace 

and elsewhere. So we thank her, and we thank the individuals 

that she‟s come with for their work and urge them to continue. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

introduce to you, and through you to members of the Assembly, 

a young woman sitting in your gallery who is very dedicated to 

the sport of figure skating. Now this young woman, Hannah 

Lingenfelter, was in Moose Jaw last weekend and had a very 

good performance at the 2011 SaskTel Jean Norman Open Free 

Skate and Dance Competition that was held in my community 

of Moose Jaw. Hannah won gold in the free skate and gold in 

the elements. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that‟s pretty impressive, and it‟s always 

interesting to see young people that are very dedicated to the 

sports they‟re involved in. And I know she‟s committed; she 

spends many hours even throughout the summer practising her 

craft and it‟s beginning to pay off very well for her. 

 

Hannah‟s here with her mother, Rubiela, and I‟d like all 

members to welcome both of them here to the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I‟d like to 

introduce Mr. Peter Adsten who‟s here from Saskatoon today. 

Many will know that he was the founder or one of the founders, 

one of the partners of Crestline ambulances and made a 

significant contribution to our province and certainly well 

beyond our province regarding medical care for people. Mr. 

Speaker, we‟re delighted to be able to welcome him to his 

Assembly today. I ask all members to help me in welcoming 

Mr. Adsten to his Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for more protection for 

renters from unreasonable rent increases. And we know that 

renters here in Saskatchewan are seeing their rents increase by 

several hundred dollars per month, with the average rent 

increases, even in smaller communities like Estevan, being 

more than $200 year over year. And we know that the majority 

of Canadians now live in provinces with rent control guidelines 

including Manitoba, BC [British Columbia], Ontario, Quebec, 

and Prince Edward Island. I would like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

consider enacting some form of rent control with a view of 

protecting Saskatchewan renters from unreasonable 

increases in rent. 

 

I do so present. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to 

stand today and to present a petition on behalf of my 

constituents regarding the need for a school in Hampton 

Village: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes including education property taxes; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to neighbouring 

communities to attend schools that are typically already 

reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition live in the 

community of Hampton Village. I so present. 

 



March 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6545 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present a petition signed by residents of Saskatchewan 

concerned about Bill 160, human rights law, which will 

effectively change in significant ways the human rights law of 

the province of Saskatchewan and without public consultation. 

And the prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Government of Saskatchewan withdraw 

Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative Assembly 

of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public consultations, 

informed by a public policy paper, before any amendments 

to the Human Rights Code, the law that supersedes all 

others in our province, are even considered. 

 

And the petition today is signed by residents of Saskatoon, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of our 

finances by the Sask Party. They allude specifically to the two 

consecutive deficit budgets, the two years of debt growth, all 

despite high levels — in fact record levels — of revenues, Mr. 

Speaker, this year growing our debt by $400 million in a single 

budget year, Mr. Speaker, of course coming at a consequence 

to Saskatchewan people and organizations. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Estevan. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

International Women’s Day 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, International Women‟s Day is 

celebrated annually on March 8th. In 2011 we pay tribute to 

100 years of celebrating women‟s achievements around the 

world through observing and hosting International Women‟s 

Day events in our communities. 

 

Sadly, Mr. Speaker, we know that Saskatchewan women are 

facing more pressures to make ends meet and take care of their 

family and their loved ones. Rents are now unaffordable in our 

province. Food bank usage is up 20 per cent over just last year 

to a disheartening 23,000 people relying on the food bank for 

help. Unemployment is also up from last year, with 27,000 

families struggling with the worry of how to pay their bills. 

 

Planned changes by the Wall government to shut down the 

Human Rights Tribunal will also impact . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask the members to refer to 

individuals of the Assembly by their proper title. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Ms. Morin: — Planned changes by the Sask Party government 

to shut down the Human Rights Tribunal will also impact 

Saskatchewan women, forcing more gender-based complaints 

to be heard in court with the cost of hired lawyers. 

 

New Democrats believe we can do more as a province for our 

women. Helping with make rent affordable, more money for 

child care, and shelving ill-conceived plans to shut down the 

Human Rights Tribunal would be a positive move forward for 

Saskatchewan women. Let‟s acknowledge 100 years of 

celebrating women‟s achievements by adding more to the list. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to join with the New 

Democrats in marking 100 years of International Women‟s Day 

events and join us on making positive changes to improve the 

lives of Saskatchewan women. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, each year 

on March the 8th, women and men in Saskatchewan join with 

the global community to celebrate International Women‟s Day. 

This special day is a time to reflect on the progress made to 

advance women‟s equality and to celebrate the economic, 

political, and social gains made for all society. These include 

protection language in labour standards, rights to maternity 

leave, increased participation in the labour force, and expansion 

of educational opportunities. 

 

This special day has been observed since 1911 and was 

officially proclaimed by the United Nations in 1975. In 

Saskatchewan the theme in 2011 is A Celebration of 100 Years 

of International Women‟s Day. Across the province, events are 

being organized to honour women past and present and to 

inspire a future generation of women and girls to achieve their 

dreams. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that the Status of Women office in 

the Ministry of Social Services, through an International 

Women‟s Day grant program, is assisting 97 community-based 

women‟s organizations that will host 38 events throughout the 

month of March. I encourage my colleagues to take the time to 

attend activities in their own communities. Details of these 

events are listed on the Ministry of Social Services website. 



6546 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2011 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this House and the 

people of this province join me in paying tribute to many 

women who have contributed to making Saskatchewan such a 

wonderful place to live and work. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Rural Women’s Month 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As people around the 

world observe International Women‟s Day, I rise to 

acknowledge Rural Women‟s Month here in Saskatchewan, a 

time to be reminded and honour rural women of this province 

who have helped shape Saskatchewan into the strong, caring 

society that it is today. 

 

Rural women have positive ideas about the changes needed to 

improve the well-being of not only themselves but their 

communities, Mr. Speaker. Yet in recent years, demographic 

shifts, funding cuts to women‟s organizations, and the triple 

workload that farm and rural women carry have made it more 

difficult for rural women and their organizations to remain 

active and present their views which, Mr. Speaker, is a loss for 

us all. That‟s why, Mr. Speaker, I‟m proud the New Democratic 

Party has been working hard to recruit today‟s generation of 

strong rural women to make sure that those voices are heard 

here in this legislature. 

 

Jeanette Wiciski-Dunn is a volunteer, business owner, and 

former town councillor who will bring her formidable business 

and leadership organizational skills to her new role as the MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. Bernadette Gopher is the NDP [New Democratic Party] 

candidate for Rosthern-Shellbrook, a business owner and 

operator and a member of the Saulteaux First Nation. Janice 

Bernier is the candidate in Batoche, is an organizer, activist, and 

community volunteer that is closely involved with the family 

farm south of Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these women have already proven that rural 

women can be a strong voice for positive change, and very soon 

their voices will be heard here in the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Tribute to the Red Cross 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Would it not be 

possible in times of peace and quiet to form relief societies for 

the purposes of having care given to the wounded in wartime by 

zealous, devoted, and thoroughly qualified volunteers? This is 

the question asked by Henry Dunant, Swiss founder of the Red 

Cross, after witnessing suffering on an Italian battlefield in 

1859. 

 

The Red Cross makes no discrimination as to nationality, race, 

religious beliefs, class, or political opinions. They endeavour to 

relieve the suffering of individuals, being guided solely by their 

needs, and to give priority to the most urgent cases of distress. 

 

Mr. Speaker, disasters can strike any time and anywhere and 

those in need cannot wait. Canadian Red Cross helps vulnerable 

communities in Canada and around the world affected by 

emergencies and disasters, situations ranging from individual 

house fires to floods and earthquakes that disrupt entire regions. 

Following a disaster, Red Cross workers provide vital 

assistance for people‟s basic needs, including shelter, family 

reunification, and first aid, along with clothing and food. It is 

because of the tireless efforts of their volunteers that the 

suffering of distressed people worldwide has been eased. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they played a tremendous role in the floods this 

past summer throughout the province, including Yorkton. And I 

ask this Assembly to thank and recognize the tremendous 

efforts of the Canadian Red Cross Society. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

International Women’s Day 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, on this the 100th International 

Women‟s Day, we recognize how far women have come over 

the last century, but we also recognize how far we still have yet 

to travel on the road to true equality. Women in the workforce 

face special challenges, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan, statistics show that the average hourly 

rate for women in 2010 was 85 per cent of that for men. Yes, 

Mr. Speaker, still, after 100 years of International Women‟s 

Days, for every 100 cents a man earns, a woman earns just 85 

cents, and many say it‟s going down rather than up. 

 

And inequality isn‟t limited to those earning hourly wages. Mr. 

Speaker, it goes all the way up to the glass ceiling, and in 

today‟s paper it‟s referred now to as the steel ceiling, and a 

ceiling that keeps women underrepresented at the leadership 

level as well. A survey released today of 290 Canadian 

organizations found that 82 per cent had no clear strategy for 

encouraging women to enter leadership positions. The trend to 

present here in Saskatchewan too, from 2005 to 2010, men‟s 

share of managers‟ jobs increased by nearly 15 per cent, women 

just by 12. If the increase had been equal, Mr. Speaker, there 

would be over 400 more Saskatchewan women working in 

leadership positions than there are here today. 

 

And the challenges don‟t end with the workday, Mr. Speaker. A 

University of Toronto study finds that women who regularly 

deal with work calls on their personal time experience greater 

stress than men — a difference that‟s likely rooted in 

stereotyped expectations about men‟s and women‟s roles in 

work and home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, despite all of these challenges, women continue to 

make gains in the struggle for equality in the workplace and 

beyond, but the numbers remind us there is still much work for 

all of us to do. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Rural Women’s Month 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In recognition of the 



March 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6547 

significant contributions to this great province, our government 

has proclaimed March Rural Women‟s Month. This month we 

celebrate the past and present contributions of Saskatchewan‟s 

rural women. 

 

Throughout our history, rural women have played a valuable 

role in their family farms, local communities, and the growth of 

our province and the agriculture industry. The contributions of 

strong rural women can be seen, whether through working the 

land, educating youth, tending the sick and elderly, or providing 

commercial services. Rural women are also vital volunteers to 

the communities, be it refereeing, working groups for hockey 

and ball tournaments, working bingos for fundraising, or being 

4-H club leaders. 

 

Saskatchewan has prospered, and the rural women in this 

province have and continue to play a pivotal role in our 

province‟s success. As Saskatchewan continues to take its place 

as a leader in the new West, our rural areas will continue to add 

to the overall strength and vitality of our province. 

 

I would ask that this Assembly recognize the hard work and 

leadership of rural women in Saskatchewan. The women of our 

province have been and will continue to be critical to the 

progress of Saskatchewan. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mental Health Concerns in Northern Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise in 

the Chamber today to raise awareness for mental health in 

Saskatchewan, specifically the mental health of our northern 

peoples and the terrible consequences of not responding to these 

challenges, and that is the suicide rates within some of our 

northern communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it weighs heavy on the heart to know that so many 

of our young people are in such a desperate hour in their lives 

that they would choose to hurt themselves. There are so many 

opportunities for young people if only they could be shown the 

path to happiness and success. Canadian stats show that First 

Nations people take their own lives at twice the national 

average. 

 

There is hope in the Aboriginal experience in Canada though, as 

more First Nations and Métis students are graduating from 

post-secondary school than ever before. And many band 

councils and Métis communities view economic development 

as one solution to the problems plaguing many of our northern 

communities. 

 

The Sask Party government need to respond to this issue. If life 

as a northern Saskatchewan resident is so rosy, then why are 

children killing themselves in droves? There are several 

deficiencies in service — severe deficiencies in service — 

front-line workers who are overworked and understaffed. The 

schools are trying, the parents hoping, but we need to respond. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all need to think long and hard about this 

tragic epidemic which is destroying not only some isolated 

northern communities but also urban and other rural 

communities within Saskatchewan. Mental health issues are 

important and should always be treated with the utmost respect 

and seriousness. Out of sight, out of mind is not an excuse. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Before I call oral questions, just a reminder to 

our guests. You are more than welcome, but we ask you not to 

participate in the debate. And at this time, oral questions. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

Support for Agricultural Producers 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of 

Agriculture. This week is the SARM [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities] convention in Saskatoon 

and, as the minister knows and many members of the Assembly 

know, hundreds of rural people are getting together to talk 

about issues. And one of the issues that is continually raised as 

we travel the province is the input costs for farmers this coming 

spring. 

 

In doing a bit of checking with the co-op in Shaunavon at the 

bulk station this morning, I find that diesel fuel this spring will 

be 21 per cent more than it was last spring as farmers go to fill 

their tanks and do their spring work. When it comes to nitrogen 

fertilizer, the increase is about 30 per cent. And last week, Mr. 

Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture announced a 21 per cent 

increase in premiums for crop insurance. 

 

My question to the minister is, at a time when farmers are 

facing increases in every area, and especially in the area where 

we had 10 million acres of unseeded crop, will the government 

and the minister consider foregoing the increase in insurance 

premiums for this year in order to allow those farmers to get 

back on their feet in the areas where we had 10 million acres 

flooded last spring? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, what the member opposite forgot to mention that this 

is the largest budget for crop insurance in the province of 

Saskatchewan‟s history. He also forgot to mention that the 

reason that premiums are going up is because grain prices are 

increasing, and that‟s a very optimistic sign for the whole 

agriculture industry in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every time grain prices go up, the coverage and 

the risk goes up. And as has been done in the past, premiums go 

up along with that. Mr. Speaker, coverage has gone up also to 

an average of $173 an acre. That‟s an increase of $42 an acre, 

Mr. Speaker, from the 2010 contract. And something that I 

haven‟t heard, one producer isn‟t thinking it‟s a very good sign 

and a very good coverage through the crop insurance program. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with the $161 million budget, I think the 

program is improving. We made other improvements to the 

program, and we‟re hoping more farmers take advantage of the 

program this year. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, again to the minister. He 



6548 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2011 

will know that fertilizer prices, nitrogen fertilizer is going up 30 

per cent, diesel fuel up over 20. 

 

And in the area that we‟re talking about, where the 10 million 

acres was flooded last year and there was no crop, these farmers 

are facing very difficult times having enough money to get the 

crops seeded. And if you don‟t have enough money to buy 

diesel fuel and you don‟t have enough for chemicals and 

fertilizer, crop insurance is the one area where you don‟t need a 

huge increase. 

 

For example, a farmer with 3,000 acres to seed this spring, 

much of it that didn‟t produce any crop last year, will see a 

$5,000 increase in their premium. And at a time when the bins 

are empty because they didn‟t get any crop last year, it‟s not 

difficult to understand why many farmers are asking for this 

kind of help. And at the very time you‟re saying that the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan with profits of 1.8 billion can‟t 

afford to pay another penny, you‟re saying to farmers at a time 

when they had no crop they should pay 21 per cent more. How 

do you square that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, last year due to 

the flooding in the province of Saskatchewan, we have just 

finished sending out cheques to the tune of $700 million to 

producers of the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that 

includes the $360 million between the federal and provincial 

government for excess moisture, which was $30 per eligible 

acres. 

 

Mr. Speaker, along with that we‟ve made a number of changes 

to the crop insurance program, where this year . . . where seeded 

acres when the NDP was in government, flooded acres would 

go against their seeding intensity and wouldn‟t be included in 

the program, this year we‟ve taken that out so that people who 

were flooded won‟t lose coverage this year. That‟s another 

improvement we‟ve made that the member opposite forgets 

about. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve also done things for the livestock industry 

in the wet parts of the province. Just lately we announced, along 

with the federal government, $30 per tonne for producers that 

have to buy feed. That was on top of the program we brought 

out earlier with the feed and livestock transportation support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe we‟re working with the producers, and 

it‟s not the neglect that they had for 16 years under an NDP 

government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the farmers in the flood 

area, in the area where the 10 million acres were seeded, were 

calling for between 100 and $150 per acre for that flooded land. 

And what they got from the provincial government was $12 per 

acre. That‟s what was done for the farmers in that area. 

 

When it comes to the amount of money it would cost to relieve 

the increase for one year, it‟s about $15 million. That‟s how 

much it would cost to give that help to farmers that they 

wouldn‟t see the increase in their premium for one year — $15 

million. 

 

In the third quarter results in your budget, you gave back $54 

million from your department back to treasury, back to the 

Minister of Finance. Why wouldn‟t you keep that money and 

help the farmers in that area rather than give it back to the 

Minister of Finance and indirectly help out the Minister of 

Finance, who refuses to look at increasing the royalty for potash 

corporations who are making record profits in the province of 

Saskatchewan off of our resource? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in following the 

Leader of the Opposition over the last few months, he‟s been 

asking for, one, $100 per flooded acre on top of — on top of, I 

might add — on top of the 700 million that we‟ve already paid 

out. That would cost the treasury just $960 million. Oh, but 

that‟s not . . . it doesn‟t end there. He‟s also asking for another 

$150 a head for cattle, another $200 million. 

 

It‟s funny, Mr. Speaker. When that member was Deputy 

Premier on the government side, the largest budget that he ever 

had under his watch was just over $200 million. Last year our 

budget was 400, just about $500 million, and also we‟ve paid 

out $700 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, isn‟t it odd that the member, now that he‟s in 

opposition, is asking for millions and millions of dollars? When 

he was in government, what did he do? He cut programs and 

raised premiums constantly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Let‟s get one thing clear. When the 

minister adds up the promises that we are making to farmers in 

Saskatchewan, he adds it up quickly. He comes to a couple of 

hundred million. But on the other side, he is saying to the 

Potash Corporation that made, one company made 1.8 billion, 

he‟s saying, I can‟t touch their pile of money but I can‟t have 

any more for farmers. 

 

How does that work? And how are farmers and families in this 

province who are waiting for a bit of help expected to believe a 

government that can‟t deal with the potash corporations in 

getting a little bit more than a nickel per dollar of profit that 

everybody else has to sacrifice? How do you square that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

has also been asking, I‟ve heard him on the radio saying that we 

should make this crop insurance program, because it‟s a really 

good program and he admitted that, we should make it 

retroactive. Well that‟s amazing, Mr. Speaker. That‟s an 

amazing comment from that leader. The only thing they made 

retroactive was the GRIP [gross revenue insurance program] 

program and taking hundreds of millions of dollars out of 

farmers‟ pockets. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to add to his comment. I have 



March 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6549 

two potash mines in my constituency. Mosaic has two potash 

mines, are investing billions of dollars in my constituency. 

They‟re investing billions of dollars in this province. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they‟re not too pleased with him wanting to change 

royalty rates in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that our 

Minister of Agriculture stands and defends the executives of 

potash corporations and their profits. I understand that. While 

thousands of farmers in this province are having a struggle to 

afford the input costs of diesel fuel, fertilizer, and chemicals, 

and he stands up and says, the reason I can‟t get any more 

because the potash corporations will be upset. 

 

Well I‟ll tell you this: you deserve to lose your job for that kind 

of action. You deserve to lose your job when you can‟t defend 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Before I 

recognize the minister, I remind members to place their 

questions through the Speaker. I recognize the Minister of 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

want to respond . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I‟d ask . . . Order. I‟d ask 

members to allow the Minister Responsible for Energy and 

Resources to respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — I respond to the member opposite, the 

Leader of the Opposition, in terms of his thoughts about the 

$1.8 billion . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I respond to the 

Leader of the Opposition‟s call about $1.8 billion of profits. 

First of all, Potash Corporation has three main areas of 

business. They have phosphorous, nitrogen, and potash. The 

first two, nitrogen and phosphorous, are not located in 

Saskatchewan. So of the $1.8 billion of profits, $1.2 billion is 

related to potash. So it‟s $600 million . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. It‟s quite ironic that the 

members at least not allowing the guests and those who are 

trying to follow the debate to hear what the minister has to say. 

I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — So it‟s $600 million right there less than 

what the Leader of the Opposition is quoting. He is saying it‟s 

only $76.5 million in royalties. Well if he looks at the balance 

sheet of Potash Corporation, he would find that it‟s much, much 

more than that if you just read a few lines further down on the 

balance sheet. If the Leader of the Opposition, the former oil 

lobbyist, would take a moment and read down a little bit further 

on the balance sheet, he would see that they paid, in addition to 

that, significant income taxes. When you total it all up, Mr. 

Speaker, on $1.2 billion of potash profits, they paid about $350 

million. That‟s what the real number is, and the Leader of the 

Opposition knows it full well. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I ask members to allow 

the minister to respond so that people could hear. Order. 

 

The Speaker times the questions, and there‟s a number of 

questions already that have been well over. But there are two 

members to the left of the Speaker that kept interfering, and I 

ask those members to allow the responses. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Mental Health Care Services 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mental health care in 

Saskatchewan is in dire straits. It takes a minimum of seven 

months to see a psychiatrist and another minimum of seven 

months to get a second visit. Only 10 per cent of children who 

need mental health assessment and treatment get it. In any given 

year, 10 per cent of Saskatchewan people will suffer from 

depression. Mr. Speaker, about 130 Saskatchewan people will 

take their own lives this year. Mr. Speaker, this government has 

ignored the needs of mental health patients. 

 

Will the minister commit today to working with stakeholders 

like the Registered Psychiatric Nurses Association or RPNAS 

to develop an overall plan for mental health care in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, as I said during introductions, I want to recognize 

and congratulate the great work that the psychiatric nurses do 

across this province, all the health care professionals, not just 

psychiatric nurses but all the health care professionals that do 

absolutely amazing work for those that suffer from mental 

illness within our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m glad to say that after a number of years of a 

program not operating in the province, that we now have a 

program that will offer psychiatric nursing for citizens here in 

Saskatchewan that want to take it. I was glad to see that 30 

graduated from the psychiatric nurses program just recently. Of 

those 30 that graduated, 25 have stayed here in Saskatchewan to 

apply their profession right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

I am not standing here to say that there isn‟t more work to do. 

Absolutely there is more work to do. We in the Ministry of 

Health are working closely with the health regions and other 

organizations to try and improve mental health services through 

the entire province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



6550 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2011 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I did not hear an answer to will he 

help develop a plan with the stakeholders. I didn‟t hear that 

answer at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the North Battleford hospital is a flagship for 

mental health care in Saskatchewan, and it‟s 100 years old and 

fairly deteriorated. In 2007 the Sask Party promised they would 

build a new mental health hospital in North Battleford, and they 

have broken that promise. One concrete step forward to a 

mental health care plan would be to build the hospital in North 

Battleford. 

 

So to the minister today, Mr. Speaker: when will construction 

begin on that hospital? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m very aware of the 

condition of the provincial hospital, the provincial hospital in 

North Battleford. I‟ve had the opportunity in three and a half 

years of being the Health minister to have toured that facility 

three times. Most recently was a time to visit the ward that 

introduced Releasing Time to Care and the great advancements 

that has made. 

 

Having said that though, we know the facility is 100 years old 

this year. We know that it is in dire need of replacement, Mr. 

Speaker. We have put planning money towards the health 

region to look at the facility, to look at it through a lean process 

to see what needs to be done into the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I will say that the facility is deteriorating. It hasn‟t deteriorated 

just in the last three and a half years, it has deteriorated over 

many years, Mr. Speaker. And unfortunately there have been 

two previous governments that haven‟t funded a redevelopment 

of that facility, Mr. Speaker, but I can tell you it‟s a priority on 

this government‟s list, and I hope to be moving forward with it 

in the near future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Revisits and a plan; no plan really that 

anybody‟s seen. No construction, nothing that says when the 

shovel will go in the ground. Mr. Speaker, there‟s a severe lack 

of mental health care services everywhere in Saskatchewan. 

There needs to be more funding for community-based 

organizations who work with mental health patients — more 

psychiatrists, more psychologists, and more psychiatric nurses. 

 

To the minister: will the government commit today to actively 

work with stakeholders like RPNAS to examine how an 

expanded scope of practice for psychiatric nurses into a nurse 

practitioner designation would contribute to better mental health 

for all Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there is a steering 

committee in place with the Prairie North Health Region, with 

other regional health authorities in the Ministry of Health, to 

complete a redevelopment proposal on the North Battleford 

facility, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we‟ve done more than that, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve put $14.9 

million into the Irene and Les Dubé Centre, Mr. Speaker, that‟s 

located on the beautiful South Saskatchewan River in 

Saskatoon. Some of the most expensive real estate in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and couldn‟t be a better facility for 

that location, Mr. Speaker. There for the opening, it is a very, 

very impressive facility, Mr. Speaker. For once, instead of a 

facility being built in the back bushes for mental health, this one 

is a state-of-the-art facility with a beautiful view, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Private individuals have put millions and millions into that 

facility, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely there‟s more to do, but this 

government has taken some steps, and more steps will be taken 

into the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — This minister and that government can take no 

credit for the mental health facility in Saskatoon. We did it. Just 

because you get to cut the ribbon doesn‟t mean you had 

anything to do with it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an RPNAS association white paper predicts that 

mental health care problems will affect almost every family in 

Saskatchewan at some point. Wait times to see a psychiatrist are 

increasing. Suicides among young people, especially in 

northern Saskatchewan, are increasing. We need more 

psychiatric nurse education seats and a psychiatric nurse 

practitioner program. 

 

To the Minister: will he commit today to increasing the 

education seats in the RPN [registered psychiatric nurse] 

program and to funding a psychiatric nurse practitioner 

program, so we have a stronger team to address mental health 

needs in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m quite astounded that 

member would stand up and try and take the full credit for the 

Irene and Les Dubé Centre by saying we did it, Mr. Speaker. I 

can guarantee you that government didn‟t do it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, individuals like Irene and Les Dubé who donated 

millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, are the people that made that 

facility come to reality. People like Merlis Belsher, Mr. 

Speaker, that donated over a million dollars are the people that 

made that facility come to reality. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ll take no counsel from that member. After 16 

years of NDP government, they cancelled the psychiatric nurses 

program. In 2008 our government introduced a psychiatric 

nursing program: 30 seats, Mr. Speaker, 25 of which are now 

working in Saskatchewan of the last graduating class. 

 

We will certainly work with post secondary education and the 

Psychiatric Nurses Association to see whether we need to 



March 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6551 

increase those seats. But I can guarantee you, if we ever go back 

to the NDP government, that program will be cancelled too. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Child Care Spaces 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people want the 

provincial government to make early learning and child care a 

priority, a top priority. But YWCA [Young Women‟s Christian 

Association] Canada released a report yesterday that shows 

Saskatchewan ranks last in the country when it comes to 

providing regulated child care spaces. Saskatchewan has 

licensed child care spaces for only 9 per cent of children under 

the age of six, compared to the national average of 20 per cent. 

Families in Saskatchewan are having a harder time finding and 

paying for quality child care than anywhere else in Canada. 

 

To the Minister: why is the government refusing to adequately 

invest in early learning and child care and instead is just 

following an ad hoc, piecemeal approach? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I‟ll tell you what approach that this 

government is not going to follow, Mr. Speaker, and that‟s the 

approach that the NDP used when they were in government. We 

are growing in this province, and child care spaces are 

becoming increasingly important. And that is why since 

forming government, Mr. Speaker, we have increased the 

spaces within this province by 30 per cent. Of those 30 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker, a 50 per cent increase for infants and toddlers. 

 

There is a lot of work that needs to be done. We inherited a 

disaster when it comes to child care spaces. But you know 

what? The last NDP Health minister, the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow, did you know what she had to say, Mr. 

Speaker? She said that a 5.7 per cent increase was, and I quote, 

“a good increase,” Mr. Speaker. Well it isn‟t a good increase. 

We have been increasing far more than that, and we‟re going to 

continue to do so. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it appears the Minister of Health 

has slipped this minister his speaking notes because it‟s the 

same answer on topic after topic. What is clear is that an ad hoc, 

piecemeal approach of this government is why we‟re dead last 

in the entire country when it comes to child care spaces. 

 

Investing in child care makes sense not only from an 

educational perspective, but it‟s good for our economy. 

According to the YWCA, every dollar invested in child care, 

for every dollar invested $2.50 goes back into our economy. 

And that‟s a big return on the investment. And over 13 per cent 

of women working part-time in 2009 were doing so not by 

choice, but because they couldn‟t access or afford child care. 

That‟s a whole lot of people being forced out of the full-time 

workforce, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the Minister: why does the government not recognize that 

investing in child care makes good sense for our economy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, investing in child care 

spaces is a huge, good decision for our economy. We absolutely 

agree with that. What we don‟t agree with is what happened 

under the NDP, and we do not want to go back to those old 

days. Because when the Leader of the Opposition was sitting in 

the cabinet table making decisions, they went back and lost 228 

spaces. That‟s what they did when they were in government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let‟s talk about what we inherited. Well at that 

time in 2007 what was the priority for the NDP? Well it 

certainly wasn‟t child care spaces. Manitoba had at that time 

over 26,000 spaces. Alberta had 71,000 spaces. And do you 

know how many spaces the NDP developed in Saskatchewan? 

Under 9,000, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have increased by 30 per cent over the last three years. We 

are going to aggressively address this issue. It‟s a very 

important issue, Mr. Speaker. We‟re not going back to what the 

NDP did. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, making child care a top priority is 

not just about improving educational outcomes and helping our 

economy, though those are important. It‟s about supporting 

families. If the minister can‟t find the money to make the 

appropriate investments in early learning and child care, 

perhaps she ought to talk to the Premier. She could leave a note 

and convince him that it‟s time for a royalty review. An 

increase in potash royalties could help pay for more child care 

spaces and put our province at the top of the national list and 

not the very bottom. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is clear when it comes to agricultural 

producers, when it comes to mental health services, when it 

comes to early learning and care spots here in the province, Mr. 

Speaker, this government chooses to defend PotashCorp 

executives every time over the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

To the minister: why are they turning their backs on the people 

of Saskatchewan and refusing a review of royalty rates? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — What this government is truly excited 

about is the growth that‟s happening in our province, and we 

have realized that that comes with challenges such as child care 

spaces. 

 

What we are not interested in is irresponsible job-killing 

policies that are coming forward from that NDP party. That 

would significantly stop the growth within this province, and 

that was not what this government is interested in. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 

 



6552 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2011 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 161 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 161 — The 

Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it truly 

is an honour and a pleasure for me to have the opportunity to 

enter into this debate, the debate on Bill 161, the Act to amend 

The Election Act, 1996. Mr. Speaker, it is . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I‟d ask the 

minister and the member from Regina . . . or pardon me, Prince 

Albert, to have their discussion outside the Chamber. I would 

ask . . . I‟d ask the minister and the member from Prince Albert 

to have their discussion behind the bar. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you once again, Mr. Speaker. I didn‟t 

know that I could draw so much attention with the word thank 

you, but okay. But thank you, Mr. Speaker. Like I said, it is 

truly an honour and a pleasure for me to have the opportunity to 

enter into this debate. It is one of the opportunities for me to 

stand in this House and take part in a debate that was, I suppose, 

in some ways narrowing down. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve indicated that I will not be 

seeking re-election with the next opportunity, which is likely 

going to be this fall, and therefore the number of times I‟ll be 

able to get on my feet here will probably be in the narrowing 

numbers. But I assure you, Mr. Speaker, this will not be my last 

speech in this session. I do plan to make two or three more. 

 

But I think, Mr. Speaker, I can say for all of us, it‟s truly an 

honour and a pleasure to have the ability to represent folks from 

Saskatchewan in this fine legislature. I know that I can say that 

I am truly honoured to have the privilege of representing the 

good folks in Regina Northeast for the . . . And I know I‟ve said 

this before, Mr. Speaker, but I believe it bears repeating, is that 

whenever you travel in Saskatchewan and wherever you travel 

in Saskatchewan, the people you meet are certainly warm and 

friendly and hospitable people. And there are no warmer, more 

friendly, and more hospitable people than the people in Regina 

Northeast, and it has truly been an honour for me to have the 

privilege of representing them and to be able to represent their 

opinions, their thoughts, and their wishes in this great 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at this particular Bill, as I said 

earlier, Bill 161, the Act to amend The Election Act, 1996, we 

certainly have had a chance to glance at the Bill, and it‟s 

certainly a Bill that deserves very close scrutiny. I think any 

time that we are tampering with the Bills and the legislation that 

enforces and strengthens our democracy, we need to do so with 

a very open mind. But we also have to do so with the purpose of 

ensuring that democracy stays strong and ensuring that 

democracy is even expanded where possible, and where we 

recognize the ability and the need, to expand democracy and 

make it available in easier fashion, in easier fashion, to all 

people who live within our society. 

 

In this case, in this province of Saskatchewan here, I think the 

role of government of any political stripe should be looking at 

ways and means to strengthen democracy, looking for ways and 

means to enhance democracy, and looking at ways and means 

to make it more acceptable or more easily obtained by the 

people of this province who we have the privilege of 

representing in this great legislature. 

 

Governments should be looking at ways and means to 

encourage more people to take part in elections. After all, Mr. 

Speaker, that is the mainstay of democracy. The mainstay of 

democracy is people participating at election time. What we 

need to do is ensure that those numbers of people who 

participate stay very high and that we have a strong 

representation within the electoral process every four years. 

Whenever the election is held, we would like to see . . . 

Personally I‟d like to see 100 per cent turnout. Likely that‟s not 

the case for various reasons, Mr. Speaker. But we certainly 

want to see a very, very high percentage of people participating 

at election time. That‟s what makes democracy work, is people 

participating in the democratic system, people coming out and 

expressing their wishes, their views, and their opinions. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s what makes our system so great, is its 

opportunity every four years for people to express their 

opinions on the record of government, the promises put forward 

by the various political parties, and what people want to . . . and 

the direction people want to see this province move in. So this 

is why it is, I think, important, Mr. Speaker, that one of the 

factors that the government needs to do whenever it makes any 

changes to legislation is to ensure that those changes will reflect 

the ability for people to take part in the electoral process. It 

should be made easier. They should not be discouraged from 

taking part, and they should be in fact encouraged to take part. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that unfortunately I don‟t see in this Bill. I 

have had the opportunity to glance through this Bill and do a bit 

of research on it — and not as much time as I would have liked 

to have had, but we‟ve had the opportunity to do some research 

on this Bill — and there are certain changes, proposed changes, 

the amendments that the government is proposing here, I do not 

think, I do not think answers the basic needs of what I think a 

government should be doing, and that is encouraging people to 

participate. I think the changes in this Bill absolutely do the 

opposite. 

 

I see not anywhere here, Mr. Speaker, where I see it made 

easier for people to participate. What I do see proposed here is 

barriers, barriers being raised by the government to people 

taking part in the electoral process. 



March 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6553 

After all, that‟s what makes our democracy work. That‟s what 

makes our system so strong. And that‟s what‟s made our system 

survive the many assaults it‟s had on it over the years and if not 

decades, over maybe hundreds and hundreds of years, Mr. 

Speaker. Democracy has emerged as the true form of political 

representation of people because it has been able to withstand 

the pressures because it‟s allowed each and every individual the 

right to take part in the election, the right to express their 

opinions, the right to express their views, and the right to select 

their representation and their representatives. 

 

[14:30] 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, to sum it all up I guess, as my colleague 

would say, it‟s the right to vote. It‟s what really reflects 

democracy. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at this Bill, particularly the new 

sections, sections 72 and 72.1 under section 5 on page 2 of the 

printed Bill, we see section 5 that is repealed and it is followed 

by the following, Mr. Speaker. That would be section 72(1), 

when an individual is not eligible for a ballot paper or to vote. 

 

No individual is entitled to a ballot paper or to vote if the 

individual: 

 

(a) does not provide to the deputy returning officer and 

poll clerk the satisfactory evidence of his or her identity 

. . . [origin of residency] required pursuant to section 72.1; 

 

Mr. Speaker, I like . . . find it interesting, the usage of the 

language in this particular section, the fact that the government 

says, “satisfactory evidence.” The fact that the person showing 

up, the fact that the person saying, giving their word they are a 

resident of the constituency, and they are within the rules and 

regulations required for the eligible vote, and that they have the 

ability to vote — now that, in the past, Mr. Speaker, used to be 

good enough. And I believe this still should be good enough 

because that allowed the person to vote. 

 

Now the scrutineer, a representative of the candidate, decided 

that perhaps this person didn‟t qualify to vote. They could 

challenge that vote. That wouldn‟t stop the individual from 

casting their ballot. They‟d still cast their ballot, only that ballot 

would be handled in a different manner until it was assured that 

there was no improprieties within the individual‟s right to vote. 

So, Mr. Speaker, that doesn‟t seem to be the case here. Now 

what the government is calling for is satisfactory evidence. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it says . . . also goes on to say in section (b), 

“if required to do so, [and] refuses to make the voter‟s 

declaration.” Well, Mr. Speaker, evidence. What is evidence? 

Some indication of the person‟s name. Some indication of the 

person‟s address. So it sounds to me like, Mr. Speaker, that the 

government is looking for a driver‟s licence. It seems to me like 

the government is saying that you have to produce a valid 

driver‟s licence if you want to vote. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the government has done any 

research on this to identify how many people in Saskatchewan 

do not have a driver‟s licence. There are, I‟m sure, a number. 

And I would think it might surprise you and I to find out what 

that number might be. I think it‟d be a significant number of 

people who don‟t have a driver‟s licence. 

 

In fact I know of a couple, Mr. Speaker, who I believe have a 

driver‟s licence, but they certainly do not own a car. And it is 

because they have chose to do so. They use, while in the city 

here, their home, and they go to their work and to do their 

business and they go to the grocery shop, and they use public 

transportation. And I do know that on a rare occasion when 

they, because of family requirements, they need to travel 

outside the city, they will rent a car and they will make their 

trip. In that case, Mr. Speaker, at least one of them has a 

driver‟s licence. I don‟t know about both of them having a 

driver‟s licence. I do know that one has. So there‟s a case, Mr. 

Speaker, where we could possibly have a situation where we 

don‟t have an individual who doesn‟t have a driver‟s licence, 

doesn‟t have that photo ID [identification]. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I once again say that the government is 

straying away from what I think the principle of a government 

should be when addressing The Election Act, and that is to try to 

improve the Act so that it encourages more people to 

participate, encourages more people to take part in elections at 

election time. It encourages people and makes it easier for them 

to be able to participate in elections and rather than 

discouraging them. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what I see so far in this Act is that it 

certainly, certainly . . . The indications here is that the 

government wishes a voter to be able to provide satisfactory 

evidence of the voter‟s identity and residence. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, what is that evidence? Is it going to be a photo ID 

driver‟s licence or a photo ID of some type? Not everyone has 

that for various reasons, Mr. Speaker. And yet they are citizens 

of this great province of ours, and I think that they are entitled 

to vote. 

 

It shouldn‟t be . . . The voting privilege shouldn‟t hinge on the 

individual‟s ability to provide a photo ID or to provide some 

type of satisfactory evidence. Rather what it should be, Mr. 

Speaker, is it should be an encouragement for people to 

participate in election, encouragement for people to be able to 

express their opinions, to be able to take part equally in 

selecting their representative to represent them in this great 

Assembly for the next four years. That, Mr. Speaker, should be 

the goal of government. It shouldn‟t be the goal of government 

to discourage people. It should be the goal of government to 

encourage people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it says here, if the voter or individual‟s name 

appears on a voters list, one original piece of identification that 

will show the voter or voter‟s photograph, name, and address. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it‟s also suggesting it should be issued by 

the Government of Saskatchewan, the Government of Canada, 

or an agency of these governments. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, once again we may have individuals out 

there who don‟t have a photo ID because they don‟t have a 

provincial driver‟s licence. They don‟t have a provincial 

driver‟s licence. And if they don‟t have a provincial driver‟s 

licence, Mr. Speaker, it‟s a good possibility they don‟t have a 

photo ID. 

 

And yet we have a government here that wants to make changes 



6554 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2011 

to The Election Act that‟s going to require people to produce a 

photo ID in order to take part in an election process. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, certainly, certainly is not encouraging 

democracy. That, Mr. Speaker, is just the opposite. It‟s 

discouraging people from participating in elections, 

discouraging people from taking part in the basics of a 

democratic process, and that is the right to vote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, suggesting here that two pieces of prescribed 

information, each of which establishes a voter or the 

individual‟s name and at least one of the voter‟s or individual‟s 

address. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a situation as it‟s emerging in this 

province — probably for the first time in our history if not 

certainly in a great, great many years — we‟re finding more and 

more situations where affordable housing is not available. In a 

lot of cases, we may have Saskatchewan citizens who do not 

have a permanent address simply because they haven‟t got 

affordable housing and they‟re making do with whatever 

arrangements they can make with friends or family until, you 

know, a break comes along, I guess you would say. Or until 

they get the opportunity to be able to afford a house which by 

the way, Mr. Speaker, in our economy today is getting more 

and more distant from a lot of people, that ability to afford a 

home or to afford even the ability to rent a home or to rent an 

apartment or rent a living space of some type. It‟s getting to be 

harder and harder for a lot of folks out there because of the 

increased costs of rent, the increased costs of housing. And 

unfortunately, salaries and wages are not keeping up to those 

costs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we‟re finding people who in the past were able to secure 

adequate housing for themselves and their family are now 

finding that is an extremely stressful challenge, and that in 

many cases are not being able to meet that challenge simply 

because their family income isn‟t adequate enough to be able to 

maintain a roof over their head, Mr. Speaker, and they have to 

look at other alternatives. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, they may 

not have — they may not have, as required here — a document 

that will indicate their address. 

 

You know, I know that in the past members of the government 

would say, well all a person has to do to be able to satisfy the 

requirements here as to their address, they‟d simply have to go 

to the polls with a document such as a telephone bill or a power 

bill or a gas bill. Well if you don‟t have a home, Mr. Speaker, 

and you don‟t have that residence and you don‟t have those 

three particular documents, then it makes it more difficult, more 

difficult for an individual to be able to satisfy the government‟s 

requirements here within this legislation of being able to 

provide a document that is either provincial government, federal 

government, or an agency of either one of those governments 

that indicates their residence, simply because they may not have 

that address. They may not have that document simply because 

they don‟t have a residence of their own. They may be sharing 

it with others. And, Mr. Speaker, these are citizens of 

Saskatchewan. These are people who, in many cases, were born 

and raised right here and should have the right to vote, and this 

particular legislation will not enable them to vote. In fact what 

it does, Mr. Speaker, it discourages them from voting. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think there are a number of flaws, a number 

of flaws within this particular Bill. And in some ways it 

surprises me because I would have thought that, before 

tinkering with a document or documents that support our 

democratic process, the government would certainly have done 

its homework and certainly have done its research. Yet there‟s 

no indication of that, Mr. Speaker, in any of the evidence that 

I‟ve been able to unearth through my bit of research, and that is 

to answer some of the basic questions that I think a government 

should be able to answer when it proposes changes to any Act, 

let alone an election Act, an Act that is the very core of our 

democratic process here. 

 

And one of those questions, Mr. Speaker, is, why does the 

government feel the need to make these amendments? Why 

does the government feel the need to make these changes? Why 

is it the government feels the need to have people required now 

to produce a photo ID in order to participate in the electoral 

process? Is it not good enough to be able to take their word, 

their sworn statement, that they are citizens of Saskatchewan 

and have the right to vote? 

 

But no, no longer is that adequate, according to the amendments 

here. What this government wants to do is to change that. They 

want to require that the good folks coming to participate in the 

election have two pieces of information or identification 

evidence as it states in this Bill here. Two pieces would have to 

provide the evidence of the voter‟s name and evidence of the 

voter‟s address. Mr. Speaker, my question still remains: why? 

Why does the government feel these changes are necessary? 

 

My next question, Mr. Speaker, to the government, would be, 

who asked for these changes? Who asked for these changes? 

Who came forward to government and lobbied government 

saying, we need to make these changes to The Election Act 

because it will make The Election Act more democratic? Or 

who was it that came forward with this request that the 

government look into and make these amendments to The 

Election Act and for what purpose? What purpose will this 

provide? Will this improve the access to taking part in the 

election process by the people of Saskatchewan? No, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟ll just do the opposite. It will discourage people 

from taking part. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before making these proposed amendments and 

bringing them forward to this Assembly, did the government do 

any consulting? Did the government do any consulting before 

bringing this Bill forward? And if they did, who did they talk 

to? They haven‟t provided us any of that information, Mr. 

Speaker. They‟re just saying, here‟s the changes that we want to 

make to the Act. They‟re saying that we want to make these 

changes and we want you to debate them in the House, but then 

at the end of the day we want to be able to get our way and 

simply force this Bill through. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they‟re doing so without answering any of 

the questions, the basic questions, which once again I think is 

the basic questions of democracy. It‟s, who did you consult 

with? Who did you talk to? Who did the government talk to 

about making these changes? Who was it that asked for these 

changes? Who did the government talk to about making these 

changes? 

 



March 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6555 

And, Mr. Speaker, if — and I say if — if the government says 

that they did consult, they did consult with the people of 

Saskatchewan or groups within Saskatchewan, then my 

question is, what method did they use to consult? Did they use 

an information letter? Did they just send a letter out to a select 

group of people or to perhaps all people of Saskatchewan 

saying, we‟re going to make changes to The Election Act and 

we want your input? We want you to tell us what you think 

should be changed. Or did they send a letter out saying, here are 

the proposed changes; which one do you think, which group do 

you think should be included in the amendments to The 

Election Act? 

 

[14:45] 

 

Did they do a telephone survey, Mr. Speaker? Did they use the 

Internet, Mr. Speaker? Did they send out emails? Did they send 

out information? What type of method did the government use 

to consult with the people of Saskatchewan before coming 

forward with these proposed changes? If they consulted with 

anybody, Mr. Speaker, who did they consult with and what 

method did they use to do that consulting? 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I see no evidence here, but I‟d like to 

know what was the feedback the government got from its 

consulting, if it says it went out and talked to Saskatchewan 

people before making these proposed changes to The Election 

Act, and who did they talk to? But more importantly, Mr. 

Speaker, what was their feedback? What was their feedback? 

Who was it that said that they needed to have these changes 

because this would strengthen democracy, this would make 

things better for Saskatchewan people, this would make things 

so that more people in Saskatchewan would be able to 

participate at election time? This would encourage people to get 

out there and share their opinions, express their views, and 

select, play a hand and role in selecting their representation, Mr. 

Speaker. Those are the questions that have not been answered in 

this Bill, Mr. Speaker, and have not been supplied by 

government in anywhere. 

 

So this obviously, Mr. Speaker, certainly, certainly leaves a lot 

of questions to be asked, a lot of questions that need to be 

answered by the government, a lot of questions that need to be 

answered by the general public as to their opinions on these 

changes and how they see this affecting them, how they see this 

affecting their communities, how they see this affecting their 

province, and how they see this affecting the principles of 

democracy, the pillars that hold up our society, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, as you can tell, there are a lot of 

unanswered questions and a lot of questions that need to be 

answered. Obviously this government has not provided that 

information, and therefore the opposition is going to have to 

take more time in order to study this Bill and to be able research 

this Bill and identify even greater problems than I have been 

able to. Because I do believe that this Bill is full of issues that 

certainly do not further the causes of democracy but in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, does just the opposite. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll 

move adjournment of debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Northeast has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 161, The Election 

Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 162 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hickie that Bill No. 162 — The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it‟s my 

pleasure to rise to speak to Bill 162, The Election Amendment 

Act. This is again a very important Bill to be discussing in the 

House, just as the previous Bill was that was referred to by the 

member for Regina Northeast. These are some changes that are 

going to deeply affect the potential right to vote in the province 

of Saskatchewan, which of course is an incredible right to have, 

as many others in many other countries do not. And it is also 

obviously a substantial responsibility. 

 

Now the fact that the changes that are proposed are not going to 

be providing more inclusiveness but rather are going to exclude 

people from their right to vote is of great concern to the NDP 

opposition, Mr. Speaker. The right to vote has an impact on the 

decisions that affect individuals in their daily lives, and 

therefore is fundamental in terms of their ability to have some 

say in what‟s happening in their daily lives. And it‟s a right that 

should be exercised by everyone in a free and democratic 

society and not just the comfortable or the privileged or those 

who are doing relatively well under the status quo, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the list of people that this Sask Party government has 

failed is long, Mr. Speaker. It‟s very long and it‟s growing by 

the day. So those people especially, Mr. Speaker, are the ones 

that want to have some ability to have their say in what happens 

in future elections, Mr. Speaker. Clearly those people are going 

to be paying more attention to what the various parties are 

doing. They‟re certainly going to pay attention to the Sask Party 

government‟s record over the last number of years as to the 

promises that have been broken, the promises that have been 

changed without consultation with the public, Mr. Speaker. And 

quite frankly, one of those issues that‟s been changed without 

due consultation, Mr. Speaker, is precisely Bill 162 which is 

what we‟re speaking of at the moment. 

 

Now one of the groups that this government has failed is 

seniors, Mr. Speaker. The government, this government, the 

Sask Party government has failed and is failing the seniors in 

the province of Saskatchewan. Seniors are struggling to cope 

with the rising cost of living, in particular rising rents and the 

rising cost of electricity. They‟re frustrated by this 

government‟s broken promises on health care. And many 

seniors are telling us that they feel like they‟re being betrayed 

and let down by the Sask Party government. The rents are going 

from rates of where some seniors are telling me that they were 

paying $600 a month rent in 2007, are now looking at over 

$1,000 a month for their rent a few short years later, Mr. 



6556 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2011 

Speaker. 

 

And what‟s most appalling about that, Mr. Speaker . . . And you 

know what? What‟s most appalling actually is that they‟re 

chirping from their seats. They‟re angry that I‟m speaking of 

these points. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Members are not to draw the 

members into the debate. And also the member knows that the 

member should be relating the comments to the Bill, and while 

they can be relating to individuals, tie it to the Bill. That‟s all 

you have to do. 

 

Ms. Morin: — With reference to Bill 162, I‟m talking about 

Bill 162 and the members from the opposite side don‟t seem to 

like to hear what they‟re hearing, Mr. Speaker. And I wonder 

why that is? Is it because they don‟t care about the seniors of 

their province? Or is it that the Sask Party government is in 

denial about what‟s happening to the seniors of this province? I 

would say it‟s probably both, Mr. Speaker, because the reality is 

that Bill 162 is directly affecting the seniors of this province in 

terms of their ability to vote, Mr. Speaker, because they will 

have a large amount of stake in terms of what happens in the 

next election, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the people that are being 

most badly hurt in terms of the policies that are happening 

under this government, Mr. Speaker, are the senior citizens in 

this province. 

 

The rents are going from $600 a month, when the Sask Party 

government was elected in 2007, to well over $1,000 a month 

currently, Mr. Speaker — well over $1,000 a month. Now 

whether the Sask Party government wants to hear it or not, the 

reality is seniors are on a fixed income. They don‟t have ability 

to increase their income. They don‟t see any help coming from 

the Sask Party government on rent control. They don‟t see any 

other ability to increase their ability to pay their bills in terms of 

helping them with their electricity bills or their natural gas bills, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the reality is that seniors in this province are most directly 

being affected by the Government of Saskatchewan and will 

have the most at stake with respect to Bill 162 and the right to 

vote in this next election, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, at a 

time in their lives when they no longer potentially have a 

driver‟s licence, which of course is that lovely piece of photo 

ID that the Sask Party government now wants to make 

mandatory for the seniors in this province to have in order for 

them to be able to exercise their right to vote, Mr. Speaker, this 

is what the Sask Party government has decided to do. Seniors 

are no longer driving, don‟t have a driver‟s licence any more. 

So what exactly are they supposed to be presenting at the voting 

booth when they want to go and vote in the next election? 

 

Now the Sask Party government will tell you that, well they can 

go and get a photo ID. It doesn‟t have to be a driver‟s licence. 

They can go to any licence issuer and get a photo ID. Well isn‟t 

that fantastic, Mr. Speaker? So we‟re going to make people go 

through the extra trouble to exercise their right to vote in the 

country of Canada. Their absolute divine right in this country is 

to be able to exercise their right to vote. And what does the 

Sask Party government want to do with Bill 162? They want to 

make that right more difficult for seniors in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So seniors don‟t have a vehicle, but they‟re supposed to get to a 

licence distributor to be able to get a photo ID. First of all, it‟s 

the issue of getting there. Second of all, it‟s the issue of cost. 

Not everybody wants to be . . . or has the ability, I should say, 

to afford the $10 that it would cost to get the photo ID. And, 

Mr. Speaker, third of all, a lot of seniors that I visit in their 

homes, I visit in their homes because why, Mr. Speaker? 

Because they have mobility issues, Mr. Speaker. Bill 162 flies 

in the face of those people who have difficulty to be able to 

access those photo ID, Mr. Speaker, because they have mobility 

issues and can‟t leave their homes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when the Sask Party government decides it wants to make 

voting in this province more difficult for the seniors of this 

province, they take nothing into account about what seniors 

actually face in the reality of their lives, Mr. Speaker. That‟s 

what the Sask Party government is all about. 

 

Now they‟ve also failed other people in other walks of life. For 

instance students are angry about the rising costs of tuition, Mr. 

Speaker, and rent and utilities and car insurance. So on top of 

the fact that they‟ve got all of these financial pressures to deal 

with, Mr. Speaker, what are we going to make them do? We‟re 

going to make them purchase a photo ID. Because hey, the 

government doesn‟t mind the extra $10 per student in their 

coffers, and who cares whether the students can afford to buy 

the photo ID anyways. Then I guess they just don‟t have the 

right to vote, which again is one of the more disenfranchised 

groups of voters, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see the voter percentages falling on a continual basis, 

whether it‟s municipal elections, whether it‟s provincial 

elections, or whether it‟s federal elections. And one of the 

largest groups of disenfranchised voters is the students, Mr. 

Speaker. And so what are we doing? Instead of encouraging 

them to vote, instead of inviting them in to vote, instead of 

making ways easier for them to vote, Mr. Speaker, we‟re going 

to make it even more challenging. That‟s what the Sask Party 

government is saying. 

 

The Sask Party government is saying, if you want to vote, if 

you want to have the right to vote, you‟re going to follow our 

rules regardless of whether it makes it easier or more difficult 

for you to vote. And that‟s what Bill 162, Mr. Speaker, is all 

about. It‟s all about disenfranchising those that are already 

disenfranchised from voting, Mr. Speaker. Because who are 

they catering to? They‟re catering to those who are happy with 

the status quo or those who have driver‟s licences and photo 

IDs and don‟t see any problem with what the Sask Party 

government wants to do. 

 

But are they listening? Are they listening to those that are 

already disenfranchised or those that will have difficulty 

meeting the standard perhaps as being set out, Mr. Speaker? No, 

not at all. Because why? Because it‟s not an issue for them, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s not the people that will want to vote for them, and 

so it‟s not an issue for the Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

That‟s why. That‟s exactly why. 

 

Another group that‟s disenfranchised, Mr. Speaker, are First 



March 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6557 

Nation and Métis people in this province, Mr. Speaker. They‟re 

angry. They‟re angry about the government‟s lack of 

consultation on issues, many issues, not the least of which, Mr. 

Speaker, not the least of which was The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act, Mr. Speaker, something that this House knows 

an awful lot about, Mr. Speaker, because we had lengthy, 

lengthy debates on this one, Mr. Speaker, about the fact that the 

Sask Party government talks about having consulted with 

people, but didn‟t actually do it. 

 

So Bill 162 is incredibly important to the First Nations and 

Métis people of this province, Mr. Speaker, because those 

people especially, Mr. Speaker, want to have their say in the 

next election. They want to have their say. But what is a 

difficulty for the First Nation and Métis people in this province, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

Well first of all, do they even have a licence issuer anywhere 

close to where they live? And for a large part of those people, 

Mr. Speaker, for a large part of the people who are First Nations 

and Métis people, it‟s not even close to being convenient to 

finding a licence issuer, Mr. Speaker, let alone the fact that 

these are also the people who are hardest hit, hardest hit by the 

policies of this Sask Party government in terms of the rising 

cost of living that‟s happening in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so what‟s happening? You‟re telling them that they have to 

find some way of getting to a licence issuer. You‟re telling 

them that they have to find some way of finding the money to 

be able to pay for that photo licence, Mr. Speaker. And what 

does the Sask Party government say about that? Nothing. All of 

a sudden they are deathly quiet, Mr. Speaker, because they 

know that all of this is exactly what is being said. They know 

that this is true. They know that these complaints are coming in. 

They know that these are the concerns of the First Nation and 

Métis people in this province. And what are they doing to 

address that, Mr. Speaker? They‟re doing absolutely nothing. 

So Bill 162 is a critical Bill to those individuals, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And let‟s talk about consultation, Mr. Speaker. Let‟s talk about 

consultation. Have they even done any consultations, Mr. 

Speaker? Because I‟ve got to tell you, from the amount of 

people that I get emailing me, phoning me, writing letters to 

me, stopping me in the grocery store, on the street, stopping me 

at cultural events in the city, stopping me at cultural events 

around the province, stopping me at sporting events around the 

province, they‟re all saying the same thing. 

 

They‟re all saying the same thing: why is it that we never heard 

anything about this? Why wasn‟t there public consultations on 

this, Mr. Speaker? Why is it that the government is simply 

proceeding with something that is going to disenfranchise 

voters even more instead of feeling that they can have more 

inclusiveness in the voting process, Mr. Speaker? Why is that? 

Why is that? It‟s hard to understand, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when we hear from the government, from the Sask Party 

government that they did consultations on The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act for instance and name six organizations, when 

the NDP opposition actually speaks to those organizations, 

those six organizations, what do we find out? We find out that 

five of the six organizations say that they weren‟t consulted 

with. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, even when the Sask Party government claims 

that they have done consultations, those consultations haven‟t 

actually been done or haven‟t been done in a meaningful way 

where the people that they claim, those stakeholders that they 

claim they spoke to have felt that they had any meaningful input 

on those consultations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again why is it that the Sask Party government is proceeding 

with Bill 162 without having done province-wide consultations 

as to whether or not this is something that is going to 

disenfranchise voters further? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let‟s talk about a group of individuals who 

are going to have probably . . . well, not probably, they are 

going to have the biggest problem with this change in 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. And that of course is the homeless 

people. Now, Mr. Speaker, the number I have in my notes is 

approximately that there are 2,200 homeless people in Regina 

alone. But I have to tell you, the research that was done for my 

notes, Mr. Speaker, was done last fall, and we know those 

numbers have increased, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So how sad, how sad that in a city of Regina, in a city with the 

population that Regina has, that we have over 2,200 homeless 

people in the city of Regina right now. And they‟re angry, Mr. 

Speaker. They‟re angry that this government has done nothing, 

absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker — zip, nada, nix, nein — to 

help them put a roof over their heads. Nothing. They‟ve done 

nothing. They haven‟t introduced rent controls, which is 

something that the NDP opposition has been talking about. 

 

And some of them just went . . . [inaudible] . . . about 

government. Well, Mr. Speaker, I encourage them to listen 

because if they‟re not going to address the problems of the 

people of Saskatchewan, this NDP opposition will be the 

government in November of 2011, Mr. Speaker. And this NDP 

government will address the concerns of the people of this 

province, Mr. Speaker, and not just the comfortable few that the 

Sask Party government seems to be catering to. 

 

So with respect to Bill 162, Mr. Speaker, the homeless people 

of this province have the most concerns, Mr. Speaker, because 

how exactly do they prove their residence when they don‟t have 

a fixed address, Mr. Speaker? How exactly do they do that? 

Now I don‟t hear any responses, any answers or quite frankly 

anything coming from the Sask Party government on the 

questions that we‟ve been asking about Bill 162, Mr. Speaker. 

 

How are people going to deal with the fact that they don‟t have 

a fixed address, Mr. Speaker? How is that going to happen? 

And yet the Sask Party government has done nothing to explain 

that to the people of Saskatchewan. They‟ve done nothing to 

explain that when asked about that by the media. They‟ve done 

nothing to explain that when asked the question by numerous 

members of opposition including myself, Mr. Speaker, because 

there are two Bills that are very similar, Mr. Speaker, and a lot 

of the questions on these Bills are very similar, Mr. Speaker. 

And my colleague from Regina Northeast just spoke 

passionately about the other Bill prior to Bill 162, Mr. Speaker. 

 



6558 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2011 

Now you know my colleague from Regina Northeast asked 

another question that I‟d like to reiterate and that is, who 

exactly asked for these changes? Who asked for these changes, 

Mr. Speaker? The only evidence that I can find is that the 

provincial government, the Sask Party government wants to be 

in line with the Harper Tories. They want to streamline 

themselves with the Harper Tories. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know if that‟s the wisest thing for 

this provincial government to be doing at this point in time 

because, Mr. Speaker, when these proposed changes were 

brought forward by the Harper Tories, let me tell you about 

some of the comments that were made at that time, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at that time when Bill C-31 was introduced into 

the House of Commons, there were a number of MPs — Paul 

Dewar who is the MP for Ottawa Centre, he‟s the NDP MP for 

Ottawa Centre and Libby Davies who is the NDP MP for 

Vancouver East — raised concerns about Bill C-31 at that time 

and talked about the fact that it would further disenfranchise 

voters, Mr. Speaker, and especially in their constituencies. 

 

 I‟d like to quote Ms. Davies: 

 

“We have to protect the integrity of the voting system,” 

she said. 

 

“New requirements for voter ID will add further barriers 

to voting for marginalized low-income people, and 

seriously undermine the right to vote,” added Davies, 

whose riding includes the downtown east side where 

hundreds of people live in homeless shelters and rooming 

homes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we see that these are also the comments that 

are being made at the federal level. But what‟s interesting, Mr. 

Speaker, is these comments were being made . . . the date on 

this is February 13th of 2007. So on February 13th, 2007, we 

hear federal MPs [Member of Parliament] raising concerns 

about the proposed changes by the Harper Tories to Bill C-31 

which requires photo ID. And now we hear that the Sask Party 

government wants to align themselves with the Harper Tories. 

Well I mean it‟s no surprise, quite frankly. 

 

Although given the bad news they‟ve received on various 

projects over the while, one would wonder if there‟s still that 

close and fuzzy relationship — for instance the lack of or the 

non-funding, I should say, to the domed stadium here in 

Saskatchewan, and of course the non-funding to the carbon 

sequestration project, as well as many others of course, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So what is interesting is that they‟re wanting to align 

themselves with the Harper Tories with respect to making voter 

ID a requirement. Now what‟s interesting about that, Mr. 

Speaker, is that by doing so they‟re pre-empting a legal 

challenge that‟s currently taking place in British Columbia by a 

coalition of organizations including people with disabilities, 

seniors, renters, and people who are homeless, Mr. Speaker — 

the very people that I‟ve just spoken about who would be most 

disadvantaged, shall we say, with these proposed changes to 

Bill 162. 

So, Mr. Speaker, one wonders why they would be coming 

forward with a Bill that they already know is causing concerns 

at the federal level and is already being challenged in terms of 

the Supreme Court of British Columbia. Why would they come 

forward with those changes now, Mr. Speaker, instead of 

waiting to see what happens with that challenge in British 

Columbia for instance, Mr. Speaker? 

 

It‟s interesting that they are willing to disenfranchise voters 

even further. But again, as I said, the voters that they are 

looking at disenfranchising even further are not voters that 

would likely vote for the Sask Party government anyways, 

because the Sask Party government is making life more difficult 

for these voters in the province of Saskatchewan at the time as 

we speak, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the government also claims that people will 

not be disenfranchised, which is quite interesting, pointing to 

measures included in the legislation that gives people 

alternatives. But all of us in this Assembly have seen instances 

where deputy returning officers have been overzealous in their 

interpretation of rules. So there‟s a very real danger that the 

clear preference for photo ID could lead some people to become 

disenfranchised, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, everyone wants to make sure that the voting 

process is very tight in terms of making sure that everything is 

above board, Mr. Speaker, but in doing so, sometimes those 

processes by the deputy returning officers tend to be at the — 

how should I say? — disadvantage again of the voters who are 

there in a legitimate fashion to exercise their right to vote. So 

one worries when the discretionary power is put in the hands of 

those few individuals, open for interpretation, Mr. Speaker, 

with respect to Bill 162. 

 

Now you know, Mr. Speaker, there are lots of other concerns 

with Bill 162 and not the least of which is for instance the lack, 

again the lack of consultation. Because this House for instance, 

there was a bipartisan committee that recommended a Chief 

Electoral Officer, Mr. Speaker. And what happened in the Sask 

Party caucus, Mr. Speaker? They decided to veto that 

recommendation, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that typically 

when the bipartisan committees make recommendations, the 

House accepts those recommendations. 

 

So again we still have questions as to why the Sask Party 

caucus decided to veto that recommendation. We have not 

heard any reasons for that. We have not heard any arguments, 

so one can leave the imagination open to wonder why that 

decision was vetoed by the Sask Party caucus, Mr. Speaker. 

And of course there are a number of assumptions that are being 

made because the Sask Party caucus is not being forthright in 

why that, exactly, that veto took place. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in Bill 162 we‟re also seeing that they‟re 

further disenfranchising voters from being able to exercise their 

right to vote. And we also see that the Sask Party is not about 

— how should I say? — is not unfamiliar with the challenge 

that‟s currently going on by another political party to be able to 

access funds, to be able to participate in the next election, Mr. 

Speaker. And there are some Sask Party members that are 

actually named in that legal challenge, Mr. Speaker. 

 



March 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6559 

And obviously the people that would like to vote for that 

political party who is not able to access their funds, which is, of 

course, is the Progressive Conservative Party, would like to be 

able to vote in the next election and vote for their party of 

choice which is the Progressive Conservative Party, Mr. 

Speaker. But because there is a court challenge that‟s 

happening, and as I said there were some Sask Party members 

that are being named in that court challenge, they will not 

potentially be able to vote for their political party of choice. So 

those again are people that would want to vote in the next 

election because they‟re disenfranchised voters. They would 

have a large stake in Bill 162 to ensure that those people that 

want to vote for the Progressive Conservative Party have the 

ability to do so. And if it‟s going to make things more difficult 

for some of their members to vote in the next election, that 

would be of great concern to the Progressive Conservative 

Party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because again, they‟re not being able to access the funds that 

they need to be able to fully participate in the next election, Mr. 

Speaker, and one has to wonder why that‟s taking place, why 

they‟re not being able to access the $3 million fund — I believe 

where it stands now — why they‟re not being able to access the 

$3 million fund that is rightfully the money of the Progressive 

Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. And why the Sask Party 

government would want to make it more difficult for their 

members to be able to vote in this next election, is a little 

suspect as well, Mr. Speaker, I have to say. 

 

So Bill 162 seems to have a lot of tentacles that it reaches out 

and into, Mr. Speaker. So it‟s not just . . . It doesn‟t seem that 

it‟s just to disenfranchise the voting process for those who are 

being hardest hit by the Sask Party government and its policies 

like the seniors, like the First Nations people, like the Métis 

people, like the students, like the homeless people, Mr. Speaker 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And I‟m hearing from one of my 

colleagues that northern mayors are very upset about some of 

the policies that the Sask Party government is implementing and 

that northern mayors are worried about the fact that their 

members won‟t be able to access their right to vote, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Now the . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I‟m hearing different 

comments from different ministers, one who might have a little 

bit more knowledge on the portfolio of First Nations and Métis 

affairs but, Mr. Speaker, I‟m wondering how many discussions 

he‟s had with those people in the First Nations and Métis 

communities to ensure that they are not opposed to Bill 162, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because what I‟m hearing from my colleagues — who do not 

only consult with people in the North but actually live in those 

northern communities and participate in those northern 

communities on a not necessarily daily basis since we‟re in 

session right now, Mr. Speaker, but are certainly there on the 

weekends and are actively participating in a lot of the 

tournaments and cultural activities and talking to young people 

and talking to the northern mayors — they want to make sure 

that those people all have the ability to vote, Mr. Speaker, and 

therefore want to have the disenfranchised be able to engage in 

the voting process in the next election, Mr. Speaker. 

So one wonders if the Sask Party minister for that portfolio, or 

others in the Sask Party government, have been speaking to 

First Nations and Métis people to ensure that their voices are 

being heard and they are in favour of Bill 162. Because I‟m 

hearing from one member that, you know, that it‟s absolutely. 

But, Mr. Speaker, that‟s contrary to what our northern members 

are saying. That‟s also contrary to what other members in my 

caucus are saying from what contact they are having from First 

Nations and Métis people across the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now it‟s not just First Nations and Métis people in the North, 

Mr. Speaker. I have to tell you, there are a number of First 

Nations and Métis people in the area of southern Saskatchewan 

that have contacted me and that have contacted other members 

of the NDP opposition and are saying the same thing: that this 

is not fair, Mr. Speaker. 

 

First of all, First Nations people are having difficulty in 

accessing voting situations to begin with if there isn‟t a polling 

station on their reserve, Mr. Speaker. And now we‟re going to 

make it even more difficult by making sure that they have to 

jump through all these hoops in terms of having the proper 

identification that the Sask Party government is now laying out 

with respect to voter ID, photo identification, Mr. Speaker. So 

instead of being more inclusive in the voting process, Mr. 

Speaker, the Sask Party government is making it more difficult, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And one has to wonder why any government who claims, who 

claims that they are the government of the people — because 

that‟s what the Sask Party government likes to tout, that they, 

you know, that they‟re listening to people; they‟re going around 

the province — that they don‟t need to have public policy 

documents, Mr. Speaker, at their convention which just took 

place last weekend, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There were two visitors at the Sask Party convention, Mr. 

Speaker, who were very fortunate visitors, Mr. Speaker, 

because with respect to Bill 162, they got to see some of what 

happens at the Sask Party convention first-hand. So you know, 

they got to see what Bill 162 would actually affect in terms of 

the voting mentality, Mr. Speaker. Because when they attended, 

these two people attended the Sask Party convention, they noted 

that everyone was given either a white name tag, a blue name 

tag, or a red name tag. And these two visitors, Mr. Speaker, 

these two visitors were given orange name tags. Interestingly 

enough, these were the only two people at the entire Sask Party 

convention that were given orange name tags, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So you know, when you look at Bill 162 and being, you know, 

open, accountable, and willing to listen to the people of the 

province, singling out two individuals who are visiting the Sask 

Party convention with orange name tags — I found that rather 

amusing, Mr. Speaker. And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t 

know if we have green and yellow name tags for visitors at the 

NDP convention. Never saw it before, but we‟ll have to wait 

and see on that one. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with respect to Bill 162, we can see that the 

Sask Party government is making it harder for people to 

exercise their democratic right to free speech and hold protests 

as well, Mr. Speaker. So those people who want to speak 

against the Sask Party government policies and those people 



6560 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2011 

that want to hold protest rallies, Mr. Speaker, those will 

probably be people who would want to engage in the voting 

process as well, Mr. Speaker. So again, Mr. Speaker, are these 

people that are likely to vote for a government that they‟re 

holding a protest rally about or that they are going to publicly 

speak about in a negative fashion, Mr. Speaker? Not likely. So 

does the Sask Party government care whether or not these are 

the voters that are going to be disenfranchised by Bill 162? I 

think not, Mr. Speaker. I think not. 

 

So we can see that despite the fact that the Sask Party 

government at its annual convention had no public policy 

document and that the NDP at its convention coming up is 

going to have a document that is . . . Perhaps one of my 

colleagues can tell me the number of pages but I believe it‟s a 

77- or 66-page document. Or anyway somewhere around the 

70-page document mark, which was through extensive 

consultations with people across the province and not just with 

people from within the party, Mr. Speaker. It was inviting 

consultations and input from people in all areas of expertise. 

Anyone that wanted to write in, anyone that wanted to submit 

something online, anyone that wanted to provide something to 

any member of the NDP or the committee was welcome to do 

so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And all of that information was collated into this document 

which is, as I said, a 70-page document of policy ideas for the 

NDP going forward which, in contrast to the Sask Party 

convention which had no policy document, which to me speaks 

like it‟s completely devoid of ideas, is rather concerning, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And then we hear the comment from the Premier of 

Saskatchewan when he hears about the 70-page document. 

What is his comment, Mr. Speaker? His comment is that, you 

know, that the document is plain crazy. Well, Mr. Speaker, we 

don‟t see it that way. We see the input from Saskatchewan 

people to be valuable, to be something that should be taken 

seriously. So Bill 162 is very important in terms of making sure 

that people have the ability to vote and the right to vote. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, that policy document that the NDP has 

right now is 70 pages full of discussion points. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you have a Sask Party convention 

which has no policy documents, which then has really nothing 

that is stimulating discussion in terms of policy going forward, 

one can see why there‟s no vision from the Sask Party 

government, Mr. Speaker. One can see why all we see or hear is 

announcements being made and nothing coming to fruition. 

 

So Bill 162 is incredibly important, Mr. Speaker, in allowing 

people to exercise their ability to express their opinion in terms 

of what the Sask Party government is doing and in terms of 

what the Sask Party government isn‟t doing. And, Mr. Speaker, 

what the Sask Party government isn‟t doing is addressing the 

real concerns of the people of Saskatchewan in terms of what‟s 

affecting them most negatively in their lives right now. 

 

Saskatchewan used to be a province that we called, under the 

NDP administration, the best place to live, work, and raise a 

family, Mr. Speaker, the best province to live, work, and raise a 

family. And, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that the NDP is no 

longer in government, I still believe in my heart that it is the 

best place to live, work, and raise a family, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it‟s more difficult, Mr. Speaker. It‟s not, it‟s not as easy to 

live, work, and raise a family in Saskatchewan now as it was 

prior to the Sask Party getting elected. Because why? We‟re 

seeing an increase in rents, Mr. Speaker. So Bill 162 is 

incredibly important to those who are seeing those monumental 

increases in rents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We‟re seeing more difficulty in finding full-time, meaningful 

jobs, Mr. Speaker. And when I say meaningful, I‟m talking 

about a living wage job, Mr. Speaker. I‟m not talking about a 

full-time job . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Exactly, not three 

jobs that equals one job, not one job that is barely meeting the 

poverty line in terms of their income, Mr. Speaker. I‟m talking 

about a full-time job that is meaningful for the people that are 

working those jobs and that provides them with a living wage, 

and not just a living wage for one person to be able to survive 

on, Mr. Speaker, but a living wage that is able to support a 

family, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party government is allowing 

that to become more difficult in this province, Mr. Speaker, and 

is not addressing those needs, is not addressing those concerns. 

So Bill 162 is incredibly important to those people who feel that 

they‟re finding it more difficult to get by, Mr. Speaker, on what 

they‟re earning in this province, Mr. Speaker. And in terms of 

raising a family, Mr. Speaker, that too has become more 

difficult under the Sask Party government. 

 

Now they‟ll tout their credit in terms of sport and recreation, or 

recreation and culture, I should say, but, Mr. Speaker, that 

doesn‟t go a long way when people can‟t afford to put their 

children into those programs to begin with because they‟re 

barely making ends meet in terms of paying the rent or in terms 

of paying the mortgages because the mortgages have gone up 

substantially, Mr. Speaker, with the increase in home prices, 

and, Mr. Speaker, and also the cost of living. We know that the 

cost of electricity has gone up, the cost of natural gas has gone 

up, and why is that, Mr. Speaker? Because the Sask Party 

government, when it got elected, despite the fact that it started 

seeing record revenue in the province of Saskatchewan, decided 

to axe, that‟s right, it cut the lowest cost utility bundle guarantee 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now why is that, Mr. Speaker? Why is it? Why did that 

happen? Despite the fact that we see now that the Sask Party 

government has $4 billion more revenue per year, Mr. Speaker, 

than the last budget that the NDP had in 2007, $4 billion more, 

what does the Sask Party government do as soon as it gets 

elected? It decides to cut the lowest cost utility bundle 

guarantee for the people of Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Speaker, 

who did that affect most directly? It affected those with the least 

means to be able to afford the utilities in this province to begin 

with, Mr. Speaker. So why is it that the Sask Party government 

again is not looking after those who need the government to 

look out for them the most, Mr. Speaker? Why is that 

happening? 

 

Those people are having the most difficulty in terms of making 

ends meet. That‟s why we‟re seeing food bank usage up 

dramatically, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s why we‟re seeing those 

families not have the ability to put their children in those 

precious recreation programs that those children need to further 

their enhancement for their growth, Mr. Speaker. So that lovely 



March 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6561 

credit that they love to tout on the Sask Party side does no good 

for those families who can‟t afford to put their children into 

those programs to begin with, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when we talk about the best place to live, work, and raise a 

family, Mr. Speaker, it has become dramatically more difficult 

under the Sask Party government to live, work, and raise a 

family, Mr. Speaker, dramatically more difficult. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, with reference to Bill 162, there‟s another 

group that I want to refer to specifically, and that is the Catholic 

school students in the province of Saskatchewan. The Catholic 

school students in the province of Saskatchewan are 

dramatically underfunded, Mr. Speaker, to the tune of millions 

and millions and millions of dollars — millions and millions of 

dollars, Mr. Speaker. My Education critic isn‟t here at the 

moment, but I believe it‟s somewhere in the amount of $70 

million that they‟re underfunded compared to the public school 

systems in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

In Regina alone, in Regina alone, the Catholic school students 

are underfunded $2.7 million compared to the public schools in 

Regina alone. That amounts to $275 per student in the Catholic 

school system is underfunded compared to a student in the 

public school system. Now let‟s ask when that change 

happened, and why that change happened. 

 

Now that change happened last year under the Sask Party 

government. Now why did that change happen? Because the 

Sask Party government, in its wisdom, decided to change the 

funding formula, Mr. Speaker. They decided to change the 

funding formula. But what did they fail to do? They failed to 

make sure that the Sask Party government was properly 

addressing an equal way of addressing the funding formula for 

all students of this province. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So with respect to Bill 162, there is a group that is deeply 

disenfranchised, Mr. Speaker, deeply disenfranchised. When 

you see students in the city of Regina underfunded to the tune 

of $275 compared to the public school that‟s next door, to each 

student that‟s in the public school next door, Mr. Speaker, and 

you‟re talking about a student population, for instance in my 

daughter‟s school, of 425 students — do the math, Mr. Speaker. 

That is a significant amount of money that my daughter‟s 

school could be using to further . . . for programs, for extra 

teachers or extra equipment or whatever it may be, Mr. Speaker. 

And it‟s unfair, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the Sask Party government last year, what did they do 

about it when representatives from the Catholic school division 

came to the legislature and sat in your gallery, Mr. Speaker? 

What did the Sask Party government do? They actually gnashed 

their teeth. In other words, they actually bared their teeth at 

those people and were angry with them for . . . How dare they 

show up in the legislature, Mr. Speaker? That‟s what they did to 

them. 

 

They sat in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, to represent the people 

that they are supposed to be representing, which are the 

Catholic school students in the city of Regina. Those Regina 

Catholic School Division representatives, they were here to 

represent their students, the Regina Catholic school students, 

and the Sask Party government dared to look at them in an 

angry fashion and directly addressed them in an angry way 

when they were responding to the questions from the Leader of 

the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, or whoever was delivering those 

questions. That‟s what the Sask Party government did. So 

heaven forbid somebody criticizes what the Sask Party 

government does because they‟re going to get the wrath of the 

Sask Party government directly in the legislature when they 

come and visit. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Bill 162 is of great concern to that group of 

individuals. Why? Because they felt threatened, Mr. Speaker. 

They felt threatened. And not for their personal safety, Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s not the threat that I‟m talking about. But they 

felt threatened in terms of how they wanted to raise the 

concerns of the people that they‟re supposed to represent, which 

is the students in the Regina Catholic School Division, and yet 

they were being threatened by the minister of Education at the 

time for doing so, Mr. Speaker. That is absolutely pathetic. So, 

Mr. Speaker, they‟re concerned about Bill 162 as well, Mr. 

Speaker. So Bill 162 is incredibly important to that group of 

individuals, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the government also talks about that renters for example, 

you know, won‟t have a problem because they can present their 

identification. But again we talked about the fact that renters are 

also having to move frequently, Mr. Speaker. Because of 

increasing rents, Mr. Speaker, renters are not able to stay in a 

particular building for any long period of time, Mr. Speaker, 

because they can‟t afford the rent. So then they have to find 

alternative rental housing or rental apartments because they 

can‟t afford to stay in the unit that they‟re in because their rent 

is increasing to a point where they can no longer pay. So, Mr. 

Speaker, we‟re seeing that even for those individuals it‟s 

becoming difficult because they‟re having to change their 

addresses frequently due to the high cost of rent. 

 

And then they talk about the fact that they‟re going to have 

people who are . . . Or let‟s talk about, for instance, the people 

who are couch surfing. So in large part, Mr. Speaker, students 

who can‟t afford rent are now resorting to the term called couch 

surfing which means that they‟ll go from place to place to place 

to be able to find accommodations to stay because they can‟t 

afford the rent or they‟re trying to gather up enough money to 

be able to pay rent for at least a few months. So they‟re couch 

surfing in various homes to be able to do so. 

 

Or it‟s people who simply can‟t afford the rent and fall through 

all the cracks in terms of being able to find any support systems, 

Mr. Speaker. So those people are couch surfing as well. And 

again they don‟t have any documentation. They don‟t have a 

fixed address. And they certainly don‟t have the means to pay 

the $10 to purchase the photo ID. Because if they have $10 in 

their pocket, Mr. Speaker, it‟s going to be spent on something 

like, you know, bread, milk, and the staples that they need to be 

able to survive. And also these are why the numbers at the food 

bank are increasing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what‟s interesting about all this, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve spoken 

on this, on Bill 162, for a while now and talked about all the 

people who are disenfranchised. I‟ve talked about all the 

difficulties that can be, that will be incurred with Bill 162 



6562 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2011 

passing, Mr. Speaker. So what I‟ve found very interesting is 

that the government, the Sask Party government, is making it 

harder for certain groups of people to vote. But they‟ve shown 

absolutely no leadership, no leadership whatsoever in trying to 

make it easier for people to vote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we wonder why that is the case, Mr. Speaker. We wonder 

why there‟s no discussion of how new technology can make it 

easier for people to vote online, for instance. Those are things 

that should be examined, could be examined. We don‟t hear the 

Sask Party government talking about the fact that this is 

something that they‟re undertaking. All we hear about from the 

Sask Party government is, we‟re going to make it more difficult 

for people to vote. And we hear no other initiatives at all, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So again the NDP opposition does understand why the Sask 

Party government is not interested in making things easier to 

vote, for people to vote, but rather making it more difficult for 

people to vote. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the move . . . There has also been a request 

to move to four-year terms, and that came from the municipal 

sector. And that‟s been endorsed by both SUMA [Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association] and SARM. Now the 

opposition supports this change, Mr. Speaker, because we‟ve 

also heard from SUMA and SARM, and we know that these 

were desired changes by these organizations and the 

municipalities that they represent. Now this would allow people 

who serve in elected office at the municipal level more time to 

build up expertise and experience, something which would, 

should benefit their constituents and improve the quality of 

government at the local level, Mr. Speaker. So we are definitely 

not opposed to that at all. 

 

But what we are concerned about, Mr. Speaker, is how the 

change happened. Because when we, the opposition, asked the 

government about the issue two years ago, the government said 

that they weren‟t going to proceed with the changes at that time 

because some people had expressed opposition to the change. 

So we‟d like to know what the reason . . . why some people 

were opposed to the change because, you know, that‟s 

important information to have, Mr. Speaker, and what did the 

government learn in its subsequent consultations that persuaded 

them to change the government‟s mind obviously, Mr. Speaker. 

So we would be interested in knowing those things. 

 

So there‟s still a number of questions that we‟d like to have 

answered with respect to Bill 162 that are still out there, Mr. 

Speaker. And we‟re also pleased to see provisions in a Bill that 

would allow for greater use of other methods of voting because, 

Mr. Speaker, this is an acknowledgement at least that a 

discussion needs to happen, unlike the changes the government 

has proposed to make to the provincial elections Act. But that 

discussion needs to move further and be more broad ranging, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now another one of the changes that needs to be considered 

includes a review of the hours that polls in rural municipalities 

remain open, Mr. Speaker. Because people in rural 

municipalities, a lot of them will work in large urban centres or 

smaller urban centres and then they go, you know, after work 

they go back to their municipalities because they live in those 

smaller municipalities — that‟s where they reside, Mr. Speaker. 

But if the voting hours are not long enough, Mr. Speaker, for 

them to be able to accommodate the travel time that it takes, 

Mr. Speaker, again it could be a potential situation where 

they‟re not able to exercise their right to vote because of the 

hours that those polls are open, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again this is something that should be open for discussion 

and that the Sask Party government should be willing to look 

into and take into account and again would be more inclusive in 

terms of inviting people to vote and increasing the voter 

numbers, Mr. Speaker. Because as I‟ve said, the percentage of 

voters in municipal, provincial, and federal elections 

continually drops, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know that this is a great concern to the NDP opposition. 

And surely to goodness this has to be a concern to the Sask 

Party government unless they‟re quite content with the current 

people that are making it out to vote and they don‟t care about 

including more voters which, quite frankly, the most 

disenfranchised groups are the ones that I‟ve listed, are the 

seniors and the students who the Sask Party government 

obviously doesn‟t take great interest in because those are also 

the ones that are being hardest hit by the lack of policies or the 

policies that the Sask Party government has put forward so far 

since it has come into government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the government says that it has consulted with the 

municipal sector regarding the Bill. But given the opposition 

we‟re hearing from across the province to the photo ID 

provisions from this Bill, it‟s obvious to us, Mr. Speaker, that 

they did not consult with people about that, Mr. Speaker. Now 

it‟s a curious admission coming from a government that held up 

the change to four-year terms over two years because they 

wanted to consult with the public. So where was the public 

consultation on photo IDs, Mr. Speaker? That‟s what everyone 

is asking. Where was the public consultation on making it more 

difficult for people in this province to vote, Mr. Speaker? 

 

I‟m absolutely shocked that the Sask Party government doesn‟t 

think that this is something that is of great importance in terms 

of needing to properly address and making sure that all the 

voices of the people of Saskatchewan are heard on the subject, 

Mr. Speaker, because there was no public consultation. 

 

And now of course we‟re hearing the fallout from that, Mr. 

Speaker. We‟re hearing numerous groups — the ones I‟ve listed 

and others — who are saying this doesn‟t make sense. Why is 

it, when the voter turnout is so low, why is it that we‟re going to 

look at implementing provisions . . . Why is the Sask Party 

looking at implementing provisions that are going to make it 

more difficult for people to vote? Why are they wanting to 

depress the voter numbers even further, Mr. Speaker, and not be 

encouraging of people to vote, Mr. Speaker? That just doesn‟t 

make sense. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again let‟s recap with respect to Bill 162. The 

groups that are very, very much affected and are going to be 

affected by the Sask Party government in terms of its lack of 

policies or the policies it‟s decided to put through, which are 

seniors, students, First Nation and Métis people, homeless 

people, people who see funding inequities such as people within 

the Catholic school divisions in the province of Saskatchewan, 



March 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6563 

people who are disenfranchised for various reasons in terms of 

what‟s not taking place in the province, renters, Mr. Speaker, 

people who are, you know, supporting people in various groups, 

or walks of life I should say, who know the difficulties that 

those people are meeting. 

 

I even walk into my bank, Mr. Speaker, and I hear from the 

people that work in my bank who are saying to me about the 

young couples that are walking into the bank and who are 

absolutely devastated and mortified because they can‟t afford a 

mortgage that they need to be able to buy a starter home 

because starter homes are so expensive, yet they can‟t afford the 

rent in the residence that they‟re living in at the time. And you 

know, I‟ve got people in my bank that are saying, like when is 

this all going to end or where does this go from here and what 

do we do and what do we do for young people? Or I have 

people saying to me, what‟s going to happen with my children 

when they eventually want to move out of the house? Well 

they‟re saying their children are likely not ever going to be able 

to move out of their house because they can‟t afford to move 

out. 

 

Or you know, I hear the minister for . . . Minister for 

Immigration, I think. I can‟t remember what he‟s the minister 

for any more, quite frankly. But . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — It speaks volumes that you can‟t. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well you know, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately he 

hasn‟t made a great impression in the legislature so far, so it‟s 

hard to keep track of these new assignments. And unfortunately 

the responses that we‟ve gotten from the ones that have been 

asked questions so far haven‟t been much more helpful in terms 

of addressing what portfolios they‟re responsible for. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the member chirps that perhaps, you know, 

that there‟s some that have to leave the province. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, you know that is something that the Sask Party 

criticized when they were in opposition was the fact that people 

were leaving the province to find jobs or adventure or what it 

was, Mr. Speaker. So now apparently the Sask Party 

government is quite content with those people leaving the 

province because they can‟t afford to live here, Mr. Speaker. I 

don‟t understand that mentality. That doesn‟t make any sense to 

me. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, one would think that if they‟re 

wanting to attract people to this province, that they‟d also want 

to keep people that would like to stay in this province and 

would give them the opportunity to do so by having affordable 

mortgages or having the ability to access mortgages or the 

ability to pay their rent for instance, Mr. Speaker, or the ability 

to pay their tuition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:45] 

 

So you know, when we see the lack of programs that are being 

addressed by the Sask Party government like for instance, you 

know, graduate retention programs or programs to help with 

tuition or for instance the lowest cost utility bundle, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s interesting that they‟re quite content now to see 

people needing to leave the province because they can‟t afford 

to stay here any more, Mr. Speaker. So the whole notion of it 

being the best province to live, work, and raise a family seems 

to be lost on the Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So Bill 162 is critical to those people, Mr. Speaker, because 

those people will want to have the ability to have their say in 

the next election. Those people will want to ensure that they 

have the ability to access their right to vote, Mr. Speaker. So 

Bill 162 is something that the Sask Party government, like 

many other Bills that they‟ve introduced, haven‟t thought 

through very well, Mr. Speaker, because obviously there‟s 

much opposition to Bill 162. So they haven‟t thought it through, 

and they haven‟t properly consulted the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if you‟re not going to properly think through 

a Bill to ensure that it‟s something that will be advantageous to 

the people of Saskatchewan, you‟d at least want to hold public 

consultations to ensure that the public knows about what‟s 

happening and has the ability to give some input, Mr. Speaker. 

You‟d at least want to do that. But did the Sask Party 

government do that? No. Like on so many other fronts, the Sask 

Party government didn‟t do any consultations on Bill 162 with 

respect to making it more difficult for people to vote, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So one really has to wonder what the motivations are. And as 

I‟ve laid out, is it the fact that they don‟t want the people who 

want to vote for the Progressive Conservative Party to be able 

to exercise their vote because they can‟t access their $3 million 

fund? Or is it the fact that Bill 162 is going to hinder the vote of 

those who are not happy with the Sask Party government for not 

creating an equitable funding formula for the Catholic school 

systems and the public school systems in the province, Mr. 

Speaker? Or is it that they don‟t care that Bill 162 is going to 

make it more difficult to vote for the seniors in this province, 

Mr. Speaker? Or is it that they don‟t care that Bill 162 is going 

to make it more difficult for the students of this province to 

vote, Mr. Speaker? Or is it that they don‟t care that Bill 162 is 

going to make it more difficult for the students in this province 

to vote, Mr. Speaker? Or is it that they don‟t care that Bill 162 

is going to make it more difficult to vote for the homeless 

people in the province, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is so much logic and reason on the side of 

the people who are seeing grave concerns with Bill 162, Mr. 

Speaker, that the opposition has tremendous difficulty 

understanding why the Sask Party government would want to 

bulldoze this Bill through, Mr. Speaker. We don‟t understand 

that. We don‟t understand why the Sask Party government is 

not willing to pull the Bill, do some more homework on the 

Bill, do the necessary consultations on the Bill or even just say, 

you know what? It was a bad idea; we should just leave things 

the way they are and improve things instead of making things 

more difficult, Mr. Speaker. Or, Mr. Speaker, why is it that they 

would not want to look at . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I‟m having a hard 

time hearing the debate here on Bill 162. So if everybody wants 

to talk, if they would please go behind the bar and do so. It‟s 

getting very difficult for me to hear. Continue. 

 



6564 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2011 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, I came 

into this session with laryngitis, but it seems to be holding up 

pretty well despite the fact that there is some interesting 

challenges, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, like I said, there is many, many, many 

questions that people in the province have. There are many, 

many questions that the opposition has with respect to Bill 162 

and obviously a lot of legitimate concerns. And yet despite 

those legitimate concerns, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party 

government is not giving any inkling of wanting to change the 

Bill or wanting to do more review on the Bill by pulling it back 

or wanting to just say, you know what? We should just pull the 

Bill altogether, do some public consultations on what we can 

do, actually facilitate making the voting process easier in the 

province of Saskatchewan or even, Mr. Speaker, just looking at 

what happens with the Supreme Court challenge in the British 

Columbia with respect to the identical notion that this Bill is 

wanting to put forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because the groups that would be challenging Bill 162 in the 

province, Mr. Speaker, are the same groups that are challenging 

Bill 162 in the province of British Columbia. And I repeat: it‟s a 

coalition of organizations including people with disabilities, 

seniors, renters, and people who are homeless, Mr. Speaker. 

And those are the same people plus many more, as I‟ve spoken 

about, who are saying that Bill 162 is going to be a detriment to 

increasing the voter percentages in the provincial election in the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So one would wonder why the government would want to 

proceed with a Bill that has clearly got so many problems and 

has clearly disenfranchised so many people. And, Mr. Speaker, 

you know, that can also backfire for the Sask Party government. 

Who knows? If people become angry enough, a disenfranchised 

voter is someone who is likely not to vote, Mr. Speaker. But 

someone who is angry with the government is likely going to 

find ways to be able to vote, Mr. Speaker. And there are 

agencies now that are looking at potential ways to assist those 

disenfranchised individuals with assisting them in being able to 

get to the polls. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that shouldn‟t have to happen. Each 

individual should be able to access the right to vote simply 

because we do live in a free and democratic society, Mr. 

Speaker. We do have the right to vote. So Bill 162 should not 

be hindering that free and democratic right to vote in the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Bill 162 is doing just 

that. It is not making access to voting easier or more 

convenient. Instead it‟s doing the opposite. It‟s causing people 

to have difficulty in terms of accessing the photo ID that the 

Sask Party government is now wanting to implement. 

 

And we just don‟t see the necessity of it, Mr. Speaker. We 

haven‟t seen any evidence from the Sask Party government, or 

otherwise, as to what‟s precipitated this change. We haven‟t 

heard anything as to why it‟s necessary. We haven‟t heard of 

any problems. We haven‟t heard of any difficulties, Mr. 

Speaker. All we know is that this Bill came forward without 

any consultation with the public and they‟re going to ram it 

through regardless of whether there is opposition to it from the 

public of Saskatchewan or not — which is not unlike what 

we‟ve seen on other Bills, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve seen many other 

Bills that have been rammed through by the Sask Party 

government without proper consultation. And we‟ve seen other 

Bills that have been rammed through whether or not they were 

good for the Saskatchewan public or good for Saskatchewan, 

period. 

 

One only has to look back to the spring session of the last year 

with respect to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, Mr. 

Speaker, where there were no public consultations. They simply 

stripped, they simply stripped 3.5 million acres of habitat land 

that was protected under legislation, which was put under 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, by the former Progressive 

Conservative government under Grant Devine. It was Colin 

Maxwell, Minister Colin Maxwell at the time, that put that land 

under legislation and started protecting it. The NDP added to it. 

 

So Bill 162 would be something . . . is something of great 

concern, I should say, to those individuals that have great 

concern about what‟s going to happen with those lands now, 

given that they‟re no longer protected under legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. They are at the discretion of the Minister of 

Environment to be able to sell at his whim, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the excuse that the minister uses about the fact that there is 

a conservation easements amendment Act that was also passed 

— which means that conservation easements can be attached — 

is of cold comfort, Mr. Speaker, because the minister also has 

the discretion to remove those easements. So Bill 162 is 

incredibly important to those individuals who are very 

concerned about what‟s going to happen with that land in the 

future. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, there‟s something very nefarious going 

on with the Sask Party government with respect to the wildlife 

habitat lands, Mr. Speaker. We haven‟t seen . . . Well we saw 

an incredible push . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I know there‟s lots 

of leniency and latitude on discussion of the various different 

Bills, but I fail to see where this has anything to do with the 

environment. And could the member please stick to Bill 162. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well with respect to Bill 162, the people who 

are concerned about the environment, Mr. Speaker, and the 

people who are directly concerned about the wildlife habitat 

protection, the protected lands that were protected under 

legislation, will have a great deal of concern about Bill 162, Mr. 

Speaker, because Bill 162 could directly affect the people that 

would like to vote in the next election with respect to exercising 

their voice on what happened under the Sask Party government, 

by stripping those lands, those 3.5 million acres of lands that 

were protected for the wildlife habitat of this province and 

putting them out of legislation into regulations, Mr. Speaker. So 

Bill 162 has direct impact on those individuals who would like 

to exercise their right to vote about what the Sask Party did with 

respect to the wildlife habitat protection land. 

 

Let‟s not even talk about what‟s happening with consultation. I 

mean, Mr. Speaker, on Bill 162 we can clearly see that there 

was not enough consultation done on a public level or we 

wouldn‟t be seeing the amount of outcry on Bill 162 that we are 

with respect to the amount of people who are disenfranchised or 

disappointed, I should say, with Bill 162. 



March 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6565 

With the wildlife habitat protected lands, we were told that 

there was widespread consultations with various organizations. 

Those organizations were actually named. Six organizations 

were named. Five of the six organizations said that they weren‟t 

consulted with, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again we see the fact that the Sask Party government is 

willing to proceed forward on a Bill regardless of whether it‟s 

to the detriment of Saskatchewan people or not, as long as it‟s 

their mandate, it‟s their idea. They‟re going to go forward 

regardless of whether or not it‟s to the good or to the detriment 

of Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s what we‟re 

seeing with Bill 162. 

 

Bill 162 does nothing to enhance the ability for people to vote 

in this province, Mr. Speaker. What it does is it further causes 

restrictions on people to vote in the province, Mr. Speaker. So 

there is no reason for Bill 162 to come forward. 

 

We also haven‟t heard from the Sask Party government, we 

haven‟t heard any reasons as to why Bill 162 was necessary to 

implement in terms of enforcing those restrictions, in terms of 

making things more difficult to vote, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve not 

yet heard from the Sask Party government why Bill 162 was 

necessary to implement in terms of voter restrictions, in terms 

of voter ID. We‟ve not yet heard why, and yet the Sask Party 

government is going to proceed forward without explaining to 

the people of Saskatchewan why it was necessary to implement 

in this province. 

 

The only thing we‟ve heard is that they want to be like their 

cousins in Ottawa and they want to have, you know, similar 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. That‟s not good enough. That‟s not 

good enough. If their cousins in Ottawa put forward bad 

legislation, does the Sask Party government think that it has to 

sink to the lowest common denominator of the Harper Tories in 

Ottawa? Is that what they‟re saying, Mr. Speaker, because 

that‟s what we‟re hearing. And we‟re hearing it on numerous 

fronts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Not only are we hearing that they now think that they have to 

mimic the Harper Tories‟ legislation with respect to voter ID — 

despite the fact that people of Saskatchewan don‟t want it; 

despite the fact that the people of Saskatchewan find that it‟s 

going to further cause problems for people to vote in this 

province, Mr. Speaker — they‟re following suit on numerous 

other fronts. Whether it‟s lowering their targets for greenhouse 

gas emissions, whether it‟s meeting other lower targets that the 

federal government is putting forward, Mr. Speaker, it seems 

that the Sask Party government always wants to sink to the 

lowest common denominator with whatever federal 

conservative cousins or whatever conservative cousins in other 

provinces they can possibly meet. 

 

It‟s no different than the New West Partnership Agreement or 

whatever the heck they‟re calling it now. Something to the 

effect of TILMA [Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility 

Agreement], quite frankly, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party 

government said that they weren‟t going to sign on to TILMA. 

That‟s what they promised the people of Saskatchewan prior to 

November 7th, 2007, the last election. And yet what did they 

do? They signed on to this New West Partnership Agreement, 

which, Mr. Speaker, mirrors TILMA. 

So once again they‟ve promised the people of Saskatchewan 

they wouldn‟t sign something on to something that the people 

of Saskatchewan didn‟t want. And yet once it gets into 

government it does whatever it wants. 

 

They promised the workers of the province that they weren‟t 

going to implement legislation like under Bills 5 and 6, like 

essential services legislation and changes to The Trade Union 

Act which now allow the Sask Party government to spend, I 

would almost hesitate to say but it‟s probably close to a million 

or if not more, but thousands and thousands and thousands of 

taxpayer dollars in terms of negative advertising with respect to 

negotiations that are going on in this province with SAHO 

[Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations]. We‟re 

seeing constant negative ads that are paid for by taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan regardless of whether those taxpayers who are 

voters under Bill 162 feel that that‟s what should be going 

forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 162 has huge impact on the people who are 

currently seeing the Sask Party government wasting their 

taxpayer dollars on negative advertising in terms of negotiations 

that are going on with the workers of this province. And when 

did that negative advertising start, Mr. Speaker? It started after 

this government rammed through those two Bills, Bills 5 and 6. 

 

Bill 6 allows them now to do whatever they want, Mr. Speaker, 

with respect to negative advertising and negotiations. And they 

say they respect workers. They say they respect workers, Mr. 

Speaker. What a absolute crock, Mr. Speaker. They have no 

respect for the workers in this province, whether they‟re 

unionized or non-unionized, Mr. Speaker. They have no respect 

for the workers in this province. 

 

Because if they had respect for the workers in this province, the 

workers in this province wouldn‟t feel so strongly about Bill 

162. Because the workers in this province are in large part the 

people who are also complaining about Bill 162, Mr. Speaker. 

The workers in this province know that this government is 

anti-worker whether they‟re unionized or non-unionized. 

 

They are doing nothing to raise the minimum wage in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. That speaks to the non-unionized 

workers in this province, Mr. Speaker. They are doing nothing 

to tell SAHO not to put forward negative ads. As a matter of 

fact, I suspect those negative ads are being instructed by the 

Sask Party government to SAHO, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker. 

So that‟s what the Sask Party government is all about. It‟s about 

negative advertising and it‟s about being anti-worker. And Bill 

162 is especially important to the workers of this province, Mr. 

Speaker, because the workers of this province will have a lot to 

say in the next election, Mr. Speaker, about how this 

government is treating them and their lack of respect for the 

workers in this province, Mr. Speaker, which is interesting 

because, Mr. Speaker, the province would not be moving 

forward the way it is if it wasn‟t for the dedication of the 

workers in this province, Mr. Speaker. It is at the hands of those 

workers, it is from the backs of those workers, it is from the 

families of those workers, supporting those workers to be able 

to do what they do, to build the province up to be what it is 

today, Mr. Speaker. 



6566 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2011 

So how dare they show the respect . . . How dare the Sask Party 

government show the disrespect that they do for the workers of 

this province, Mr. Speaker? It is absolutely deplorable. And Bill 

162 has a great impact on those workers, Mr. Speaker, because 

again those are the people that are going to want to be able to 

exercise their right to vote in the next election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve outlined many different groups that 

have concerns with this Bill. I‟ve outlined many different 

groups that are deeply concerned and affected by this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve outlined some of the 

alternatives that the Sask Party government could undertake 

because again, Mr. Speaker, we‟re talking about the fact that 

there are changes that could be made to the voting system in the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And that should be 

discussed, but this is not the way to go about doing so. 

 

We should be talking about the polling hours, Mr. Speaker. We 

should be talking about easier access to voting, Mr. Speaker. 

Those are the discussions that should be taking place, Mr. 

Speaker. We should be talking about moving forward and 

engaging more speakers in the province, more voters in the 

province, Mr. Speaker, and not talking about how we‟re going 

to further make it difficult for the people in the province to 

exercise their right to vote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that‟s what the Sask Party government is all about. They 

just don‟t care about the individuals that are going to see the 

most harm from Bill 162. They just don‟t care about the 

individuals who see the most harm from cancelling the lowest 

cost utility bundle in this province, Mr. Speaker. They just don‟t 

care about the individuals who really need some system of rent 

control and are not going to see it from a Sask Party 

government, Mr. Speaker. They just don‟t care about the people 

that are hardest hit by the rising cost of living in the province, 

Mr. Speaker. That‟s not who they care about, and those are the 

individuals that are hardest hit by Bill 162 and those are the 

people that have the most stake in Bill 162, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of being able to exercise their right to vote. 

 

So unlike the government, the opposition intends to consult 

more widely on this Bill, despite the fact that we‟ve already 

received many, many, many letters and emails and phone calls 

with respect to this Bill, and particularly the requirement to 

produce ID. 

 

For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to allow the other 

members of my caucus to be able to engage in the debate as 

well and exercise their opinions and their voices, plus exercise 

the opinions and voices of those that they‟re hearing from as 

well, Mr. Speaker, because I know that I mean clearly if I‟m 

getting the amount of feedback that I‟m getting, that my 

colleagues are getting the equal amount of feedback. 

 

And what‟s more shameful about that, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

Sask Party caucus, the Sask Party government is getting as 

much feedback on the issue, negative feedback on the issue as 

we are, and yet you don‟t hear them saying, gee we made a 

mistake or we should pull back the Bill for a while; we should 

make some changes. No, Mr. Speaker, they‟re saying, we‟re 

going full steam ahead, just like they always do regardless of if 

it‟s correct or not. They‟re going full steam ahead with the Bill 

whether or not it‟s going to be good for the public of 

Saskatchewan or not, and the NDP opposition feels quite 

differently. We‟ve put forward a few suggestions, and I hope 

the Sask Party government will heed those suggestions. So at 

this time I‟m going to adjourn debate. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — The member from 

Regina Walsh Acres has moved adjournment on debate on Bill 

162. Is the Assembly ready to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 160 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 160 — The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I recognize the 

member from Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m indeed pleased to 

have the opportunity to rise today and speak to Bill No. 160. 

This Bill is of vast importance, of great importance, for a 

number of individuals in Saskatchewan. And again it‟s a Bill 

that speaks to fundamental changes that will affect, in many 

cases, the most vulnerable citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The original intent of the tribunals that were set up in 

Saskatchewan that are being changed in this legislation and 

through this legislation was to hear complaints that are referred 

by the Human Rights Commission. And they are complaints of 

people who are discriminated against and people who feel that 

they are discriminated against based on a number of different 

criteria or for a number of different reasons, and those may be 

race, colour, age, sex, sexual orientation, physical or mental 

disability, religion, marital status, family status, place of origin, 

or ancestry. So it‟s a very wide range of concerns that might be 

brought forward to the Human Rights Commission and 

formerly brought to a tribunal. 

 

Now originally tribunals were set up as a way for marginalized 

people to bring forward concerns that they have, whether it‟s in 

the workplace, whether it is in relation to their tenancy, 

employment advertisements, whether it‟s related to 

publications, public services and facilities, the purchase of 

property, and discrimination by unions or associations. 

 

Now tribunals were set up as a less formal function of 

government in order to hear these complaints because they‟re 

less intimidating places to hear cases. And for the people who 

are bringing forward a complaint, as the Speaker might well 

know, a court of law can be an intimidating place for people. It 

can be intimidating for a number of reasons, but it‟s a very 

formal and intimidating place. These tribunals that were acting 

on behalf of Saskatchewan people were much less formal and 

much more accessible than what is being proposed in this 

legislation. 

 

Now there have been some concerns expressed previously 



March 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6567 

about the time it takes for a tribunal to go through to hear a 

case, and certainly we agree that people are entitled to a timely 

resolution when they raise concerns with respect to any reason 

that they‟re discriminated against. They might have legitimate 

concerns about the timing. But I‟m not sure that this legislation 

can guarantee anybody that the timeliness will be any better 

when the newly proposed changes are made. I think it says in 

the legislation that they‟ll be limited to a year, but there‟s no 

guarantee of that in the legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now certainly you would want to have a timely resolution to 

these issues, particularly when the issues might involve 

something that‟s deeply personal, emotional. And if you look at 

the list that I‟d read earlier — race, colour, age, physical or 

mental disability, religion, marital status — these items go to 

the core of who we are as human beings. So they can be very 

emotional and personal situations, so you want to have a timely 

and quick resolution. 

 

Now we are discussing at second reading here some of the 

proposed changes, and I want to note for the people of 

Saskatchewan some of the comments that were made by the 

minister responsible, the Minister of Justice, in his speech on 

November 30th of 2010 because he says this, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. [I‟m quoting.] I rise today to 

move second reading of Bill No. 160, The Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010. Mr. Speaker, 

earlier this session we introduced a Bill dealing with the 

Provincial Court. The members opposite during their 

comments on that made significant reference to the fact 

that the second reading speech was short and was going to 

require them to do some additional work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I thought at the time that the 

information was provided was more than adequate — and 

I still believe that — I have today provided some 

significant additional information with regard to this Bill, 

so I will be somewhat lengthier in time than we were on 

the earlier Bill. But that is directly in response to the 

members opposite inquiries as to the things [we should 

include] . . . in a second reading speech, so we will 

provide some more significant detail. 

 

So in legislation that makes fundamental changes to a person‟s 

human rights and cases where their human rights might be 

stripped away, the minister is complaining about having to be 

more forthcoming with information on the Bill. It‟s astounding, 

and I hope the irony isn‟t lost on Saskatchewan people. But 

that‟s what we have here. That‟s how he started his speech in 

order to provide some more information that‟s being asked for 

by the opposition on behalf of Saskatchewan residents who 

have appealed to us to get more information for them because 

this directly affects their daily lives. 

 

Now again it‟s ironic that you have the Justice minister in the 

province of Saskatchewan belabouring, bemoaning the fact that 

he has to provide more information to the legislature on a Bill 

he‟s introducing that changes fundamental rights for people 

who have a complaint. 

 

Now we do have so many concerns about this legislation, and 

they are lengthy to list but interesting to note. Now I‟ll quote 

again from November 30th speech of the minister where he 

says that “moving the duties of the tribunal to the court should 

not impact the accessibility of hearings to members of the 

public given the Queen‟s Bench courthouse locations across the 

province.” 

 

So he has great concern seemingly about people who want to 

witness the court proceedings. But I would argue that he should 

have equal concern about the accessibility of complainants 

because there is a possibility that this legislation makes 

fundamental changes that cause individuals to not bring forward 

cases. And I would say that because it is unclear in this 

legislation that is proposed whether or not there will be a cost 

associated for individuals who are bringing forward a 

complaint. 

 

Again these are complaints that are fundamental to who we are 

as human beings, related to race, colour, mental or physical 

disability, marital status, family status, religion. These can be 

fundamental items that people bring forward complaints 

regarding. And so it‟s again fundamentally important that the 

people who bring these complaints forward are able to do so 

freely and openly and are not hindered in any way by a financial 

constraint that is placed on them because there were no such 

financial constraints previous to this legislation being 

introduced. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Again in the Minister of Justice‟s speech on November 30th, he 

states: 

 

The Bill moves the cost provisions to the Code and places 

a limit on costs that may be awarded to situations where 

there has been vexatious, frivolous, or abusive conduct on 

the part of any party to the proceeding, including if 

appropriate, the commission itself. Limiting costs will 

preserve accessibility to human rights hearings. 

 

Limiting costs to the hearings. So that means now implicitly 

that there‟s going to be some sort of cost for individuals who 

bring forward a complaint. I would argue that that is wholly and 

entirely inappropriate for these types of complaints for people 

who have been in some way marginalized by another individual 

or a workplace, one of the groups that I had listed earlier. 

There‟s going to be a cost for the hearing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it says nothing of an appeal process. It says 

nothing of an appeal process at all because if they are able to, as 

the minister says, limit costs for the hearings, we‟re not sure 

what those costs will be limited to. But it says nothing of the 

appeal process and where the costs might be borne there and 

who might have to bear those costs. And so we have great 

concerns for people in the province of Saskatchewan who are 

bringing forward a complaint who may have to bear the cost of 

bringing for the complaint where they did not have to 

previously. And there is nothing specific at all, no reference at 

all to the potential cost of an appeal in this case. 

 

And so again highly disconcerting, and we‟ve heard from many 

people throughout the province who are frustrated by this — 

whether it‟s a lack of oversight, whether it‟s intentional on 

behalf of the government to omit or to have the cost be part of 



6568 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2011 

the process now. Because again there was no cost in previously 

in the province of Saskatchewan to bring forward one of these 

complaints, and that was true right up to the highest court in the 

country. The costs were covered for these cases and these 

complaints. 

 

So again I want to quote, if I could, from another page in 

Hansard where the Chief Commissioner, Judge Arnot, has 

spoken with respect to his desire to decrease the amount of time 

it takes to hear somebody‟s complaint and that he says that, 

quote, “. . . a decision making process which is informal and 

accessible to all, provides for review of decisions, and is 

handled by experts who reflect our diverse society.” 

 

Now this is a laudable goal. We certainly agree with it. All of 

these things have to take place in a timely manner, however. 

And so we‟ve heard many, many different complaints from 

different individuals throughout Saskatchewan about the 

proposed legislation. We‟ve heard from professionals. We‟ve 

heard from people who have brought complaints previously. 

We‟ve heard from various groups throughout the province that 

aid people in making complaints in these situations, and we‟ve 

also heard very recently from the Secretary-General of Amnesty 

International Canada. 

 

Now unfortunately this government‟s track record with worldly 

organizations such as Amnesty International, NATO [North 

Atlantic Treaty Organization], the UN [United Nations] is not 

good because the UN, a group of the UN, spoke out against the 

government on Bills 5 and 6 about the complete lack of 

consultation on those Bills. They spoke out very strongly. And 

what was the government‟s reaction to that international body? 

Their reaction was to dismiss it, to say, well they‟re 

quasi-judicial at best. They don‟t have any standing here in 

Saskatchewan, so we can ignore them because it doesn‟t mean 

anything. So to this government, the voice of the United 

Nations is unfortunately meaningless. 

 

Now there is another group that wants to talk about legislation 

being brought forward by this government. And it is the group 

called Amnesty International Canada. Their Secretary-General, 

Alex Neve, spoke in Saskatoon on March 2nd, so very recently 

spoke, and he gave a lengthy speech about the perils of what is 

being proposed here by the Sask Party government. And I want 

to, if I could, quote at good length from his speech, from his 

remarks, because I think that it‟s important to put on the record 

for Saskatchewan people again. 

 

He says this, and I quote, “. . . I remain struck by the fact that 

many people active in the Saskatchewan human rights 

movement are concerned about deficient consultations.” Now 

that‟s in respect to Bill 160, Mr. Speaker. He goes on to say: 

 

They talk to me of two main concerns. First, I‟m told that 

the consultation was not an open-ended consultation 

seeking views about the state of human rights protection in 

the province and ideas for changes to the system; out of 

which a reform proposal could then have been developed. 

Rather, it was a consultation in which people were asked 

to react and respond to a proposal that had already been 

developed. Second, many have expressed concern to me 

that the consultations focused mainly on the four pillars 

and gave much less attention to the more controversial 

proposal related to the future of the human rights tribunal. 

 

So what he is saying here is that while the government, just like 

they did with The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, are stating 

that they‟ve consulted with a number of groups . . . Now I 

remember having read for the record in this Assembly, the 

minister at that time, her remarks from her second reading 

speech where she quoted directly the groups with whom she 

had said she had consulted. And it turns out after the opposition 

consulted with these groups — and consulting is where you 

actually communicate with the groups — we learned that the 

vast majority of those groups had not taken place in any 

consultation whatsoever. So when it comes to consultation, I 

have some concerns. And so, apparently, does the 

Secretary-General of Amnesty International Canada. 

 

Now he makes recommendations, which I think are again 

important to read into the record, and I‟ll quote: 

 

I‟ll start with my first recommendation, which is twofold. 

 

It would be helpful for the Commission or the government 

to provide more details about the consultation process, 

including when and where it took place, who was involved 

and the nature of the consultation meetings. It would also 

be helpful to be more specific about the basis for asserting 

that support for Bill 160 is „overwhelming.‟ 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the Secretary-General echoes the concerns that 

we‟ve been hearing from Saskatchewan people, and they are 

identical to the concerns that were heard with respect to The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. And that is quite simply that 

the consultation that‟s being touted, that‟s being explained by 

the government in the way they describe it, has not taken place. 

They list groups that they consulted with but they don‟t tell you 

when, where, or how they consulted. And that is of concern 

both to the opposition, on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, 

and now to the organization Amnesty International Canada. 

 

So again, I‟ll go on to list the recommendations of the 

Secretary-General: 

 

I would suggest . . . that it is also necessary to go back to 

the drawing board to a large extent and initiate a further 

consultation exercise. Consultation never hurts; especially 

when something as basic as people‟s human rights are on 

the line. 

 

So he says quite simply, Mr. Speaker, that he expects that the 

government will move back to consultations. And so when we 

brought forward this case, again in legislation, previously when 

we heard in a second reading speech that consultations had 

taken place, we made some phone calls to the organizations 

listed in the speech. They denied flatly that there had been any 

consultation whatsoever. 

 

What was the response of the government at that time to a call 

for consultation after we learned that there had been none? Was 

it then to go out to the broader public? Was it then to actually 

make phone calls and communicate with these groups that they 

said they had consulted previously and to do a meaningful and 

real consultation and to get the input of Saskatchewan people 

for their legislation? 



March 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6569 

One would hope that that would be the reaction of the 

government, but it wasn‟t, Mr. Speaker. It wasn‟t at all. They 

chose instead to bunker themselves in, to not talk to anybody 

further about the legislation, and just to try to pass it as quickly 

as they could. And so their record for consulting, even after 

they‟ve been caught in not consulting when they said they had, 

is not good. And so I have some concerns along with the 

Secretary-General that these consultations might not take place 

on something, Mr. Speaker, on something as fundamental as 

our human rights — basic, fundamental human rights. This is 

about who we are as people. 

 

So again I‟ll continue quoting from the remarks. He says: 

 

Let me now turn more specifically to the actual reform 

proposal that lies before us. I am an activist and we are 

always best known for our criticism and complaints. But 

that is not where I am going to start. Instead, I want to 

begin by emphasizing a number of positive aspects. 

 

So this is someone that you would want to consult with, Mr. 

Speaker. Open-minded, not criticizing just for the sake of 

criticizing, but giving credit where credit is due to the 

government. 

 

First, I welcome the Four Pillars that are described as 

forming the basis to the reforms: 

 

More efficient and effective in investigation, prosecution 

and gate keeping for complaints of discrimination. 

 

Increased focus on early resolution using mediation, 

collaboration, talking circles and other forms of alternative 

dispute resolution. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, giving credit to some of the good things 

that might come out of this legislation. 

 

Increased systemic advocacy for issues that affect multiple 

persons or groups. 

 

Development of pre-kindergarten to Grade 12 civics 

materials and content that teach citizenship rights, 

responsibilities and respect in all Saskatchewan schools. I 

trust that goes alongside continuing support for and, I 

would expect, efforts to strengthen the curriculum when it 

comes to human rights education more broadly. It is 

fundamental that our schools play a lead role in educating 

our youth both about their responsibility to uphold and 

respect rights, but also to empower them with a full 

knowledge of their rights and means of protecting them. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, credit where credit is due for what the 

legislation is attempting to accomplish. And as I had said in my 

earlier remarks, we are certainly as an opposition welcoming of 

the possibility that this might speed the process for the affected 

folks. The education piece is also very important for 

Saskatchewan people, and so we should give credit to the 

government where credit is due. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Additionally there are, however, some more concerns levelled 

against the government in the remarks. He goes on to say, 

quote: 

 

I do have a number of concerns — of course I do, why 

else would we be together tonight. 

 

First, I am puzzled by the shortening of the limitation 

period within which human rights complaints can be 

initiated, from two years to one year. I have a mixed view 

here, because I see that alongside the change there is an 

explicit power granted to the Commissioner to allow 

complaints after the one year bar if he or she feels it is 

“appropriate in the circumstances to do so.” 

 

So in one case they‟re stripping away the rights of people to 

begin the complaint process, to begin the process after a year, 

but they‟re leaving it up to the discretion of the commissioner. 

It seems contradictory, Mr. Speaker, and I‟m not sure the 

purpose it serves to strip away somebody‟s rights and then 

install them partially, reinstall them partially in the same 

legislation. I would argue that the time period should be left 

open to two years as has been the case. 

 

Now the Secretary-General goes on to say: 

 

But why the shorter limitation period? Is there empirical 

evidence of a substantial number of unfounded complaints 

being launched during that second year? I have not seen 

any indication of that, so do not understand what the 

change seeks to address. 

 

So he‟s saying quite simply that the government is somehow 

limiting the amount of time an individual has to bring a 

complaint forward, and they‟re doing it in a way that is, in his 

view, arbitrary because they seem to be limiting something that 

has not been a problem previously. And so I‟ll continue: 

 

There are any number of reasons why it may take time for 

a complainant to come forward and launch a complaint: 

including fear, shame, lack of awareness, lack of 

assistance or lack of trust. All of these concerns, 

particularly absent any compelling evidence of abuse, 

point to maintaining the limitation period as it is — two 

years. 

 

And so again, Mr. Speaker, when you‟re talking about 

something, when you‟re talking about fundamental human 

rights, when you‟re talking about the things that are 

fundamental to each of us — our race, our colour, our religion, 

our sexual orientation — there can be a number of reasons why 

it would take time for a person to bring a complaint forward. So 

again it doesn‟t seem to make a lot of sense to strip away the 

rights of people to bring forward a complaint after a year. 

 

Now the Secretary-General goes on to state: 

 

Second, it seems that there are two new grounds which 

could form the basis for a decision by the Commissioner 

to dismiss a complaint outright. Both of which cause 

concern. 

 

The first is related to mediation. In an effort to bolster the 

successful completion rate of mediation, the Act provides 



6570 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2011 

that if a complainant turns down an offer of settlement that 

the Commissioner considers to be “fair and reasonable” 

the Commissioner may dismiss the complaint. Notably, 

while the complainant faces that punitive provision there 

is no equivalent provision penalizing the individual or 

group against whom the complaint has been made if they 

turn down a reasonable offer of settlement. 

 

So the complainant can have a judgment ruled against them. 

But the person who is defending themselves, or the organization 

that‟s defending themselves, don‟t have the same provision. 

And it seems obviously incongruent because they should be 

treated equally, you would expect, by the commissioner. 

 

And again, when you‟re speaking about fundamental human 

rights, who we are as people, to have the commissioner be able 

to decide unilaterally to dismiss the complaint based on what he 

or she deems is fair causes some concern, especially if it costs a 

great deal of money to then appeal that decision. We heard 

earlier that costs may be limited but still occur for people in 

their original complaint, but there is nothing that I‟ve read in 

the legislation that leads me to believe that once the 

commissioner dismisses a complaint, that the appeal process is 

funded in any way. 

 

So are we asking people who are lodging a complaint, somehow 

possibly marginalized individuals, to then seek out a lawyer, 

and pay out of their own pocket, which may be extremely 

difficult for them to pay for an appeal process for a unilateral 

decision of the commissioner. So certainly there are some 

concerns — legitimate concerns — raised about that process. 

Now it says, it goes on to say: 

 

. . . that one-sided penalty risks creating a . . . uneven 

dynamic in the mediation process . . . Also, there is no 

further indication as to what constitutes a “fair and 

reasonable” offer of settlement. Fair and reasonable 

judged against what? 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, speaks to what I just talked about. When 

the commissioner has a unilateral opportunity to dismiss a 

complaint, it certainly seems to be unfair to the complainant 

that that might take place because there‟s nothing that it‟s 

measured against. It‟s a simple judgment of fairness by an 

individual. The Secretary-General goes on to say that: 

 

This power is obviously meant to encourage complainants 

to engage in the mediation process in good faith and to 

increase the number of mediations that end in settlement. 

There is nothing inherently objectionable in that goal — in 

fact it is a laudable goal. The problem lies in the means of 

getting there. For there is no denying that the approach 

here has a decidedly coercive feel to it. 

 

As admirable as it may be to urge, cajole and persuade 

complainants to settle when the proposal before them is a 

reasonable one, the bottom line is that human rights that 

are at stake in the complaint belong to the individual or 

individuals who have made the complaint, not to the 

Commission. 

 

To me, Mr. Speaker, an exceedingly important point to make 

that the unilateral decision of the commissioner would be seen 

as dismissing the complaint, which belongs to the individual or 

individuals who made the complaint originally and not to the 

commission. If complainants make their own informed decision 

at the end of a mediation exercise that they do not want to settle 

and do instead want to have a full hearing of their case, that 

choice should be respected. That is what human rights are all 

about. So to take that away by extension means that you‟re 

doing the opposite of what you intended to do in introducing 

this legislation, that you are stripping away the fundamental 

human rights of the individual lodging the complaint. 

 

Under the tribunal system, there is always the opportunity to be 

heard in a public way. This has the potential to urge, cajole, or 

persuade complainants to settle in a way that they do not want 

to. And as has been said, this strips away fundamental human 

rights. And so we ought to be exceedingly careful when we 

introduce legislation and pass legislation that strip away 

fundamental human rights — certainly something to be 

concerned about. 

 

Now I‟ll go on to quote, if I could, from the Secretary-General: 

 

The second new ground for dismissal is a fairly vague and 

general one — allowing the Commissioner to dismiss 

when “having regard to all the circumstances” the 

Commissioner is of the view that hearing of the complaint 

is not warranted. 

 

There‟s nothing more than that. Perhaps more is to come in the 

regulations but, Mr. Speaker, that‟s not what we‟re discussing 

here today and we have no way to know that that will take 

place. 

 

So it‟s not bad enough that there‟s the threat that if the 

complainant brings forward a complaint and is offered a 

settlement in mediation that the commissioner deems is fair and 

you turn that down — because as an individual who has the 

perception that you are harmed in some way fundamentally in 

terms of who you are — that they can dismiss that case, but 

what it‟s saying, what the Secretary-General is saying is that 

this legislation as it is now, without the regulations before us, 

suggests that the commissioner can dismiss any case that they 

believe is not warranted. And so again a fundamental stripping 

away of human rights for the people of Saskatchewan if they 

have a complaint, when one individual who hears that 

complaint can dismiss it outright. 

 

So there are two reasons why it might be dismissed and both 

decisions can be made unilaterally by a commissioner. And if 

those decisions are made where the commissioner deems that 

(1) the settlement was fair and you didn‟t agree to take it or (2) 

that your complaint is not valid to begin with or warranted as 

the Secretary-General says, that that can be dismissed outright 

by the commissioner. 

 

So again we ought to be absolutely, fundamentally careful that 

this is not something that we do in the legislature — the 

people‟s legislature of Saskatchewan — because we are here to 

enhance the fundamental human rights of the people of 

Saskatchewan and not to take them away. We were elected to 

enhance those rights and not to strip them away. 

 

Now again to quote: 



March 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6571 

Dismissing a human rights complaint is serious business 

and should only be done on the basis of grounds that are 

clear and understandable and not open to arbitrariness. 

This provision should be removed from the Act. 

 

I would argue that that is absolutely reasonable, Mr. Speaker, 

considering that it is an opportunity to erode the fundamental 

human rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 

He goes on to say that: 

 

My third area of concern, related to this issue of grounds 

for dismissal is the following. As far as I can tell, there is 

no review or appeal of a decision to dismiss a complaint. 

[So] currently in the Act the decision of the Commission 

to dismiss a complaint will be reviewed by the Human 

Rights Tribunal if the complainant so wishes. That is no 

longer the case. And that is a problem. There should be a 

means of reviewing decisions to dismiss complaints. 

 

And now I come to my final area of concern — the one, I 

believe, that has attracted the majority media, political and 

public attention. That is the proposal to abolish the Human 

Rights Tribunal and assign the role of hearing all human 

rights complaints that reach the hearing stage to the Court 

of Queen‟s Bench instead. 

 

As a first note it is worth underscoring that this would be 

out of step with every other human rights system in 

Canada — all provinces, territories, and the Canadian 

Human Rights Commission maintain a system which 

entrusts the hearing of human rights complaints to 

specialized, informal tribunals. The role of the courts is 

left to dealing with legal and jurisdictional issues and 

reviewing tribunal decisions for errors. This has very 

much come to be seen as best practice. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So here we have a case, Mr. Speaker, with this legislation 

where the Saskatchewan Party has decided to lead all of 

Canada. They want to be the best at something. They want to 

lead the country. But they‟re doing it in eroding people‟s 

fundamental human rights — a fundamentally wrong way to 

lead a province. They‟re leading it in exactly the wrong 

direction. 

 

And again these are the words of the Secretary-General of 

Amnesty International Canada. He goes on to say: 

 

Notably, other jurisdictions have conducted reviews of 

their human rights complaint process over the past several 

years. Those reviews have led to a number of changes, 

some of which were controversial. But none proposed, nor 

led to the dismantling of tribunals. 

 

So again we‟re going to lead the country. The Saskatchewan 

Party government is going to lead the country in something. But 

it‟s taking Saskatchewan in the wrong direction. It‟s eroding the 

fundamental human rights of Saskatchewan residents in a way 

that doesn‟t take place in any other province or territory in the 

country. 

 

The Secretary-General goes on to say: 

 

I understand that there are concerns that the Tribunal 

process has been inefficient. Government figures that 

indicate that the average amount . . . to resolve a case is 

[up to] 21 months. First, remember my opening words — 

human rights adjudication is not easy and straightforward. 

I‟m not saying 21 months is a good thing. But do 

remember that some, even many cases, may well take a 

considerable amount of time to resolve. 

 

But secondly, I am unclear why the response to concerns 

about long delays with the Tribunals is to abolish the 

Tribunals rather than explore possibilities for 

improvement, including restructuring, revised rules, 

greater resourcing, full-time members or other options. 

 

So what is being said quite clearly by the Secretary-General is 

that instead of supporting the tribunals, which is done in every 

other jurisdiction in Canada to help support and enhance the 

fundamental human rights of Saskatchewan residents, they 

chose to blow up the tribunals and lead the country in the wrong 

direction. Instead of enhancing the tribunals, they choose to go 

a different direction, which in the view of the Secretary-General 

of Amnesty International Canada is the wrong direction. 

 

He goes on to say, “I have heard nothing to suggest those 

options have been explored and rejected.” So again, not only do 

they consult poorly, if at all, but they also have not gone 

through the option of supporting the tribunals in any way. They 

have not been explored and have been rejected. 

 

And he goes on to say: 

 

I have heard nothing to explain why reforming and 

strengthening the Tribunals is not possible; and that the 

only response to the challenges and difficulties the 

Tribunals face is to do away with them. 

 

I think it is safe to say that there are two reasons that all 

jurisdictions, including Saskatchewan to date, have opted 

for this model: expertise and accessibility. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to fundamental human rights 

complaints, when it‟s a complaint against an organization with 

respect to who you are fundamentally as a person, I would 

argue that two of the most important things that the body that‟s 

hearing the complaint should have are expertise and 

accessibility, and this legislation, as has been denoted, takes us 

backward in each case. Certainly accessibility is a huge issue. 

 

Now the Secretary-General goes on to say that: 

 

Tribunals are able to build expertise in human rights — 

and even specialized expertise with respect to specific 

human rights issues, such as the rights of First Nations 

people or of people living with disabilities or the gendered 

aspect of . . . human rights claims — that judges . . . would 

simply not be able to build given the breadth of subject 

matter they are required to deal with in their courts. 

 

The value of that expertise cannot be understated. It is, in 

fact, one of the key reasons that governments have set up 



6572 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2011 

administrative tribunals to hold hearings with respect to a 

wide range of important and specialized decisions in 

society, including refugee protection, licensing television 

stations, and making parole decisions. Expertise is not 

always easy to develop, but it is of obvious benefit in 

making sound decisions. 

 

Tribunals are also generally seen to be more accessible. 

They are much less formal than the courts, including with 

respect to rules of procedure and evidence, and are more 

flexible with respect to legal representation and less 

dependent upon lawyers. 

 

I know that the Commission and the government have 

sought to ease some of the concerns about the Courts 

being too formal and intimidating. We are told that they 

most certainly apply relaxed rules for human rights 

hearings. However, the Act quite specifically notes that 

the hearings will be governed by the Rules of the Court of 

Queen‟s Bench and does not legislate any notable 

exemptions from that requirement. 

 

So that appears to be entirely contradictory, Mr. Speaker. You 

have the commission and the government suggesting that 

they‟re going to ease some of the concerns about the courts 

being too formal and intimidating, and we‟re told that the rules 

will be relaxed for human rights hearings, but the Act 

specifically notes that hearings will be governed by the rules of 

the Court of Queen‟s Bench. And there is no legislation that put 

forth any notable exemptions from that requirement. 

 

So either you‟re going to make them less formal and more 

accessible or you‟re going to keep them the same. Clearly it‟s 

being stated that they‟re going to be more relaxed, however 

what is written in the legislation is exactly the opposite of that 

— that there will not be any notable exceptions from the 

requirement to be governed by the rules of the Court of Queen‟s 

Bench. 

 

I‟ll go on to read, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Previous provisions describing the more relaxed nature of 

tribunal hearings are gone, including that tribunals were 

empowered to admit any evidence of information that it 

considers “appropriate” even when that evidence or 

information would not be admissible under normal rules of 

court. 

 

So the tribunals could hear and digest information that is not 

deemed appropriate by the Court of Queen‟s Bench. However 

what is said explicitly in the Act is that the hearings will be 

governed by the rules for the Court of Queen‟s Bench. So again, 

an erosion of the fundamental human rights of Saskatchewan 

people to provide evidence in a way that they could provide it 

previously. Now that evidence will be inadmissible. That‟s 

what it says right here, Mr. Speaker. And so again, making it 

more difficult for people to have their case heard and not 

enhancing it as should be done. 

 

I‟ll go on to read, Mr. Speaker: 

 

In its question and answer document the government 

indicates that there is “no reason why the Court would not 

be willing or able to adopt a more informal hearing 

process.” But there is no explanation why the Act does not 

legislate that requirement rather than leave it open to the 

willingness of the judges. 

 

So if you wanted to put forward a Bill that made the proper 

changes, you would also introduce the changes that enable the 

courts to have a more relaxed approach to these hearings. But 

the government in this case has neglected to do that, which is 

very unfortunate. And again we‟re talking about fundamental 

human rights for Saskatchewan residents. And so any time you 

strip away even a small amount of their right, you have to be 

awfully careful. But I‟ve noted here now several occasions 

where that‟s taken place, and it‟s cause for great concern. 

Certainly being heard by opposition members with respect to 

this legislation. 

 

It goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We are also told that the concerns about legal 

representation are misplaced because the Commission will 

represent the individual at all levels of the court process. 

Well the Commission is not the individual. The Act makes 

it clear, noting that both the Commission and the 

complainant have the right to counsel, separate rights to 

counsel. But making it also clear . . . that complainants 

would have to fund counsel at their own expense. 

 

So again, a fundamental change from what existed previously in 

Saskatchewan, considering that you could take your case all the 

way to the Supreme Court of Canada and not have to . . . not 

cause you the expense to do so. In this case, it‟s made clear that 

complainants would have to fund counsel at their own expense. 

So if that is not stripping away at the fundamental human rights 

of Saskatchewan people, I don‟t know what is, Mr. Speaker. It 

says right there, the minister in his previous remarks talked how 

it‟s important to have accessibility for the court hearing so that 

people who are witnessing can attend. That‟s how he wants to 

enhance the accessibility. But when it comes to the accessibility 

of the complainant, there‟s silence. And in fact, worse than 

silence, there‟s a clear definition that complainants will have to 

fund counsel at their expense, eroding fundamentally their 

human right to bring forward a complaint to the government. 

 

He goes on to say that: 

 

There is a big difference as to how this plays out in a 

tribunal setting as opposed to the courts. First, as a general 

rule a legal bill for a lawyer appearing before a tribunal 

would be lower . . . from a lawyer . . . As well, in a less 

formal tribunal setting it may be more feasible for an 

individual to go ahead without representation or be 

represented by somebody other than a lawyer . . . I would 

say that these three concerns — about expertise, formality, 

and legal representation — are major, substantive 

shortcomings in the proposal to do away with tribunals 

and turn to the courts. I would urge that the proposal be 

reconsidered and that the options for improving and 

strengthening of the tribunal process be pursued instead. 

 

Now in addition to Amnesty International, the people of 

Saskatchewan have been pressing the opposition to have the 

government withdraw this Bill, do the consultation that they 



March 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6573 

said they have done and do it properly, and to ensure that the 

fundamental human rights of Saskatchewan people are 

enhanced and not reduced, as this legislation clearly does, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There was a petition read, signed by a number of Saskatchewan 

residents that are concerned with the fact that Bill 160, The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010, was 

introduced into the Legislative Assembly despite the fact that it 

will make the system for hearing for human rights complaints 

less accessible to the victims of human rights violations. 

 

Furthermore, the citizens of Saskatchewan are concerned with 

the fact that Bill 160 was introduced into the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan without first being subject to an 

extensive and public consultation process. Still further, the 

citizens of Saskatchewan are concerned with the fact that 

Government of Saskatchewan has been supporting an 

information campaign that explains the abstract aims of the 

Chief Human Rights Commissioner, but not substantive 

portions of Bill 160 itself. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there you have it. The people of Saskatchewan 

are asking for, again, a proper consultation to take place by this 

government in the same way that they have with many other 

pieces of legislation. And a repeat here we have of the WHPA 

[The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act] legislation where the 

government said they consulted with the people of 

Saskatchewan but absolutely failed to do so. That they failed to 

do so, when they designate 3.5 million acres of Saskatchewan 

land up for sale that was previously protected, that‟s bad, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But what I would argue is far worse than that, it‟s a 

fundamental erosion of the human rights of Saskatchewan 

people. Because now they‟re making it, this government, the 

Saskatchewan Party is making it much more difficult for 

Saskatchewan residents to lodge a complaint and to be heard. 

Again this is fundamental to who we are as human beings that 

these complaints arise, the reason these complaints arise. 

 

Now I know I have a number of other colleagues that would 

like to weigh in on this legislation. And with that, I would 

adjourn the debate on this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 

has moved adjournment of debate on the Bill No. 160, The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Being now the hour of 5 p.m., this 

Assembly will recess until tonight at 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6543 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6543 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6543 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6543 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6544 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6544 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6544 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6544 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6544 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6545 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6545 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 International Women’s Day 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6545 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6545 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6546 

 Rural Women’s Month 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6546 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6546 

 Tribute to the Red Cross 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6546 

 Mental Health Concerns in Northern Saskatchewan 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6547 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Agricultural Producers 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6547 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6547 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6549 

 Mental Health Care Services 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6549 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6549 

 Child Care Spaces 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6551 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6551 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 161 — The Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6552 

 Bill No. 162 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6555 

 Bill No. 160 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6566 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


