




















































Hansard: April 13, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 48A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 13, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7235 

 April 13, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

Clerk: — Members, it’s my duty to inform you that Mr. 

Speaker will not be present today to open today’s sitting. 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s my honour today to 

introduce two very special groups of people. And not in a 

random order, I’m going to . . . It is my pleasure to introduce 

Don Stevenson. Don is the director of government’s employee 

and family assistance plan. He’s in your gallery today. And 

along with him is Don Wincherauk, who is the Chair and the 

deputy minister of the Public Service Commission, and Karen 

Aulie. 

 

This week Don is retiring after 37 years of public service. He’s 

seen the important program that he started that focused on 

helping employees with alcohol dependency to a provision of a 

lot wider span of supports for people in the public service. 

Through his work, he has touched the lives of more than 16,000 

employees. This important role Don has played has spanned 

several administrations, and he’s been supporting managers and 

debriefing employees after critical incidents in times of trauma.  

 

Don has a commitment to the public service and a huge sense of 

humour that everybody appreciates, and his quality service has 

been recognized by the Premier’s Award for Excellence in the 

Public Service. I’d also like to share the fact that Don is a 

practising magician, and it’s probably helped him through 37 

years of work with the public service. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to miss Don. And I know that 

he’s leaving the program in great hands; his colleague Lynda 

Bankley will take over. So I’m asking all members in the House 

to thank Don for his years of service, and I’m sure you’re going 

to enjoy your retirement. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I’d also like to 

welcome representatives from the Silver Sage Housing to this 

legislature. We had an opportunity to meet with them earlier. 

And everyone, I’m sure, is going to recognize Maynard 

Sonntag, a colleague in the legislature. We had a chance to talk 

about housing, and I’m happy to report that they’re going to be 

attending next week’s housing summit. Silver Sage was 

sponsored by Sask Housing to attend that summit. 

 

Silver Sage has a long history of providing affordable housing 

for First Nations in our province. They own approximately 450 

units in Regina and some in Fort Qu’Appelle at this time. And 

I’m really proud to say that currently they’re working on a 

townhouse-style affordable housing project in Swift Current. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I ask everyone to appreciate the people that 

are in the gallery today and welcome to your legislature. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the minister and welcome a very special guest to our 

Assembly, Mr. Don Stevenson. Don has had a long and 

distinguished career in the public service of Saskatchewan, and 

I’ve had the opportunity to know and work with Don for many, 

many years prior to my being elected to this legislature. And I 

know first hand that Don has served the people of 

Saskatchewan and the various public servants of our province 

with great distinction. 

 

Don is the type of individual that will always give you 110 per 

cent. You don’t have to worry about whether Don is going to be 

there when he is needed. He has worked hard to develop an 

EFAP program, an employee and family assistance program, in 

the Government of Saskatchewan that I think is first-rate. And I 

can remember the early days as we were discussing what that 

program would look like some, about 20 years ago now or a 

little more than that when we first put that joint program in 

place. 

 

And Don is, as indicated, is also a magician and has some 

wonderful tricks that he could teach or pull on any one of us. 

And he’s always the type of person you like to be around, and I 

heard that from civil servants for many, many years. And it is a 

loss to the civil service of Saskatchewan that Don has chosen to 

retire, but I’m sure that he will move on in life and contribute 

greatly to our community and to the city of Regina. So thank 

you very much, Don, for your service. And on behalf of all of 

us, I’d like to join with the minister in welcoming you to your 

Assembly. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly 

I’ve got three individuals I’d like to introduce. First is Kale 

Derksen — if you’d just give a quick wave — and J.C. Lipon. 

Kale is a student out of Notre Dame and plays with the SJHL 

[Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League] Hounds. And J.C. is 

from Regina. They’re both from Regina. J.C. plays in 

Kamloops with the Blazers. Made it when he was 16; played for 

two years already; has done amazing. And the third is my son, 

Mark McMorris, who we’ll maybe hear a little bit about after. 

But I would say that Mark hangs around with some pretty good 

athletes. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d ask all members to 

welcome them here. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

those welcoming the folks from Silver Sage to their Legislative 

Assembly. We’ve had a good meeting this morning. And this is 

of course part of their professional development series and 

gaining a better understanding of the different issues that affect 

their lives. They’re doing great work on the front lines of 

delivering housing, have been doing so since 1983, and are an 



7236 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2011 

endeavour incorporated under the aegis of Touchwood Agency 

and File Hills Qu’Appelle Tribal Council. 

 

Mr. Speaker, of course they’re joined with their general 

manager, Maynard Sonntag. And after distinguished service to 

the people of Saskatchewan from 1991 to 2007, I’m really glad 

to see Maynard in this Legislative Assembly again and wish the 

seat was a little different of course, but that’s the way it goes. 

But I am very glad to see that he’s continuing his service to the 

people of Saskatchewan on such an important front in terms of 

working with First Nations and Métis people and on the vital 

issue of housing. But it’s been good visiting with Rick and Tina 

and Delbert and the folks with Silver Sage. So I would join with 

those welcoming the people from Silver Sage to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

On behalf of the member for Cypress Hills, it’s an honour to 

introduce to you and through you a group of students from Gull 

Lake School. Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are 19 grade 4 and 13 

grade 12 students who have joined us today in the west gallery. 

They’re accompanied by their teachers, Adele Kirwan and Neal 

Boutin. And they also have a large group of chaperones, 

although kids from the Southwest typically don’t need a lot of 

chaperones. Em Zanidean, Delee Linsley, Tracey Trapp, Doug 

Logan, Mel Leppa, Lynette Butts, Deb Willis, Delores Klink, 

Al Penner and Keith McCarty have joined us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ll look forward to meeting with the students after question 

period. We’ll chat a little bit about what went on here and what 

didn’t go on here . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And no, to the 

member for Kindersley, I don’t think it’s my job to buy the kids 

a Blizzard. That’s the responsibility of the member for Cypress 

Hills. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to welcome these 

students to their Legislative Assembly today. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, I do want to join with the Minister of 

Health in introducing one of Saskatchewan’s most famous 

athletes. I want to welcome Mark. I’ll have a chance to say a 

little bit about him here in a minute. But Mark McMorris is 

ranked fourth overall in the TTR [Ticket To Ride] world tour — 

world tour — and he’s second overall in slope style, Mr. 

Speaker. More on that in a moment. Welcome, Mark. Welcome 

home, and it’s good to have you here today. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

want to take a few minutes to recognize the folks from Silver 

Sage Housing, but in particular another individual that I also 

want to recognize. Since we were talking about hockey players 

and athletes in general, I’d like to recognize Maynard Sonntag. 

And maybe the players that play in the junior leagues right now 

should know that Maynard played 17 games with Boston in the 

late ’80s — Boston Pizza out of P.A. [Prince Albert]. He was a 

third-line centre and he got cut. But anyway, Mr. Speaker, I just 

wanted to recognize Maynard who has done an incredible job 

not only in sporting development but certainly with the 

Assembly here. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

So translation in my Cree language is that I’m glad they are 

here. As Aboriginal people, they have nothing to fear. This is 

our House as well as it’s anybody’s House, and I want to make 

a special recognition to all the Aboriginal people that are here 

with Silver Sage Housing. And keep up the fantastic work. 

Thank you very much. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

rise to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan tenants that 

are facing surging rental increases that are simply making life in 

Saskatchewan unaffordable. And it recognizes also that the 

majority of Canadians now live in provinces with rent control 

guidelines including Manitoba, British Columbia, Ontario, 

Quebec, and Prince Edward Island. Mr. Speaker, it also points 

out that in rent-controlled Winnipeg, they have generated more 

new rental units than in Regina and Saskatoon. From the years 

2007 to 2009, CMHC [Canadian Mortgage and Housing 

Corporation] data shows that there were fewer than 300 rental 

unit starts in Saskatchewan’s two largest cities combined, and 

during that same period, Winnipeg with their rent controls has 

generated over 1,500 new rental units, Mr. Speaker. And the 

prayers reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the government to 

immediately enact rent control legislation that protects 

Saskatchewan tenants from unreasonable increases in 

rent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed from citizens in Carlyle, 

Regina, Saskatoon, Yellow Grass, Kindersley, Weyburn, 

Lloydminster, Mervin, and Prince Albert. I so present. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty 

here in Saskatchewan. And we know that freedom from poverty 

is an enshrined human right by the United Nations and that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security. We also 

know that in Saskatchewan the income gap between the rich 

and poor continues to grow, and now one in five children in 

Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. And we know citizens 

who are living in poverty have long identified workable, 

affordable solutions. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



April 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7237 

I do so present. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition concerning the need of hospice and palliative 

care here in Saskatchewan. 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that all Saskatchewan people deserve quality 

end-of-life and bereavement care; that hospice and 

palliative care is known to help enhance the quality of life 

for those facing advancing illness, death, and 

bereavement; that a publicly funded and administered 

hospice and palliative care system including residential 

hospices would increase end-of-life care options for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to enhance and increase 

publicly funded and administered hospice and palliative 

care including in-home hospice services and residential 

hospices in order to ensure that all Saskatchewan people 

have access to high-quality end-of-life care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the constituency of Saskatoon Massey Place. I so present. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 

present a petition in support of a potash royalty review because, 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are owners of a 

thousand-year resource, a strategic supply of this resource. And 

the owners of this potash resource deserve the maximum 

possible benefit from the resource. And the petition is also 

being circulated, Mr. Speaker, because this government has 

flatly rejected looking at royalties for the next 16 years, Mr. 

Speaker, and the CEO [chief executive officer] of one of the 

potash companies in Saskatchewan has said that there’s a new 

norm for potash in Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to begin a 

comprehensive, transparent, and public review of 

Saskatchewan’s royalty system with a view to maximizing 

the return from this strategic resource for its owners, the 

people of Saskatchewan, who wish to use these additional 

potash royalty revenues for needed investments in health 

care, child care, education, affordable housing, 

infrastructure, and other social programs as well as public 

initiatives such as debt repayment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by folks from Balcarres, 

Raymore, Fort Qu’Appelle, Lumsden, and Buena Vista. I so 

present. 

 

[13:45] 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan concerned 

about the detrimental effect that Bill 160 will have on human 

rights law in the province if enacted. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Government of Saskatchewan withdraw 

Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative Assembly 

of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public consultations 

informed by a public policy paper before any 

amendments to the Human Rights Code, the law that 

supersedes all others in our province, are even considered. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Regina and 

Stoughton, Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from 

across Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of our 

finances by the Sask Party. They allude to the record that 

includes a significant increasing of debt and a running of 

deficits at a period of time of record highs in revenues in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. And despite having record highs in 

revenues, we’re not paying down debt. In fact we’re adding 

debt, Mr. Speaker — $1.3 billion over the last three years, and 

this year alone debt increasing by $548 million, Mr. Speaker. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Regina, Lumsden, and Grenfell. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Yorkton. 

 

National Volunteer Week 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. April 10th 

to the 16th is National Volunteer Week. There’s no better place 

in Canada to see the power of volunteerism at work than right 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Saskatchewan’s spirit of volunteerism is renowned far beyond 

our own borders. We are recognized for our extraordinarily high 

rate of volunteering, and those visiting Saskatchewan have been 



7238 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2011 

astounded by the volunteer-driven events that we have hosted. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our province’s successful events include 

the Scotties Tournament of Hearts, the Brier, the Grey Cup, last 

year’s World Junior Hockey Championship, and of course most 

recently a very successful world curling championships. 

 

Volunteers are active in all Saskatchewan communities. In fact, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, many of our sports coaches and youth 

mentors are volunteers. Our neighbours who shovel seniors’ 

walks or help buy them groceries are volunteers. Additionally 

Saskatchewan’s volunteers help to raise millions of dollars 

every year for many worthwhile causes. We all know who they 

are, and no doubt each and every one of us and our families 

have benefited from their goodwill. Volunteer Week highlights 

these contributions and encourages all of us to think about how 

we can help as well. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to thank the thousands of 

people working day and night to fill sandbags and take 

extraordinary measures in order to protect their neighbours and 

communities from the flooding that is and may occur over the 

next few weeks from this spring’s thaw. To each and every 

volunteer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, thank you. You all make 

Saskatchewan truly a greater province. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Day of Pink 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 

is the Day of Pink, the International Day against Bullying, 

Homophobia and Discrimination in schools and communities. 

The Day of Pink is a day of action, a day to assert in the clearest 

and boldest of ways that bullying and discrimination on any 

grounds are not acceptable in our society. 

 

The idea of a Day of Pink began when a youth in high school in 

Cambridge, Nova Scotia was bullied because he wore a pink 

shirt to school. His fellow students decided to stand up to the 

bullying. Hundreds of students came to the school wearing pink 

to show support by diversity and tolerance and for stopping 

discrimination and bullying. Since then people across Canada 

and beyond have joined together to make the Day of Pink a 

truly grassroots movement for social justice and equality. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan, the Avenue Community Centre in 

Saskatoon is spearheading many of the activities with thousands 

of school students and community residents participating across 

the province. Tonight some of my colleagues and I will be 

attending a Day of Pink rally in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, today 

the opposition caucus is pleased and proud to participate in Day 

of Pink activities. We call on all members of the legislature to 

support the Day of Pink and truly progressive support of human 

rights in our activities today and every day. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Celebrating A Saskatchewan Snowboarder 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 

me to rise in the Assembly today and speak for just a short 

period of time about a very special young individual who’s 

joined us in the gallery today. Mark McMorris has been 

representing the country, frankly, and the province of 

Saskatchewan all over the world. 

 

Mark is born in Saskatchewan. He is a professional 

snowboarder who is receiving a lot of international accolades 

and recognition. He has got a number of aerial moves that he’s 

very well known for including the double cork, but on the 2nd 

of March, 2011, Mark became the first to ever land the backside 

triple cork 1440. That’s right. And all members are very 

familiar with that move. 

 

Just this season alone on the Dew Tour — that’s the Mountain 

Dew tour — Mark has been all over the podium in competition. 

He claims second place in Breckenridge, Colorado, third in 

January snowboard slopestyle competition in Kellington, 

Vermont. And, Mr. Speaker, at this year’s Winter X-games, 

Mark managed to capture the silver medal. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, for those of us who got a chance to watch on NBC 

[National Broadcasting Company] and other well-known 

networks, it’s kind of surreal to see someone that we know 

reasonably well, doing that well and being talked about by 

commentators from all over the world. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mark is demonstrating that you don’t have 

to be from the mountains to be very proficient, to be a world 

leader in this sport. He makes us all proud, and frankly, he’s a 

bit of a entrepreneur. He’s got a number of sponsors now. So if 

you’ll permit the Legislative Assembly to help him, I think we 

want to mention Red Bull, Burton, DFS [Dollars for 

Skiing/Snowboarding], and Matix so that other corporate 

sponsors come on board with one of Saskatchewan’s best 

success stories. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

La Ronge’s Ice Wolves Win Credit Union Cup 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, La Ronge Ice Wolves 

hockey team won the Credit Union Cup in the final game of a 

seven-game series played in La Ronge in front a packed house. 

They captured a 3 to 1 win against the Yorkton Terriers. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, La Ronge Ice Wolves repeated last year’s 

achievement of winning the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey 

League Credit Union Cup and now will represent Saskatchewan 

in Anavet Cup in a seven-game series against Portage Terriers. 

The series will begin this weekend, April the 15th, with the first 

two games played at the PC Centre in Portage La Prairie, 

Manitoba. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the winning team of the Anavet 

Cup will advance to play for the 2011 Royal Bank Cup 

championship in Camrose, Alberta later this month. 

 

The team spirit shown by both fans and volunteer staff is truly 

amazing. These fans and volunteers make it easier for Coach 

Bob Beatty and his staff to focus on preparing the players. Their 

support is key to motivate the team and strengthen our 

community. The easiest way to motivate a team is through fan 

support, and Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Ice will certainly have 

that. With every goal scored, by the fans fish are thrown onto 

the ice. I hope the fans get to throw many fish to feed the 



April 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7239 

wolves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

La Ronge Ice Wolves for their victory last night. And we wish 

them all the best as they try to win the Anavet Cup. Go get ’em, 

Wolves.  

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Silver Springs. 

 

Regina Chamber of Commerce Paragon Awards 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

was indeed an honour for the member from Regina Qu’Appelle 

Valley and I to attend the Regina Chamber of Commerce 

Paragon Awards last Thursday. 

 

The room was filled to capacity with outstanding business 

leaders that have contributed to our strong economy and are key 

figures in helping drive this province forward. Regina’s 

business community includes some of the best business leaders 

you will find anywhere in the world. One of those leaders, Mr. 

Gavin Semple, was recognized as an individual who has had 

significant long-term business success and continually supports 

our community. Gavin was the recipient of the prestigious 

Regina Chamber of Commerce Award of Distinction, an award 

only given out twice before in the 100-plus year chamber 

history. 

 

The Paragon Awards are an opportunity for all of us to 

acknowledge the hard work, the influence, and the importance 

of all nominees. It’s always wonderful to celebrate businesses 

that are creating employment, expanding capacity, and creating 

economic opportunity that leads to prosperity in our province. 

However, I must say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, being from 

Saskatoon, I am always happy to toast Regina businesses, but 

when a Regina city councillor heckled me from the crowd and 

said, go Rams, I thought that was a bit much. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking President 

Victor Thomas and the Regina Chamber of Commerce for 

organizing a fantastic event honouring the deserving recipients 

of the 2011 Paragon Awards. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

Highway 378 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I recently attended a meeting of 

community leaders who reside and work north of The 

Battlefords, who want the provincial government to know that 

local residents, tourists, truckers, parents, and business owners 

have reason to be concerned about the deteriorating condition of 

Highway No. 378. This is a 110-kilometre thin-membraned, 

very narrow road joining Spiritwood, Rabbit Lake, and 

Whitkow to North Battleford. There are no heavy-haul roads or 

super grids serving the area. There are no functioning hospitals 

in this area, which means that Highway 378 is a crucial link to 

health care. And more than 100 students from 11 different 

schools travel Highway 378 on a daily basis. 

 

Members of the 378 Highway improvement committee include 

official representatives from the RM [rural municipality] of 

Meeting Lake, the RM of Spiritwood, the RM of Round Hill, 

the RM of North Battleford, the town of Rabbit Lake, and the 

town of Spiritwood. A representative of the Rabbit Lake Board 

of Trade and a representative of The Battlefords Chamber of 

Commerce also participated in that information meeting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Highway 378 is an important transportation route 

in northwest Saskatchewan that requires immediate attention. 

This narrow road with no shoulders and broken pavement is not 

only unsafe, but it presents a barrier to economic activity in the 

region. I call on the Minister of Highways to instruct his 

officials to begin planning to upgrade Highway 378 

immediately. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw North. 

 

Remembering Gary Hyland 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, last Tuesday the 

city of Moose Jaw lost one of its most influential citizens with 

the passing of Gary Hyland. Gary Hyland was a poet and a 

publisher and was probably the best known as founder of the 

Saskatchewan Festival of Words, a celebration of the 

imaginative use of the language which is held annually in 

Moose Jaw. 

 

Gary Hyland taught English at Riverview Collegiate from 1964 

to 1994. His passion for literature influenced hundreds of 

students, developing in them the love of reading and writing. 

The library of Riverview Collegiate has been dedicated to the 

name of Gary Hyland. 

 

In addition to teaching and writing poetry, Gary Hyland edited 

books and helped build many organizations including Coteau 

Books. It was Gary Hyland who was instrumental in the 

creation of the Moose Jaw Culture Centre. Gary Hyland was 

honoured with a life-time Poet Laureate with Robert Currie. He 

was named to the Order of Canada and held an honorary 

doctorate of literature degree at the University of Regina. He 

was chosen Citizen of the Year twice in Moose Jaw and was 

named as one of the 100 most influential graduates of the 

University of Saskatchewan in the last 100 years. 

 

Gary Hyland was a man who was loved and appreciated by 

many and will be missed by the citizens of Moose Jaw and the 

cultural community of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Leader. 

 

Natural Gas System 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, 

earlier this week there was an explosion at 1004 Shannon Road 

here in Regina and a number of fires also at other residences in 

the area in south Regina. In fact, two family members were sent 

to hospital as a result of the explosion and one of the houses is 

completely destroyed. 

 

My question is to the Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy. My 



7240 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2011 

question is this: is it the responsibility of Sask Energy to protect 

families who are connected to the gas lines in this province? 

And if so, what is the minister doing and has he done in the last 

couple of days to ensure that families in Regina and across the 

province are protected as a result of leaks that are occurring in 

this province to the gas lines? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Let me first begin by expressing the government’s 

concern for those that have been affected by this incident, 

particularly those that were . . . suffered physical injuries but 

also to all of those that call that neighbourhood their home, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I can tell the people of this province that the women and men of 

SaskEnergy, from the board of directors to the executive 

management to the staff, take the public safety of the people 

that they serve as well as the integrity of the gas system as their 

highest priority, Mr. Speaker. That’s why in this incident, Sask 

Energy officials are working very closely with the fire 

department to determine not only what the preliminary cause 

was, which was identified a couple of days ago, but also to 

ensure that there is follow-up work to be done to determine 

what the specific cause of this particular incident was. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Leader. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — The incident wasn’t isolated. There were 

a number of leaks and a number of fires at that time, 60 families 

were evacuated, and yesterday there were a number of other 

reported leaks in south Regina. 

 

My question to the minister is this, that we’re also receiving 

reports that when gas leaks are reported, that the wait time has 

increased from one hour to three hours. And I want to ask the 

minister very clearly: is it in fact due in part to the fact of 

cutbacks in the area of inspection that the wait times are longer 

and that in fact families are being put at risk because of 

cutbacks in that area? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I want to thank the Leader of the Opposition for his 

question. On this specific incident that took place in Regina, 

Mr. Speaker, it would be too early for me to speculate on what 

the exact cause of this incident was, Mr. Speaker. That’s why 

SaskEnergy officials are working very closely with the fire 

department and other officials to determine what the cause was, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can tell the member that in the province of Saskatchewan 

where, areas where SaskEnergy does provide service, that call 

times are done very efficiently in terms of responding to those 

calls. That certainly was the case when there was an issue that 

was reported to SaskEnergy. SaskEnergy officials were on the 

scene in a very short order. 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the issue of wait time is 

hugely important because the number of hours or even minutes 

that it takes the gas company to get to check meters, gas lines, 

or furnaces to see where the leak is occurring can be the 

difference between injury and loss of property, and the 

worst-case scenario could be even worse than that. 

 

But my question to the minister is this: why would he be 

surprised if in fact there are cutbacks to service when last year 

the corporation had to give back to the treasury 100 per cent of 

the profits that allowed them little, if any, money to repair, 

upgrade, rebuild infrastructure? Can the minister make a 

commitment that this year that that practice of taking 100 per 

cent of the profits from SaskEnergy will end and in fact monies 

should be left and will be left in the corporation to carry out 

inspection and repair to our gas system in the province to 

protect families? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s important to know 

that in this past year it wasn’t 100 per cent dividend that was 

taken from SaskEnergy; it was 90 per cent, Mr. Speaker. As 

well in 2010, the system-wide investment in safety, in the 

functions such as pipeline integrity, were in excess of $30 

million. That is on par for what it has been over a number of 

years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can also tell the member that in fact since this government 

took office in late 2007, the workforce of SaskEnergy has 

grown by over 70 FTEs [full-time equivalent], Mr. Speaker, so 

there has not been a reduction in the FTEs. And I want to say to 

the people of Saskatchewan that from the board and the 

management and the staff of SaskEnergy and this government, 

the 1,100 employees of the corporation including the 450 

individuals that work in, the technical people that work in 

ensuring the integrity of the gas system, Mr. Speaker, that we 

take this issue very seriously. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

College Merger 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday when pressed by the 

media following question period, the Minister of Advanced 

Education kept talking about how gaps existed which allowed 

an individual convicted of fraud to be in charge of the 

government’s college merger project and millions of taxpayers’ 

dollars. But the minister did not define what those gaps are, and 

he simply ducked behind his deputy minister. 

 

Well there is no deputy minister for him to hide behind in this 

Chamber, Mr. Speaker, so my question to the minister: what are 

the gaps he was referring to yesterday? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 



April 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7241 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much. I think 

what’s important here is to begin with the context. And the 

context, as quoted from the Canadian University Guide 2011 

edition, is there’s never been a better time to consider 

Saskatchewan as the place to attain a great post-secondary 

education, Mr. Speaker. We know how important this is, Mr. 

Speaker, for students right across the province. 

 

The members opposite are making specific reference to a case, 

Mr. Speaker, where there was a proposal that came forward, 

Mr. Speaker. That was last June; we know that. Mr. Speaker, 

we had an independent process that came forward. That 

independent process recommended that there would be no 

merger. We acted on that, Mr. Speaker. There are also a number 

of outstanding questions, Mr. Speaker. We know how important 

those are to follow up. That follow-up is under way. That 

follow-up is under way, Mr. Speaker, because we are going to 

account to the taxpayers or the people of this province as well 

as to the students, Mr. Speaker, because their well-being and 

success in the classroom is what’s first and foremost. Thank 

you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has admitted that he 

received a fax as early as last May about Glen Kobussen’s 

history of defrauding the Saskatchewan firefighters’ burn fund. 

We learned from his deputy minister yesterday that the minister 

never even shared that fax with her. All the deputy heard were 

rumours that Kobussen may have a criminal past, but she didn’t 

know the details because the minister didn’t take it seriously 

enough to actually give her the fax that he received. But he still 

chose to leave his deputy minister in the rotunda yesterday to 

answer questions on this issue as he ran away and hid in the 

government lounge. 

 

To the minister: how exactly were his officials supposed to 

follow up on serious concerns about his pet merger project 

when he withheld important information from them? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we know the talks began while the members opposite 

were actually in power, Mr. Speaker. That’s important. Mr. 

Speaker, what we also know, what we also know, Mr. Speaker, 

is that Glen Kobussen served as a CEO at St. Peter’s College, 

served at St. Peter’s College in 2004-2005 and in 2006 became 

a special adviser to the board, Mr. Speaker. We know the 

significance of this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we can say is that, Mr. Speaker, we know 

how important this is that the members opposite worked with 

this individual. In fact, Mr. Speaker, there are records, Mr. 

Speaker, of members opposite actually meeting with this 

individual. Mr. Speaker, there have been a series of accusations 

to date, only a series of accusations, Mr. Speaker. These 

accusations are being tracked down, Mr. Speaker. We are doing 

that through a number of independent audit processes and we’re 

going to make all of these processes and the conclusions 

presented to the people of the public. Thank you very much. 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we have a minister here. He will 

cut a ribbon on a project; he will deliver a partisan speech. But 

when it comes to answering questions, he runs away to the 

members’ lounge to drink a Diet Coke and to simply lick his 

wounds, Mr. Speaker. This is a sad, sad excuse for ministerial 

responsibility. 

 

It’s interesting that the minister received at least two emails last 

May. Neither of those reached his officials and nothing was 

done. The minister received a fax about Glen Kobussen’s 

history of fraud. He didn’t share that with his officials either, 

and nothing was done. 

 

So the minister cannot blame his officials for this. He withheld 

information from them and they were just carrying out his 

wishes with respect to his pet merger project. His deputy said 

yesterday that officials didn’t look into concerns about the fraud 

history because “we were thinking about the proposed merger.” 

Yet the minister is content to toss his deputy under the bus 

because for him, ministerial responsibility apparently means 

self-preservation at all costs. 

 

To the minister: yesterday he was talking about gaps that 

allowed this mess to happen. Will he admit today that the main 

gap is his complete lack of responsibility and accountability? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, this government has 

invested more than $2.8 billion in post-secondary education, 

Mr. Speaker. We’ve also tried to pay particular attention to rural 

communities, Mr. Speaker. For example, when a couple of 

communities came forward and suggested that a couple of 

regional colleges actually come together, we said, let’s try that. 

That successfully led to Great Plains, Mr. Speaker. We know 

how important that is in the Southwest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, talks had begun while the members opposite were 

in office. What we said is, let’s make sure there is due 

diligence. Let’s make sure there’s a process. Let’s make sure 

that we can be at once responsive to the voices of communities, 

Mr. Speaker, and responsible to taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We set up an independent process, Mr. Speaker. We followed 

the recommendations of that process. And Mr. Speaker, in 

following up, we now are undertaking a series of audits, Mr. 

Speaker, in order to ensure that these allegations, these 

questions, and these suggestions and rumours, Mr. Speaker, that 

we track down all public dollars, Mr. Speaker. That process is 

under way, and that process is going to lead to conclusions that 

will be made public. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this situation, this merger mess of 

the minister is very disturbing and so are his answers today, Mr. 

Speaker. This is a textbook case of path dependency. The 

minister wanted his pet merger project to happen, and he 



7242 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2011 

funneled a whole lot of public money toward it. So when 

serious concerns were raised with him, he ignored them and did 

not share them with his officials. And when everything blew up, 

the minister just started tossing everybody under the bus. 

 

He fired every single board member of the Carlton Trail board, 

even those who tried to address concerns. He blamed his 

political staff for not showing him the emails that were sent to 

his office. And yesterday he left his deputy minister to answer 

the tough questions as he ran back to the safety of the 

government lounge. Frankly, Mr. Speaker, there is no one left 

to throw under the bus. So to the minister: will he finally take 

responsibility for this mess and will he resign from his position 

until this whole situation is properly dealt with? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I take responsibility for the 

work that’s under way. I take responsibility for making the right 

decision. I take responsibility, Mr. Speaker, for ensuring that 

there was an independent process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I was talking to a gentleman from 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I’m having trouble 

hearing the minister. I would ask the members to allow the 

minister to answer the question. Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I was just speaking to an 

elderly gentleman, a senior citizen in Humboldt the other day 

and he said a few things about responsibility, Mr. Speaker. He 

said, Mr. Speaker, this, and quite clearly, he said, there are a 

number of rumours out there. We want to make sure those are 

cleared up. Secondly, we need to track and ensure that those 

public dollars are accounted for. And, Mr. Speaker, he said, let 

the chips fall where they may. Mr. Speaker, that’s a definition 

that ministerial responsibility is in alignment with, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re going to find out where those dollars are, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to let the chips fall where they 

may. To date they’re only rumours. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Reporting Political Donations 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Justice. The minister has 

confirmed that he is a member of the Enterprise Club, the Sask 

Party’s exclusive $1,000 a year membership club. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister also knows that we’ve sent a letter to 

the Chief Electoral Officer requesting an investigation into the 

Sask Party’s failure to disclose contributions made in their 

annual report for the year the contribution was made, as 

required by law. 

 

Given the minister’s involvement in Enterprise Club and his 

cavalier disregard for The Election Act, will he confirm today 

that he will enable the Chief Electoral Officer to send the file 

out of province to independent counsel to review and determine 

if The Election Act has been breached? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I have confidence in the 

Chief Electoral Officer. If he chooses to send the file out of the 

province to have it investigated, he can. If he chooses to involve 

the officials of the Ministry of Justice, they will do that without 

my knowledge, and that will happen in the ordinary and usual 

course. And, Mr. Speaker, it was, I understand, the practice that 

was followed by the previous administration and it is certainly 

the practice of this administration, and we expect and hope that 

it has always been the practice of the members of this House to 

ensure that things are put under proper and acceptable scrutiny. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can advise you that the member goes on and on 

about whether a contribution was disclosed in 2009 or 2010. It 

has always been the practice of the Saskatchewan Party to 

ensure that things are disclosed. 

 

There is a statutory process under The Political Contributions 

Tax Credit Act, which goes into great detail how it’s calculated. 

It involves the number of tickets sold, the expenses holding a 

function. It’s section 7 of that Act. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d ask 

the member opposite to have a look at that section and find out 

how he could possibly determine how much an eligible tax 

credit is until after an event has been held, Mr. Speaker. It is 

common sense and practicality. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, in the normal course of action 

when the Chief Electoral Officer asks for a review of a file he 

would request Department of Justice lawyers to investigate and 

of course that would come as no cost to the Chief Electoral 

office. Mr. Speaker, in the case of the $1,000 per year 

Enterprise Club contributions, the Minister of Justice is a 

member of the exclusive club. It’s a conflict of interest to have 

the Minister of Justice lawyers investigating the membership of 

the Minister of Justice. 

 

To the minister: in order to avoid a conflict of interest and to 

assure complete transparency and accountability, will he ensure 

that the Chief Electoral office has the resources to send this file 

out of province for independent legal counsel for investigation? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, there will never be a 

shortage of resources to ensure that investigations are 

thoroughly and completely done under this government. And 

I’d like to tell you something else, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We 

have never turned down a request from the Chief Electoral 

Officer for funding. We’ve always worked with that office to 

ensure that they are adequately and appropriately staffed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is this: all contributions to the 

Saskatchewan Party over $250 are disclosed. They always have 



April 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7243 

been; they always will. 

 

In contrast, Mr. Speaker, the NDP [New Democratic Party] got 

caught not disclosing millions worth of ticket sales to their 

events. Between 2001 and 2006, the NDP failed to disclose 

over two and a half million dollars worth of contributions 

through ticket sales. Mr. Speaker, those people bought tickets, 

they did not get a tax credit, but worst of all, Mr. Speaker, their 

identity was not disclosed. They were in direct . . . [inaudible] 

. . . of that Act for years, between 2001 and 2006. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, under this party everything is disclosed. We do it 

properly, we do it right, and we’ll always do that. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — I’m sure the Acting Chief Electoral Officer is 

well aware of the support he has from Saskatchewan Party 

government members, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2009 Mr. Glen Kobussen made a $1,000 

contribution to the Sask Party, paid for by St. Peter’s College. 

That was not disclosed in the Sask Party’s annual report for the 

year it was received. The minister, who is a member of the 

Enterprise Club, said he was in possession of an interpretation 

bulletin from the Chief Electoral Officer saying that the 

Saskatchewan Party can deduct fundraising activities and 

expenses from contributions a year later before disclosing them 

and disclose them for a different fiscal year than the year they 

were contributed. But apparently he has no such interpretation 

bulletin. 

 

There’s a tradition in Saskatchewan for sending these matters 

out of province to independent legal counsel for review. To the 

minister: will he confirm that he will follow that tradition and 

send this matter out of province for independent legal counsel? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

have chosen to make a complaint to the Chief Electoral Officer. 

That was done at the end of last month. It is certainly their right 

to do that. We will ensure that that complaint goes ahead and is 

dealt with appropriately. We will be absolutely hands-off. 

 

The Chief Electoral Officer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is an 

independent officer of this House. I will not interfere with his 

independence. His requests for resources are always dealt with 

appropriately, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It will happen. 

 

Unlike the NDP that spent five years hiding millions of dollars 

worth of contributions, ours are disclosed. The issue is whether 

they’re filed in 2009, 2010 and to comply with the legislation. 

In fact past, in the year 2001 . . . I’m not saying who was in 

government at that time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But we will 

comply with that Act and we will comply with the legislation 

scrupulously and carefully, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That is the 

practice of this government; that is the practice of this party — 

unlike the $2.5 million that they just conveniently swept away 

so they didn’t have to disclose who their friends were, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Arrangements for Office Space 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Wow, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the lack of government transparency when it 

comes to the new Regina office tower, or as it’s being known 

by some as taxpayers’ tower, has raised numerous questions. 

 

When it was announced, the new Regina tower was heralded as 

being a headquarters for a large corporation. But those head 

offices will only take up a couple of floors. In turn the 

Government of Saskatchewan, as was determined last week in 

estimates, will be leasing 50 to 60,000 square feet or five to six 

floors of space. That’s more space than any other tenant. So if 

this is going to be named after the main tenant, it’s only fitting 

that it be called the taxpayer tower, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why was this minister not upfront with 

Saskatchewan people that the Government of Saskatchewan is 

going to be the major tenant in this office tower? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. The member opposite has stated that in fact 

the Government of Saskatchewan is the major tenant in that 

building. In fact we are not. Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister has 

been talking about the fact that a company will be moving its 

head office into the downtown Regina tower. But where is . . . 

But, Mr. Speaker, where are the jobs coming from? Are they 

coming from Calgary? Are they coming from Winnipeg or 

Vancouver? No. They’re coming from Belle Plaine, Mr. 

Speaker. But even then, that company is not a major tenant. We 

are. 

 

And this government, at a time when they have committed to 

reducing the civil service, cannot even justify the need for 50 to 

60,000 square feet of very expensive office space. And on top 

of that, they have committed Saskatchewan taxpayers to this 

lease for 20 years without being told why. Can the minister now 

clear the air and give the people who are going to be paying this 

bill for the next 20 years the actual cost and details of the lease? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we’ve done is we’ve scanned the 

country to see what is done in other jurisdictions. And the 

Western provinces handle lease agreements like Saskatchewan. 

They do not disclose the detail of their lease arrangements. And 

our review of Saskatchewan past practices indicate that this 

approach has been used for over 40 years. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, all of a sudden the members of the 

opposite say that we should throw out best practice and the 



7244 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2011 

reason for best practice. The members opposite say they did . . . 

they may have done it that way but maybe they were wrong. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we in Saskatchewan were going to go in 

a different direction, we would need thoughtful consideration 

and consultation with industry before we made any changes. 

 

Unless the opposition has changed their approach on this as 

well, I seem to recall them strongly advocating for consultation 

prior to making changes. Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, here is the minister standing on 

her feet and justifying making a decision on an office tower that 

commits the taxpayers of Saskatchewan to a long-term, 

expensive lease for 20 years. They have no plan on who moves 

into the building. They have not released any details. 

 

The Premier was at the photo shoot. Man, we wouldn’t want 

him to miss turning the sod and getting his picture taken, for 

heaven’s sakes. But he fails to mention that the Government of 

Saskatchewan was going to be a major tenant in that building. 

And the minister stands and defends her decision saying, well 

it’s been done this way for 40 years. This is the new 

Saskatchewan? Well excuse me, Mr. Speaker; it’s not. 

 

The minister, the minister and this . . . The minister and this 

Premier owe an explanation to the taxpayers of this province. 

People in this day and age expect transparency. They expect 

accountability. Will that minister release the details? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Now I 

don’t know about you, but I think that most of us on this side of 

the House are pretty excited to see a new head office being 

located in downtown Regina. I’m not sure, but it seems that the 

NDP are not excited and not pleased that new offices are being 

located here. New head offices are choosing to locate here . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’m having 

trouble hearing the answer. I would ask the member or the 

Minister of Government Services to continue with the answer. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It seems to be fairly apparent that in fact the NDP do not want 

to see this province move forward. They don’t want more head 

offices here. They don’t want to see more jobs here in 

Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, the Government of 

Saskatchewan under the, under the Saskatchewan government 

is pleased to see new head offices here, is to see more people 

choose to locate here. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, during question period, the 

minister for government . . . Point of order, Mr. Speaker. The 

Minister of Government Services was reading directly from a 

note or a piece of paper or a document, Mr. Speaker. We 

request that document be tabled. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I 

would ask, I would leave it up to the minister if she believes it’s 

either a briefing note or if it was a quote. If it’s up to her . . . 

Order. Order. I will leave that up to the minister right now. If 

not, if you want to press it, I will ask to look at it and then let 

the Clerk decide whether it’s an item to be tabled. 

 

Mr. Yates: — I stood on a point of order . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. If it’s a letter, I would 

ask the minister to table it. If it’s a briefing note, she doesn’t 

have to. I would ask the minister to clarify whether it’s a 

briefing note or a letter she was quoting from. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It was a briefing note. It was not a letter. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, 

Parks and Culture. 

 

Main Street Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’m very 

happy to stand today to inform the Assembly of a very exciting 

new program being introduced by my ministry. Mr. Speaker, 

we have heard our Premier speak about the new road that 

Saskatchewan is on. I can say today that this new road will start 

on Main Street for four Saskatchewan communities. 

 

Last year, Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport introduced a 

cultural policy called Pride of Saskatchewan, a policy where 

culture, community, and commerce meet. Main Street 

Saskatchewan is a great example of how we are implementing 

the cultural policy, Mr. Speaker, as it combines all three of 

those elements. 

 

As a part of the 2011 Saskatchewan advantage budget, the 

Ministry of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport will invest $1.65 

million over three years in a redevelopment program for 

communities of all sizes. Main Street is a community-driven 

program that works to revitalize historic downtown commercial 

districts. The program is built on four solid principles which 

ensure its success. 

 

The first principle is community organization. The program 

emphasizes community involvement by establishing community 

advisory boards which participate in producing a work plan that 

is unique and responsive to each community’s character and 

needs. 

 

The second principle is economic restructuring. Main Street 

will work with other economic development agencies to 

develop financial incentives, find new uses for historic 

buildings, strengthen existing businesses and attract new ones, 

and create neighbourhoods where arts and culture can thrive. 

 

The third element of the program concerns design and heritage 



April 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7245 

conservation, Mr. Speaker. Main Street will assist communities 

in identifying their heritage and cultural assets and in creating a 

revitalization plan that includes the rehabilitation of existing 

heritage buildings. The program will encourage the 

conservation and reuse of distinctive historical structures, 

giving them new life and returning attractiveness of local 

character to the streetscape of these towns. 

 

Now the fourth element of the program is promotion. Main 

Street will help communities to develop a marketing strategy 

that presents a positive image of towns and increases their 

tourism potential. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this summer four communities will be selected for 

demonstration programs. Two will be smaller communities with 

populations under 2,000 people, and two will be larger. All 

Saskatchewan communities will be eligible to apply through a 

request for proposal process. The program will match funds 

raised by a community, and the funding will run for three years. 

 

Main Street programs are time-tested initiatives that have 

successfully encouraged economic and social development in 

communities all across North America through heritage 

conservation. Past examples of successful Main Street 

revitalizations right here in Saskatchewan include Moose Jaw, 

Gravelbourg, and Saskatoon’s Broadway Avenue. All three 

achieved significant economic development and heritage 

conservation results. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re very proud to introduce this new program. I 

encourage all interested communities to apply to this excellent 

program which they can find on our ministry’s website. Main 

Street is an excellent example of how this government is 

implementing our cultural policy, the Pride of Saskatchewan, 

by working to support heritage stewardship and strengthening 

our arts, culture, and heritage sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know this 

government is very . . . has said many, many times it’s very 

pleased or proud of its Building Pride, a policy that it 

announced last year. I just want to note, this is the government 

that three weeks before it announced its policy, Where Culture, 

Commerce and Community Meet, they had cut the funding to 

SCN [Saskatchewan Communications Network]. They decided 

to fade SCN to black, a key pillar in the film and television 

industry, and then they realized they couldn’t do that and 

decided to privatize it. 

 

So this is a government that talks about policy. There’s no 

doubt that Main Street is a very good program, but 

implementing a policy isn’t about one-offs, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Implementing a policy is about supporting the 

organizations that do the work in the arts and culture sectors. 

 

This is a government that talks about heritage. And in the 100th 

anniversary of St. Peter’s College, this is a government that 

de-designated St. Peter’s College without community 

consultation. The historic wood windows are gone. There’s 

been an elevator added to the front of that building that has 

impacted . . . Well there’s some question about where those 

windows are. There’s some concern that those wood windows 

are now in the dump. The elevator that’s been added to the front 

of the building has had a huge impact on the facade of the 

building. 

 

So it’s interesting to me that this is a government that talks 

about heritage support. It did give a modest increase to the 

Heritage Foundation, a modest increase, not nearly what they 

had been asking for, Mr. Speaker. Not nearly what they had 

been asking for. This is a government that’s given a 1.5 per cent 

increase to the arts and culture sector. A 1.5 increase, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is a status quo increase. 

 

These arts organizations, the Saskatchewan Arts Board, are 

being starved. These are the organizations that have the capacity 

and the skills to in fact implement this policy. And this 

government is choosing to do one-offs to . . . How do you 

implement a policy with one-offs, Mr. Deputy Speaker? There’s 

no doubt that Main Street has proven to be successful, but it’ll 

impact four communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

This is about a whole entire arts and culture sector. And I think 

this government has no standing in this regard. This 

government has had a habit of directing their funding to special 

initiatives that would be much better directed to organizations 

whose core operations are under stress. 

 

So although I commend the government for implementing the 

Main Street program, I would say that they need in fact to put 

the money into the arts and culture sector so this sector can do 

the work it needs to do in terms of implementing this policy. 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the minister of Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to 

introduce guests. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has asked leave to 

introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

thank you to the members of the Legislative Assembly this 

afternoon. To you and through you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 

your gallery are two individuals from Prince Albert who I want 

to take a moment to recognize. 

 

But the most important one is the young gentleman by the name 

of Brenner Holash, who is in Regina today interviewing for the 

Page program in the House of Commons. I believe he’s going 

to be following his brother’s footsteps who was there a couple 

of years ago doing the job. And we all want to wish him the 



7246 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2011 

best and the best of luck for that job. But on that note as well, 

Mr. Brenner Holash is the co-president of St. Mary’s High 

School. And this weekend, he was selected by the presiding 

Queen’s Bench and Provincial Court judges as the best overall 

lawyer at the CBA [Canadian Bar Association] provincial mock 

trial competition. 

 

So he’s done pretty well for not even attending law school yet, 

unlike his great father next to him, Mr. Mitch Holash, who’s in 

your gallery, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who is one of our best 

lawyers in the province. And I’m sure that Brenner will follow 

his father’s footsteps possibly and take over the law firm and 

serve the Saskatchewan people well. And we want to wish you 

the very best, Brenner. And to Mitch, welcome to your 

Legislative Assembly this afternoon. Gentlemen. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take this 

opportunity to introduce guests as well. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has asked with leave to 

introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from 

Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well I appreciate that, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

honour to get up and join with the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton in introducing guests to the legislature from Prince 

Albert. It’s a rare occasion when we get folks down here from 

Prince Albert. 

 

And I want to, if I could, say a few things about the gentlemen 

in your gallery today, Mr. Speaker. Mitchell Holash is a friend 

of the family. I’m glad to say the member opposite recognized 

his skill as a lawyer. He has represented me on occasion, and I 

can attest to that skill first-hand, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Additionally, Brenner Holash, not only is he a champion at 

mock trials and co-president of the high school, he’s also an 

incredible athlete and a great soccer player. And I have the great 

displeasure of defending him in our senior soccer league in 

Prince Albert, and he’s . . . [inaudible] . . . me on a number of 

occasions and scored a few goals at my expense. I hope that he 

does as well in his interview with the Page program as he does 

on a pitch in Prince Albert, and with all of the other things, wish 

him nothing but the best of success and the best of luck moving 

forward. Thanks so much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 624 — The Contracts, Lease Agreements 

and Tenders Accountability and Transparency Act 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move Bill No. 624, The 

Contracts, Lease Agreements and Tenders Accountability and 

Transparency Act be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow has moved first reading of Bill No. 624, The 

Contracts, Lease Agreements and Tenders Accountability and 

Transparency Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read? 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the 

answers to questions 1,030 and 1,031. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled 

questions 1,030 and 1,031. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 169 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 169 — The 

Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Amendment 

Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to enter the debate on The Saskatchewan Financial 

Services Commission Act, Bill No. 169. And Mr. Speaker, when 

I look at the Bill, it is clear what we are doing is taking a 

stand-alone division out, which used to be a department really, 

the Department of Consumer Affairs, and rolling it into the 

Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission. 

 

At present, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission does the following: it administers the following 

pieces of legislation which I think the public might be interested 

in. Basically the Financial Services Commission up until now 

has dealt with The Credit Union Act, The Mortgage Brokerages 

and Mortgage Administrators Act, The New Generation 

Co-operatives Act, The Pension Benefits Act, The Saskatchewan 



April 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7247 

Insurance Act, The Securities Act, The Trust and Loan 

Corporations Act, and The Co-operatives Act. 

 

So the Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission has 

essentially been looking after some fairly substantive Bills that 

deal with some fairly substantive operations in the province of 

Saskatchewan. What the government is proposing to do is to 

roll in what in essence is consumer protection into this 

commission. 

 

And let’s look at the consumer protection legislation that they 

want to roll into the Financial Services Commission: The 

Auctioneers Act, The Cemeteries Act, The Charitable 

Fund-raising Businesses Act, The Collection Agents Act, The 

Cost of Credit Disclosure Act, The Credit Reporting Act, The 

Direct Sellers Act, get this, The Film and Video Classification 

Act, The Funeral and Cremation Services Act, The Motor 

Dealers Act, The Sale of Goods Act and The Ticket Sales Act. 

 

Now these Acts are where we, as individual consumers, can go 

to get some of our significant issues dealt with. And I’m not 

sure, Mr. Speaker, that basically suppressing or eliminating the 

profile of consumer protection for individuals across the 

province is going to enhance consumer protection in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So we in essence have some concerns about this Bill because all 

of us working in our constituencies know people that come to 

our offices that may have difficulties with an appliance that 

they may have purchased. They may have difficulty with some 

commission that they may have paid. They may have difficulty 

dealing with sales people in various institutions or situations. 

And so I think we need to be awfully careful when examining 

this particular piece of legislation. 

 

When I look at The Auctioneers Act for instance, I mean The 

Auctioneers Act is basically a Bill or a piece of legislation that 

lays out some rules around those of us who may attend an 

auction, purchase something at an auction, and to make sure 

that bids are properly considered, and so on and so forth. And it 

also is there to protect the person that is the auctioneer. Now 

I’m not sure what’s going to happen now that this particular 

piece of legislation is being moved over to the Saskatchewan 

Financial Services Commission, which deals with pensions and 

the co-ops and the credit unions and so on and so forth. I mean 

are these pieces of legislation going to be suppressed, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

When I look at the Financial Services Commission at present, it 

administers a lot things. It administers credit union legislation. 

It administers legislation around mortgage brokers, and some of 

us have seen what’s happened to individuals who may have 

difficulty with mortgage brokers in the province of 

Saskatchewan. It’s involved in pension plan administration, in 

dealing with pension funds, dealing with selling and providing 

of insurance in the province, lending money, purchasing 

mortgages on property and land, personal property. These are 

all of the areas that the Financial Services Commission deals 

with now. And what I’m not sure about is whether or not 

they’re going to suppress what is being proposed, and that is 

consumer protection, when they are dealing with some fairly 

substantive issues in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will need to hear from the government. And 

we certainly didn’t hear from the government when the Minister 

of Justice spoke about that because his speech didn’t even fill a 

page of Hansard. He says, he tells us that consumer and 

consumer protection functions are constantly evolving. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that the evolution that we’re 

witnessing here in the House with this particular piece of 

legislation is about suppressing consumer protection. 

 

He says that the functions can be assigned to the commission by 

regulation. Well right now we know that there are people in the 

province of Saskatchewan, I believe in the Ministry of Justice, 

that deal with consumer protection issues day in and day out. 

 

And consumer protection is important. The minister tells us 

consumer protection is important in our society. But I don’t see, 

as the minister has told us, how this particular piece of 

legislation is going to emphasize, to quote the minister, “the 

government’s focus on and involvement with consumer 

protection initiatives of all kinds.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the minister was not at all substantive when he 

introduced this piece of legislation. He has not told us in a 

substantive way why he wants to roll The Auctioneers Act, for 

instance, over to the Financial Services Commission. He hasn’t 

told us why he wants to roll The Cemeteries Act over to the 

Financial Services Commission. He hasn’t told us why he wants 

to roll The Consumer Protection Act, The Direct Sellers Act, 

The Credit Reporting Act and — get this — The Film and Video 

Classification Act, The Funeral and Cremation Services Act, 

The Motor Dealers Act, The Sale of Goods Act, The Ticket Sales 

Act, and The Consumer and Commercial Affairs Act all over to 

the Financial Services Commission. 

 

[14:45] 

 

If you look at his legislation, he says that the consumer 

protection branch and the Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission share many of the same objectives. Well they 

share many of the same objectives, but what he hasn’t told us is 

why we need to see this particular rolling in of consumer 

protection into the Financial Services Commission where they 

administer some very, very substantive pieces of legislation in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say that there are those of us 

on the opposition benches that are not exactly clear why the 

government has introduced this particular piece of legislation. 

The minister didn’t outline in a clear and concise way why the 

decision to roll consumer protection functions that are now in 

the Department of Justice over to the Financial Services 

Commission, other than that they share some of the very same 

objectives. 

 

We want to ensure that consumer protection is paramount. We 

want to ensure that there is a focus, a continued focus on 

consumer protection in the province of Saskatchewan. And 

we’re not convinced at the moment that this gets us to where we 

want to go. And in fact, we think that this could very well 

suppress consumer protection in the province of Saskatchewan. 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 



7248 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2011 

has adjourned debate on Bill 169, The Saskatchewan Financial 

Services Commission Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 167 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 167 — The 

Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 
be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to make some comments about Bill No. 167, An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Act. Mr. 

Speaker, this is a relatively short piece of legislation in that all it 

does is take section 12 of the existing legislation and repeal it 

and replace it with a new section 12. And so the question then 

becomes, what is the purpose of this particular legislation? 

 

What we know, Mr. Speaker, is that around 1980 the province 

of Saskatchewan participated with other Prairie provinces and 

the federal government in purchasing grain cars to make sure 

that the wheat and other grains grown by Canadian farmers 

could make it to the export points, both east and west and north. 

We include Hudson Bay. 

 

And what was happening at that time, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

railway companies did not have sufficient funds in the revenues 

that they received to continue and maintain or purchase new 

hopper cars. So as many of us who remember those days will 

recall, most of the grain was hauled in boxcars, and it was 

picked up at elevators all across the province, and it was a 

system that had been in place for many, many years. And those 

of us who live in Regina know that Regina was often the 

graveyard for railway cars from every part of North America, 

and we saw a lot of these cars later going to the cutting yards up 

by IPSCO and then eventually being melted and being made by 

IPSCO, or now Evraz, into the steel pipe that has been used in 

the oil and gas industry. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what was happening at that time was that 

there was a recognition that some of these new hopper cars 

were needed in the railway system to make sure that the grain 

would make it to the export markets. So the province of 

Saskatchewan purchased 1,000 new cars and had them added to 

the railway fleet. And we know that they were used for the 

specific purpose of hauling grain to the various export points. 

But we also know that they were included into the whole North 

American fleet of grain transport cars, and they were well used 

all over North America. 

 

I know that many times you would see a Saskatchewan grain 

car if you were in Arizona or California or sometimes even on 

the East Coast, in the same way that we sometimes see transport 

train cars from other railways across North America. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have grain cars that were purchased in 

1980. It’s now 31 years later. These grain cars are still owned 

by the province of Saskatchewan through the Saskatchewan 

Grain Car Corporation, pursuant to the legislation which is 

being amended. What we also know is that over the last decade 

or more there have been continual safety reviews of the present 

fleet of cars, and so they have been, some of them repaired, 

some of them refurbished, a number of them repainted, but 

there are quite a number that still require a substantial amount 

of work. 

 

So getting to this particular Bill, what is happening here? Now 

when the minister provided his remarks about the purpose of 

this Bill, he set out the fact that the plan is to have the Grain Car 

Corporation take on some added responsibilities around 

administering the shortline railway sustainability grant program. 

 

Now my understanding is that this grant program has presently 

been operated out of the ministry, and so it once again raises the 

question that we see in many of these budget Bills, whether it 

was the Bill that my colleague just spoke about, related to the 

Financial Services Commission taking over consumer 

protection legislation, or some of the changes that are being 

proposed for The Natural Resources Act. Or you can go down a 

whole number of these Bills where it looks as if costs that have 

traditionally been in departments, which includes also the 

employees to manage these things, are being moved out of the 

line departments or ministries into corporations or other entities 

that are created. So what we seem to have here is the ability, 

yes, to administer this program for shortline railways but also 

the ability to help the minister attain his goal from the Minister 

of Finance, which is to reduce the number of civil servants in 

the department by 15 per cent. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it also raises questions about how the money 

is going to be obtained by this new corporation so that they can 

give out the grants that they’re talking about. In the budget this 

year, the minister says that the amount of money for this 

shortline railway sustainability program will be $700,000 for 

the year 2011-12, which is an increase of 200,000. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it appears that that money at this point is being 

obtained through the regular budgeting process. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we also know that when one looks at the 

financial management review committee and their progress 

reports of what they had to do in 1992 to get the finances of the 

province back in order, one of the problems that was dealt with 

— on March 31st, 1992 — was that, pursuant to the 

recommendation of the commission, they recommended that 

transactions involving loans which can only be repaid through 

future budgetary appropriations by the government should be 

treated as expenditures rather than assets, for example, loans 

receivable in the government’s financial statements. 

 

So this change was made to the accounting practices to make 

sure that the finances of the government were more transparent. 

And so this change was made in the year ’92-93 as the books of 

the province were being cleaned up after much of the 

difficulties of the Devine Conservative government during the 

’90s. As we all remember, the government changed in late 

1991. 

 

And so when they talk about which loans fell in this category, 



April 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7249 

that they should be treated as expenditures rather than assets, 

there were three of them. The first one was the Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation and had a debt of $713 

million, so that was written off against accumulated deficit. The 

second was the Saskatchewan Water Corporation who had a 

debt of $182 million, and that was written off against the 

accumulated deficit on March 31st, 1992. And the third one was 

the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation, and that had a debt of 

$36 million that was written off against the accumulated deficit. 

And so what we had, Mr. Speaker, is debt accumulating in the 

Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the changes that are being proposed in this 

legislation seem to make it even easier for the government, 

which controls the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation, to end 

up having money administered within the Grain Car 

Corporation. And it also makes it clear that more financial 

assistance to railways — it doesn’t specify only shortline 

railways but all railways — can be included or can be done 

within this legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m concerned that there are attempts made here to 

make it easier for this past practice of accumulating debt 

outside of government in one of these corporations . . . will be 

facilitated by this particular piece of legislation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am a great supporter of shortline railways, 

and one of the things that we should remember about what the 

definitions of a shortline railway is . . . In Canada railways that 

cross provincial boundaries are normally regulated on a national 

basis, and all the rules around the track and the transport are 

under federal law. It’s a constitutional provision. 

 

I know that people sometimes rue the demise of the grain 

elevators in small towns in Saskatchewan. And one of the issues 

that arose when many of the grain elevators were being torn 

down and removed in small town Saskatchewan was how could 

the province of Saskatchewan, as government, try to protect 

some of these facilities, sometimes even just as heritage 

properties. Well the issue always became that virtually all of 

them were built on land that was connected to the national 

railways, and they were constitutionally under the responsibility 

of the federal government. And it was almost impossible for the 

province to make any kind of legislative protection for them. 

 

And I know that one of the things about the Saskatchewan 

Grain Car Corporation, as it relates to shortline railways, is that 

as long as these railways are within the boundaries of the 

province of Saskatchewan, they are administered under 

Saskatchewan railway rules. And that’s, I think, in many ways a 

positive thing because we, in the province of Saskatchewan, 

have sufficient skills and knowledge to administer these rail 

lines. But it also means that they operate in a slightly different 

basis. The other difficulty is there has to be an ability to connect 

with all of the nationally regulated railways. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And so in this legislation, we have the ability for the 

government to start making grants through the corporation, so it 

changes fundamentally what the Grain Car Corporation is. And 

possibly it allows for the province to set up their own grain car 

corporation, I mean, in the sense of purchasing shortlines and 

getting involved with running railways within the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not certain that that’s the hidden agenda 

of this government, but maybe it is. Maybe what we’re seeing 

here is an attempt by the provincial government to get into the 

railway business using borrowed money or money that they 

would be able to administer through this particular piece of 

legislation. But ultimately the question becomes though, will 

this be done in a transparent way? Will it be done in a way that 

we don’t end up subsequently having to write off all of the debt 

that’s accumulated within the particular corporation? 

 

So what is it that the legislation does? Well the new section 12 

has a section (a) which adds one word to that previous section, 

and the word is commodities. So what it does is say that these 

particular assets owned by the Saskatchewan Grain Car 

Corporation can be used to haul commodities other than grain. 

So I assume that includes possibly minerals, coal, lumber, other 

kinds of things, but practically it would have, for the existing 

cars that are owned by the corporation, it would have to be 

something that could go into a bulk transport car. 

 

Another intention or another amendment to the legislation in 

12(b) makes it clear that the consulting management and 

administrative services can be provided in the corporation. And 

so, Mr. Speaker, this is a place where employees can be moved 

to this corporation and their salaries and other costs paid out of 

the corporation. So that’s the clause that allows for the minister 

to reduce by 15 per cent the people who are actually working in 

his ministry. 

 

Section 12(c) hasn’t been changed. Section 12(d) provides that 

the corporation can purchase assets for the benefit of the rail 

industry. It doesn’t make any restriction on what those assets 

are. So this could be office buildings. It could be stations. It 

could be loading equipment. It could be a whole set of new 

types of railcars which might be used by shortline railways in 

Saskatchewan, or it could be used by some of the 

national-international rail lines if the corporation felt that was 

appropriate. 

 

And the section 12(e) is changed. What it does is recognize that, 

with this change in 12(d) which allows for purchase of all kinds 

of assets, it had to make sure that it also could dispose of assets. 

So it’s possible with this particular legislation to actually 

change the Grain Car Corporation from what’s been effectively 

a holding company or ownership company of 1,000 grain cars 

into a company that owns a whole number of brand new railcars 

that are used in other industries in the province or maybe even a 

passenger service. That would be possible with this wording, 

and it would allow them to sell off all of the grain cars or 

dispose of them in whatever way the corporation would deem 

appropriate. So, Mr. Speaker, it’s these clauses can change 

totally the nature of what the corporation is. 

 

Now another change in section 12(f) says, it says that other 

goods can be hauled and it’ll provide . . . The corporation can 

define by what means grain, commodities, or other products 

produced in Saskatchewan or elsewhere — so in other words, 

things produced anywhere — may be transported. So it could be 

that it’s not prudent to use grain cars or railcars or anything to 

do with rails to transport. This clause looks like it would allow 



7250 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2011 

for the corporation to be transformed into a trucking company 

or some other transportation company to move grain 

commodities or other products. 

 

And so what’s happening here is that the wording that’s been 

asked for by the minister and the staff has been wording that 

will allow for some changes in what they do. And what they 

have in this particular legislation is wording that allows for total 

change of the purpose of the Grain Car Corporation. So if that’s 

the intention of the minister and the government, then probably 

they would want to set that out for us. It would’ve been possible 

to do some of the simple things that the minister’s talked about 

without allowing for such broad changes to this particular 

legislation. 

 

Now section 12(g) makes a change which allows for the 

government, obviously subject to Treasury Board, to provide 

financial assistance by way of grant, that’s the money that the 

minister had in his speech; loan, we didn’t hear anything about 

any loans in the minister’s speech; guarantee, we didn’t hear 

anything about guarantees; or similar means to persons, and 

persons includes both people like us but also corporations; for 

purposes of allowing those persons to acquire railway rolling 

stock, plant, equipment, or other assets that will benefit the 

railway industry. 

 

So under this clause, it would be possible for the government to 

pay a rail company, like one of the big international rail 

companies, to buy and take the railcars from the responsibility 

of the province of Saskatchewan. I didn’t hear anything about 

that in the minister’s speech when he was presenting this 

legislation. But the way this particular Bill is worded, it gives a 

much broader ability to do almost anything with the railcars but 

also with the corporation itself. And if there’s any concerns 

about that, then you go to section 12(h) which allows for the 

corporation to do anything necessary to meet the objects and 

purposes of the government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a short Bill, but it has all kinds of 

interesting times to . . . It gives all kinds of opportunities for the 

government to make some fairly dramatic changes, and it gives 

the opportunity for the government to give grants, loans, make 

guarantees, and it’s a whole number of things that we’ve seen 

before with this corporation where ultimately the province was 

on the hook for quite a bit of money which had to be brought 

back into the clear responsibility of the ministry. 

 

And so therefore, Mr. Speaker, I think that we should be careful 

to ask many questions about this Bill because it appears to have 

been worded in a much broader fashion than was necessary to 

accomplish the purposes of what the minister has set out in his 

speech. So it may be that he’ll be able to clarify this, but I think 

that we should be especially careful. I know other of my 

colleagues will want to make comments about this particular 

Bill because once again it goes to the heart of the support of 

shortline railways and the ability to transport grain within our 

province. We think that’s a positive thing to do, but we need to 

do it in a way that doesn’t lose that asset for the producers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that I will move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Lakeview has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill 167, The Saskatchewan Grain 

Car Corporation Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 168 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 168 — The 

Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment 

Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to enter in the debate on Bill No. 168. And of course the 

Bill’s An Act to amend The Teachers Superannuation and 

Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2011. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

looking at the Bill itself you can see that the nature of the Bill is 

primarily more of . . . and I hate to use the phrase, housekeeping 

purposes, but that’s basically what the Bill is all about in terms 

of what needs to be corrected in some of the language in some 

of the previous Bills. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, for a summary, people ought to know that 

this Bill was a direct result of some of the discussions and the 

negotiations, as I understand it, that happened in the fall of 2007 

in relation to the last teachers discussion they had with this 

current government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that was three and a half years ago. And 

there was a minor amendment necessary under this Bill to 

accommodate some of the changes in some of the agreements 

that were arrived at, at that time. And obviously the government 

in their haste to try and make sure they were able to get through 

this Bill, through this process, they had a few errors that were 

on the Bill, and this is what we’re talking about today. 

 

So those teachers and those students that may be watching the 

proceedings, the Bill, while minor in nature, certainly I think 

what I want to touch on, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that they have 

not responded to this minor housekeeping amendments, these 

few minor amendments in this Bill to address the discussions 

they had in 2007. How is it now in 2011 we’re finally getting 

through with the minor amendments that were promised by 

those guys three and a half years ago, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So what I’m going to point out is that a lot of the people out in 

northern Saskatchewan, they value our teaching profession a 

great deal as they do all throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

About the only people that don’t appreciate the teachers in 

general, I would certainly want to point out, would be the 

Saskatchewan Party government. Because again, going back to 

this minor issue in Bill 168, which is just an amendment, it took 

them three and a half long years to bring this forward to correct 

some of those errors and some of the mistakes that were made. 

Why couldn’t they do this very quickly, Mr. Speaker? I don’t 

know. I can’t answer for them. But I can certainly, I am going 

to guess as to why it took them three and a half years to put 



April 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7251 

forward this minor amendment. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, many communities in northern 

Saskatchewan . . . And I’m making the reference to northern 

Saskatchewan. People ought to know that, you know, it’s not a 

disregard nor is it disrespect for some of the other teachers 

throughout the province. And the reason why I’m specifically 

focusing on northern Saskatchewan is primarily because we in 

northern Saskatchewan see every day the positive effect and 

positive impact that our teaching industry offers the North. 

 

[15:15] 

 

In many northern communities, in many northern communities 

the school is the saving grace in many of the young people’s 

lives. Mr. Speaker, I look at some of the communities in general 

— La Loche, Beauval, La Ronge, Sandy Bay — there are many 

gifted and intelligent and very committed teachers, Mr. 

Speaker, that do an incredible amount of work. And obviously 

they have to get up early and they have to prepare their lesson 

plans for the day. They have to go through the students to the 

parents. They’ve got to volunteer after that for some of the 

school activities on their own, and they also participate in many 

of the community functions and activities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think if you look at the contribution of the teachers in 

northern Saskatchewan, it is phenomenally more important, Mr. 

Speaker, it is phenomenally more integral and it is 

phenomenally more, in terms of time, more of a commitment in 

northern Saskatchewan to be a teacher. And as I mentioned at 

my earlier comments, if it takes three and a half years to do a 

minor amendment to an Act and to a Bill, it really shows how 

much priority that the teaching profession has from the 

Saskatchewan Party government. It is embarrassing; it is 

shameful, Mr. Speaker. And they ought to treat our teachers 

with a bit more respect than what they have shown certainly 

over the past couple of years. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I watch with interest as to what they’re 

doing on not just this particular Bill 168 but some of the other 

Bills that they’ve brought forward, Mr. Speaker, and some of 

the other ideas that they’re playing with. And one of them of 

course is the school funding model. Well guess what, Mr. 

Speaker? They’re looking at the education agreement. They’re 

looking at how they’re going to fund education in the future. 

 

But the only problem is they’re bringing it forward a year from 

now, 2011, a year after the election, they’re bringing forward 

this agreement. And right across the board, the Teachers’ 

Federation of course, the School Boards Association, parents, 

the taxpayers, people really want to know what’s going on with 

that funding agreement. And yet this party and this government 

are saying, well we’re going to wait until after 2012 before we 

unveil our plan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, a lot of people are saying, well that doesn’t 

make any sense because obviously the election’s happening in 

2011. We need to see what they have planned for education in 

terms of the funding model prior to the next election, Mr. 

Speaker, not after this fall’s election. And again they have not 

been forthright and forthcoming in terms of some of that 

information. 

 

Now Bill 168 is much similar in terms of their respect for the 

teaching profession, Mr. Speaker. And the reason why I say that 

is in Bill 168 the changes are minor. They’re not 

earth-shattering in a sense of making some of the amendments. 

And why did it take them three and a half years to bring this 

forward to correct these small housekeeping issues, Mr. 

Speaker? Because they’re not committed to dealing with the 

teachers. That’s the simple and plain truth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They don’t care what they do in terms of the manner in which 

they treat them. They don’t deal with their issues in a timely 

fashion. And they have politicized the process to a point where 

people don’t know what’s going on. They first removed the 

opportunity for the local school boards to do any taxing through 

the property tax avenue. And then they also sit down and they 

make sure that they get rid of some of the teachers’ assistants 

that they’ve been so eloquently and so constantly trying to get 

rid of some of the teachers’ assistants. And now some of these 

small amendments have taken three and a half years, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I guess the point is, on some of these smaller points that 

we’ve been dealing with this particular government on, they 

have been dragging their feet. They have been disrespectful to 

the process. And they have tied the hands of a lot of groups — 

not just the SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards Association], 

the School Boards Association, not just the STF [Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation], but parents and people that are involved 

with education such as the teachers’ assistants and many of the 

support staff that they have. 

 

Now as I mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to talk a bit 

about the respectful relationship that the teachers have in 

northern Saskatchewan. And I often travel to some of these 

communities and I see the direct impact. If you look at a couple 

of good examples and the manner in which . . . Turnor Lake is 

an example, the Birch Narrows First Nations where the chief 

there has built a beautiful facility, and he should be recognized 

for doing all that work. And thank goodness for the stimulus 

money because that’s exactly what happens when you have the 

stimulus spending that was required by the federal government. 

 

The Birch Narrows First Nation got their school built and, Mr. 

Speaker, this school was built because the chief and the council 

fought for many, many years. They worked very hard. So I 

want to commend and thank Chief Robert Sylvester on some of 

the work that he’s done. And people ought to know in Turnor 

Lake, whether it’s the Métis community or whether it’s the First 

Nations of Birch Narrows, that it was the chief and council, as 

well as the mayor of the neighbouring Métis community, that 

fought for that school. They fought and they never gave up, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I can remember when we had meetings in Birch Narrows seven 

or eight years ago, when under the former NDP administration, 

there was a plan to actually build that school, Mr. Speaker. It 

was going to be a joint school between the province and the 

federal government, but what happened at the time was INAC 

[Indian and Northern Affairs Canada] wouldn’t go beyond the 

prescribed amount that we needed from the federal government 

to have this building, or have this school built. So the province 

was ready to move. And what happened, Mr. Speaker, is INAC 

saying, well we need a bit more money than what you guys, 



7252 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2011 

what we thought we needed, so we have to go back to the 

federal Treasury Board and ask for more money, and this is 

beyond the spending limit that we have right now on this 

project. 

 

So you fast forward seven or eight years and finally, because of 

the stimulus funding and the stimulus planning that was 

necessary to spend this money, all of a sudden INAC found the 

money. And of course the chief and some of the other leaders, 

the local council and the mayor and a number of other leaders in 

the education field certainly never gave up. They continued 

fighting for it, and they all of a sudden see this new school 

being built. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this school is on the reserve side. It’s a 

beautiful school. I had the opportunity to go visit the school and 

surprising, some of the facilities . . . that the rooms within the 

facility were named after people that helped them out. And 

obviously, Mr. Speaker, some of the people within the Turnor 

Lake community, both the Métis community of Turnor Lake 

and the Birch Narrows First Nations, they’re a very generous 

lot. They’re very good people. And, Mr. Speaker, when they 

built this school at the request and certainly at the hard work of 

the chief and also with the support of some of the educational 

leaders and the staff and some of the Métis leaders in the 

community, they did not do anything else except name a couple 

of the rooms within the facility after people that came to help 

them. 

 

People like Dave Adams, where they actually named, I believe 

it was the gym part they named after Dave Adams. And many 

people know Dave Adams was an educator in northern 

Saskatchewan for many, many years. They named the library. I 

believe they named it after Ernie Lawton, another person that 

worked very hard with the community over the years. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that is the nature, when I speak of northern education, 

that is the nature in which northern people value educators, 

value builders. They value some of the leadership that has been 

shown over the years. 

 

And when you have a community like Birch Narrows that 

really, really supports their children by giving them a good, 

beautiful school and having them work very hard over the years 

for their children, they not only were able to do that but they 

also wanted to recognize some of the outside people that helped 

them achieve some of their educational goals. And certainly 

Dave Adams and, as I mentioned, Ernie Lawton were some of 

the people that obviously were very instrumental in helping 

them achieve a number of educational objectives. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s something that they’re quite prepared to share in 

recognizing some of these professional people. And that shows 

the generosity and it certainly shows the integrity and it shows 

the leadership of not just the Métis community at Turnor Lake, 

but the Birch Narrows First Nations that share the same people, 

the same children. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the education system in 

northern Saskatchewan, Birch Narrows, Turnor Lake is one 

good example of how a Métis community and a strong First 

Nations leader got together and they worked out their 

differences and they got a new school built. 

 

For the record in the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

and giving full marks and full recognition to Chief Robert 

Sylvester and his council as well as the mayor and council of 

Turnor Lake, and them and only them working hard and never 

forgetting for one instant that they are the ones that built that 

school, and all of us as legislators in this Assembly ought to 

take our hat off to them and say, thank you very much, Chief 

Sylvester. Thanks to all the mayors in the past and the councils 

of the village of Turnor Lake and of course the educational 

leaders and the council of Birch Narrows for never giving up on 

their dream, for constantly fighting for that facility. 

 

And today, Mr. Speaker, you’re seeing that education in Turnor 

Lake is moving leaps and bounds forward primarily because of 

local leadership. And that local leadership was more than 

prepared to recognize other people from outside the 

communities that helped them along. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

dedication and that’s leadership. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as we go on to Buffalo Narrows and we see 

some of the values and some of the educators there . . . And 

again I go back to this Bill 168, a small amendment. Why did it 

take them three and a half years to proceed with this 

amendment? It’s because they don’t value educators, Mr. 

Speaker. They do not value the education system in northern 

Saskatchewan as they don’t in southern Saskatchewan. And 

they’ll pay a price for that, Mr. Speaker. They will pay a price 

for that. 

 

And you look at Bill 168. As I mentioned at the outset, it talks 

about teachers’ pensions, it talks about teachers’ disabilities, 

and it took them three and a half years to make one small 

amendment. Like my goodness, they have to get with the 

program, Mr. Speaker. They have to get with the program 

because they’re so far behind in showing their commitment to 

the educators of our great province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I look at Buffalo Narrows, as I mentioned in 

my earlier comments, and under the leadership of their 

principal, Jackie Durocher . . . [inaudible] . . . She has worked 

very hard, Mr. Speaker, along with all of the other staff within 

Twin Lakes School, to really bring forward a model in which 

you walk through the school, you see a lot of well-behaved 

kids. It’s very quiet. They’re starting to learn a lot about some 

of the other challenges that they have in the community, 

whether it’s things to do with sport. You see a great hockey 

team from Buffalo Narrows. You see a lot of kids being 

involved in the community. You see them playing basketball, 

basketball outside in the community play area. So these are 

some of the things, Mr. Speaker, that I see as I travel through 

Buffalo Narrows. 

 

But I know the school has had tremendous progress in working 

with the students. And as you go through the school, Mr. 

Speaker, as I have on numerous occasions, as you go through 

the school you’ll notice the school is well-kept. It’s very clean, 

and they maintain their school as best they can. The staff are 

very dedicated there. And I think Mr. Thompson is one of . . . 

the person that looks after the school. 

 

And I think one of the things that people ought to know is that, 

as you look at the activity within the school, you can certainly 

see that there’s a lot of activity after school. And you look at the 

quietness of the school. You can tell the students are behaved 



April 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7253 

and learning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, look at the maintenance of the school. You see 

how fantastic the school looks. And they’re doing wonderful 

things, marvellous things for the kids of Buffalo Narrows. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we ought to have a lot more respect for them in 

recognizing that work that they have done as opposed to 

delaying small, little housekeeping items in their pension plan 

and their disability plan for three and a half years. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in Beauval, in Green Lake, in Pinehouse, 

there’s just a tremendous amount of valuable teachers 

throughout these communities, and they do a lot for their 

communities. I’ve used Turnor Lake as an example. I’ve used 

Buffalo Narrows as an example. 

 

I’ve always spoke highly of La Loche in a sense that La Loche 

is one of the communities where the school is the beacon of 

hope for many of the local people and for many of the kids. 

That’s where a lot of the kids go to look at opportunities to 

further their education, to really make that particular 

community school a true community school because the entire 

community goes there. And they utilize that school as much as 

they can. 

 

And you, over the time, over the years, Mr. Speaker, you’ll hear 

of the names of some of the staff members like Greg Hatch, like 

Stephen King. These are some of the people that have worked 

over the years in the leadership of the principal role. And they 

continue doing that, Mr. Speaker, and they hire staff. And they 

have very high standards for their staff. They expect a lot of 

their staff.  

 

And many of these staff members, they go on and on and on in 

terms of the commitment that is required of them. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they need, they need to be recognized for that. Now 

the local school council and certainly the Northern Lights 

representative, Mr. St. Pierre, Robert St. Pierre, he often talks 

about how much the dedication, the dedicated staff have to 

show in order to stay there. And it takes a lot of extra effort, not 

only to recruit, but to retain some of the teachers in these 

northern communities. 

 

When I travel to La Loche, again I see that beautiful school. I 

see a beautiful people. I see a beautiful education system, and I 

see well-disciplined children. And I also see, I also see, Mr. 

Speaker, I see dedicated educators. And I say to myself, thank 

goodness we have that system right now in this community and 

many other communities. Because at the very least we have 

some hope for our young people that they look at that school, 

look at that board, look at that staff and they say, these are the 

people that are front line fighters to develop a better 

community, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the amount of treatment and the disrespect they get from 

this Sask Party government needs to stop. They’ve got to 

recognize that in many of these northern communities, a lot of 

times the beacon of hope in our communities is the school. It is 

the school. And these schools are going to stop a lot of 

problems for our community. They’re going to create a lot of 

opportunities for our young kids. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got 

to do a heck of a lot more than what is currently being done by 

that government to make sure we keep a system like that in 

place. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to suggest that everything is 

rosy. We know that there are challenges. To recruit and to retain 

educators in northern Saskatchewan is always difficult. Mr. St. 

Pierre has told me on numerous occasion that it’s hard getting 

teachers to northern Saskatchewan, and you want to keep the 

good ones. It’s always a balancing act between not only having 

programs, but having the right complement of teachers, having 

construction projects in place, the resources that are necessary 

for additional activities. These are some of the things that some 

of the local boards and the Northern Lights School Division 

often struggle with. They struggle with this every single day. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, people ought to recognize them and respect 

them for that role. Because at the end of the day, what have 

these communities got? All they have, as I mentioned earlier, is 

they have their school. And that school is supposed to represent 

a place of learning, a place of hope for our young people. And 

we’ve got to make sure we do all we can to support the teaching 

industry and to make sure that Bills like this Bill 168 isn’t held 

up for three and a half years for a minor amendment dealing 

with pensions and disabilities, Mr. Speaker. And that’s one of 

the points that I want to raise today in relation to this Bill. 

 

And people out there in Saskatchewan land, all throughout the 

province, they know what’s going on. The teachers know 

what’s happening. STF is in tune with what’s going on with this 

particular government. They’ve had record revenues, record 

revenues, Mr. Speaker, that they inherited and yet they’re not 

dealing with the basic fundamental issue of making sure we 

have a good system, an education system that our children can 

certainly rely on, that our children can benefit from. 

 

Now again Mr. Speaker, going back to northern Saskatchewan, 

I look at some of the issues that many of the teachers have 

raised to me. Some of them have written letters to me, and they 

are quite concerned as to what some of the challenges are in 

some of these northern communities. And I don’t want to bring 

out their names, Mr. Speaker, because primarily because it is 

something that they’ve written to me privately. But they talk 

about the challenges of travelling to northern Saskatchewan on 

roads that are in very poor shape, Mr. Speaker. They talk about 

the costs of going out for dental benefits. They talk about the 

costs of going out for medical attention. They talk about the 

need for them to have a relaxing recreational time in the 

community besides teaching and teaching and working, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And they talk about some of the challenges that other 

jurisdictions don’t provide to northern Saskatchewan or to the 

province in general. And they say, well why can’t we do that 

here? And the reason why we can’t do any of those things here, 

Mr. Speaker, is that the Sask Party government is not serious 

about supporting our educators. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I alluded a bit to the challenges of the 

teaching profession in northern Saskatchewan. We know that 

there are teachers out there that have incredible degrees in terms 

of their experience and their own education where they spend 

years and years and years developing their resumé. And 



7254 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2011 

certainly they’ve committed to their profession and it’s 

surprising that in some jurisdictions as Alberta, sometimes they 

get paid 15, $20,000 more than what their counterpart in 

Saskatchewan would get paid, Mr. Speaker. And why is that? 

Why is that, despite us having record revenues in Saskatchewan 

today? Why is that, Mr. Speaker?  

 

And I’ll tell you why it is — because you have an insensitive 

Sask Party government that doesn’t care about education, that 

doesn’t care about the teachers and never will. And, Mr. 

Speaker, as I mentioned at the outset, the teachers will not 

forget this, Mr. Speaker. They will not forget this. And if you 

think they’re angry now, you wait. They’ll be much angrier as 

time goes on because they’ll see that government having all 

kinds of money and building and committing to 20-year leases 

for buildings that they don’t need. And that comes at a cost, Mr. 

Speaker, to the taxpayers. And they’d rather sink money into 

buildings that aren’t needed than put money into teachers that 

could really build the future of our kids and build the future of 

this province. And that is what’s fundamentally wrong with the 

Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. Their priorities are skewered 

and, Mr. Speaker, their priorities are way off base. 

 

And I can’t figure out, Mr. Speaker. I was sitting here trying to 

figure these guys out because on one hand they have 

emblazoned in their budget document the Premier saying, I 

want to get rid of 15 per cent of the civil servants in 

Saskatchewan. That’s his target, 15 per cent. So if you want to 

get rid of 15 per cent of your civil servants, why is it you’re 

building buildings that are going to continue to have more and 

more cost to the people? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, how does that connect to Bill 168? It’s 

because they’ve ignored issues around education too long, Mr. 

Speaker. And they’re busy making sweetheart deals with their 

buddies, and that comes at a cost and expense to the people of 

Saskatchewan for the next 20 years. Why can’t they make the 

same commitment to our teaching profession, Mr. Speaker? 

Because they don’t care. 

 

And a lot of teachers come up to me and they tell me, Mr. 

Speaker, they say, you know the bad thing about it is that we 

know our kids are having trouble with, whether it’s the legal 

system — some of the problems we have in these communities 

— or whether it’s family problems or whether it’s housing 

problems, they come to our school, we try and work with them. 

We know that they’re a great bunch of kids, and we do our best 

to build hope in them. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, they get tired. They get tired of all the extra 

work they do. They get tired of not being recognized for that 

extra work. They get tired of being taken for granted, Mr. 

Speaker. And they get tired of being abused. And at the end of 

the day, it’s much easier to be a teacher in other jurisdictions. 

And they often ask themselves, what am I doing here? And, Mr. 

Speaker, that government is helping those teachers make up 

their minds in leaving our province and leaving our north to go 

somewhere else where they’re much more valued and certainly 

much more appreciated. And I say shame on the Saskatchewan 

Party government. They should do more. 

 

Bill 168 didn’t need three and a half years to come through with 

a minor amendment on their contract — three and a half years, 

Mr. Speaker. Now imagine . . . It’s just a minor amendment 

dealing with their pension and their disability aspects. Imagine 

if they’re going to start talking about salaries and further 

benefits. How many years will that take? 

 

Well the Minister of Education was astute enough to say, well 

we’re not going to deal with that until after the next election. 

Well people in the education profession and certainly the NDP 

opposition, we’re simply going to say, well we see right 

through that ruse, Mr. Speaker. Their plan is to save all the bad 

news until after the next election. And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, 

people don’t like to be used in that fashion, and there’s a lot of 

people that will make up their own minds prior to the election. 

So no matter how much that government tries to hide their 

education agreement or funding arrangement, people are going 

to make their own, their own scenarios up in their own mind, 

Mr. Speaker. And we’ll do our own hypothetical thinking on 

that one. 

 

And what’s going to happen at the end of the day is that people 

are going to come around and they’re going to say, well we 

don’t trust these guys. It took them three and a half years to deal 

with one small change on Bill 168. How many more years is it 

going to take them to figure out a funding arrangement, a 

sustainable funding arrangement to properly pay our teachers 

and to finally commit to the education system of not just 

northern Saskatchewan but to the entire province? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, getting back to a number of other 

communities I want to touch base on, one of them of course is 

the community of Beauval. Beauval has a population base of 

over 1,000 people. It’s an exciting community. They’ve got a 

great local board of education that does a lot of work. They 

have a great Northern Lights representative in Joe Daigneault. 

And Mr. Daigneault is a very well-educated man himself. And 

he works very closely with the community and certainly with 

the parents. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, he knows, he knows, Mr. Daigneault knows 

exactly what is necessary to build a solid school system, an 

education system. Why does he know? Because he’s also 

principal of Northlands College in Buffalo Narrows. And he 

sees how you need the proper math, the proper English, the 

proper sciences to become a student that can take further studies 

after grade 12 to become a journeyman electrician or become an 

engineer or a doctor or whatever choice that child chooses. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the community of Beauval, 

their hope is that Valley View School is able to function well 

and function efficiently and that the teachers there are 

committed like anywhere else. But they’ve got to be 

recognized, and they’ve got to be supported. In three and a half 

years, to make a minor amendment to their last contract, Mr. 

Speaker, does in no way, shape, or form show any commitment 

to our teaching profession. 

 

Now getting back to Valley View School, there’s a lot of kids 

that go to school there, and there’s a lot of dedicated staff, as I 

mentioned. And as you look at the community itself and you 

look at their future, like I said, they’ve got over 1,000 people 

there, and they have dreams and aspirations. It’s a fantastic 

community. They’re very active in the community. 

 



April 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7255 

And I often make reference to Beauval being the music capital 

of the Northwest, Mr. Speaker. And the reason why I make 

reference to them being the music capital of the Northwest is 

because you go into Beauval and you have hundreds of gifted 

people who can play guitar or sing or do the violin and do a 

number of other musical instruments. Like this is one 

community that I believe, Mr. Speaker, had three or four 

teachers that took under their wing 30 or 40 young kids, and 

they taught them all the value of music. They taught them how 

to play guitar. Some of them learned from their parents, but a 

lot of the teachers that came to the community taught a lot of 

kids the different ways of playing different instruments. And 

today now you see Beauval, pound for pound, they put out the 

best musicians and most gifted musicians in the region, Mr. 

Speaker. And that is because some of the teachers and some of 

the parents took time to teach the young kids. 

 

Now going back to my earlier comments about the community 

of Beauval, they know that those teachers that work in the 

school are dedicated teachers. They’re dedicated staff members. 

And they say, what more can we do to build the system up 

because if we build the system up we’re building our children’s 

future, making it brighter, making it more sustainable, making it 

more hopeful to everybody. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the best way to do that is treat them with 

dignity and treat them with respect. And that is to start teaching 

— to start teaching — the Sask Party politicians, what you got 

to do to build that system. And the first step is you respect the 

teacher. You respect the teacher, Mr. Speaker, and that is the 

one lesson I think the Sask Party government has yet to learn. 

But they will learn it pretty soon, Mr. Speaker, because the 

principal is coming soon to put them out in the hallway, put 

them out in the hallway for a couple of hours and stand out 

there and pay penance for their sins again education, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I say today that Bill 168, a small amendment under Bill 

168, that took them three and a half years to do, that is 

ridiculous, Mr. Speaker. It is absolutely ridiculous. 

 

So when I mention names of some of the educators and some of 

the people involved with our kids, of some of the facilities and 

some of the leaders, as I mentioned Northern Lights 

representatives, I talk about some of the local leadership in 

some of these communities, some of the local teachers and the 

staff, Mr. Speaker, these are real stories. These are real people, 

these are real issues, and these are real success stories. And why 

is it, why is it, and I can’t figure out for the life of me, that the 

Sask Party is not showing them enough respect. Why is that, 

Mr. Speaker? And I can’t for the life of me figure out why 

they’re not. 

 

And one of the things I think that’s really important is that at 

the end of the day, when all the dust is settled, that teachers will 

know a number of things. They will know who got rid of the 

teachers’ assistants. They will know who done that. They will 

know who neutered the local school boards of education of 

being able to go after income from the education property tax. 

They will know who took three and a half years to go through 

minor amendments in Bill 168, the Bill of which I’m speaking 

today. They will know who toyed with the educational funding 

model and put it till after the election before they dealt with, 

before they deal with it. They will know some of these issues, 

Mr. Speaker, very, very well and they’ll know it. 

 

They’ll know it sooner than the November election, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s one of the things that the Sask Party is 

hoping never happens. They hope the teachers never know what 

kind of game that they’re playing, the Sask Party’s political 

game. But, Mr. Speaker, rest assured STF and the teachers are 

fully aware of the games of the Minister of Education and the 

Sask Party government and their leader, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So once again I think it’s important that people out there in 

Saskatchewan know that from the NDP perspective, we support 

and we protect and we want to enhance our teachers’ lives so 

they become freer to teach our kids more, free to do things that 

they want to do given the proper resources that they so richly 

deserve, to make sure they continue offering hope, and that you 

don’t see teachers leaving this industry, going off to some other 

provinces or pray it never happens to the extent that it’s 

happened in other areas where you see a lot of teachers leaving 

a lot of communities, especially in northern Saskatchewan 

because, Mr. Speaker, that would be certainly a crying shame 

for our north and certainly a crying shame for our province. 

 

[15:45] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s time for these guys to own up, the 

Saskatchewan Party, to own up to our teachers. And if it takes 

you three and a half years to deal with Bill 168, well then 

shame on you. You should have done this a long time ago, not 

three and a half years for some minor amendments as attached 

to Bill 168. And shame on you for holding off the education 

funding till after the next election because we see right through 

it as an opposition, and every single teacher sees right through 

this ploy, this political game you’re playing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they will come up with their own theories as 

to why they’re doing that. And as I had mentioned in the earlier 

comment, that we certainly have our theories as to why they’re 

doing that, Mr. Speaker . . . is there’s going to be a lot of bad 

changes under that government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And given the fact that Saskatchewan has enjoyed a great 

amount of wealth, Mr. Speaker, they have enjoyed a great 

amount of wealth. They have seen the economy move forward, 

and things are really happening, Mr. Speaker. And the sad thing 

is, Mr. Speaker, is the Sask Party really had nothing to do with 

that. They inherited all that good news. They inherited all that 

money. They inherited all that economy. Everything was just 

moving in the right direction, and along came the Sask Party, 

and they’ve had just a grand old time spending their inheritance, 

Mr. Speaker. Every single person in Saskatchewan knows that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, time will show. Time will show the 

weakness of this leader and of this party, because quite frankly 

at the end of the day, once the inheritance is gone and tough 

times start rolling around, that’s when decisions in leadership 

will show. 

 

Right now the money’s there, and they’re paying off their 

friends, and they’re ignoring a lot of key groups, Mr. Speaker 

— whether it’s the Aboriginal people, whether it’s the 

chiropractors, or whether it’s the teachers. You can’t sustain 



7256 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2011 

that kind of building up of enemies because they’re going to get 

together, and they’re going to throw you out of that office and 

say you’re out of there because you didn’t deal with the issues 

despite the fact that you had the money. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned at the outset, I watched today 

some of the news clippings around President Obama, and he has 

a tough task of rebuilding the economy and rebuilding the 

budget and the deficit they’re facing within the States. That’s a 

huge challenge. It’s a tremendous challenge. And President 

Obama was there, taking the challenge head-on, and saying 

what fights he has, what issues he’s got to show, and he’s got to 

provide that leadership, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Sask Party’s never really had any problems since they got 

into office because they had all the money. They had the 

booming economy. And all they done was they helped their 

friends out, Mr. Speaker. That’s all they done is they helped 

their friends out. They really had no challenges. It was a huge 

gift to them. So they get this money, and they get this booming 

economy. It’s easy to be a government when you have all this 

money coming in. And guess what, Mr. Speaker? They forget 

once again the basic rule of making sure you stay in 

government, and that is to treat people well and treat them with 

respect. 

 

And when it comes to the teaching profession, they done 

nothing of that, Mr. Speaker. They showed total disdain and 

disregard for the teaching profession. And the reason why, Mr. 

Speaker — it’s proved right here under Bill 168 — is because it 

took them three and a half years to do a minor amendment to 

the last agreement. Imagine for a moment how many years it’ll 

take them to come up with a long-term funding agreement and a 

salary agreement with STF following the next election. 

 

I think what’s going to happen is they’re going to ignore the 

teaching profession, and they’re going to see a lot of teachers 

leave this industry and, in my case, leave the North. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s going to have a huge price for Saskatchewan for 

many, many years. 

 

Our students, our northern communities, our northern people 

need our teachers. We need our schools and they need it to be 

. . . make sure that the education foundation is solid for northern 

Saskatchewan. And we see no evidence whatsoever, whatsoever 

from that party. And, Mr. Speaker, do they care? No. It’s not 

fair and the Sask Party don’t care. 

 

And I’m telling teachers all throughout northern Saskatchewan, 

you start that phrase, start that chant: it is not fair; the Sask 

Party don’t care. When it comes to teaching, to properly 

supporting our teachers, they’re not doing. That’s not fair; they 

don’t care, Mr. Speaker. And I go on and on about the 

thousands of examples and the hundreds of teachers and the 

manner in which they’re being treated and the disregard and the 

disdain and them not recognizing the local leadership in the 

building of schools, in the building of students, in the building 

of staff, that they’re not doing nothing to reward these teachers 

with a decent sense of respect towards them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s why I go back to saying to a lot of teachers out there, 

if it took them three and a half years to deal with this small, 

little Bill which had a few amendments to it, three and a half 

years to deal with one small Bill, imagine the time and imagine 

the hurt and imagine the pain to come yet when they start 

talking about a collective agreement, when they start talking 

about major investments into our schools, when they start 

talking about facilities, Mr. Speaker. Imagine how bad it’ll 

become under a Sask Party government. Three and a half years 

for minor amendments to Bill 168 and, Mr. Speaker, the big 

issues are coming yet to this government, and they have not 

shown any respect for the teaching profession. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more to say about this and a lot 

more to say about a lot of educational challenges in the North. 

And we’ll continue standing up here and taking on that 

government to make sure they do it properly and to do it right. 

And therefore I’d like to adjourn debate on Bill 168 for now. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — The member from 

Athabasca has moved adjournment of debate on Bill 168, the 

teachers superannuation and disability benefits Bill. Is the 

Assembly ready to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 155 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 155 — The 

Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I recognize the 

member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 

extremely pleased this afternoon to stand and enter into debate 

on a very important issue before this legislature and on behalf 

of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of this province value their natural 

resources, and they take the issue of the protection of their 

natural resources very seriously. And, Mr. Speaker, we have 

seen a history from this government since it came to power 

three years ago that undermines the importance of those natural 

resources, particularly, Mr. Speaker, in dealing with the issue of 

protected lands. And over the last three years, we’ve seen a 

significant erosion of the protection of lands that people value 

very strongly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So whenever we have a piece of legislation coming forward that 

deals with the protection of our natural resources, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re going to examine it very carefully and be somewhat 

skeptical about what the intent of this government is. Mr. 

Speaker, it would be, without doubt, a major concern to many 

in the province if we didn’t evaluate natural resource 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, very thoroughly and analyze all the 

implications and potential pitfalls of legislation prior to passing 

it through to committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just a year ago we had representatives from many, 

many organizations that were concerned about 3 million acres 

of prime protected land being taken out of protection, Mr. 



April 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7257 

Speaker, and being placed at the whim of the Ministry of the 

Environment, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, that land 

previously was protected in legislation and needed a change in 

that legislation in debate in this Assembly prior to the sale or 

disposition of any of that land. And, Mr. Speaker, that was done 

for a reason. It was done so that we — those of us who are 

elected on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan — had to in 

each and every occasion debate, analyze, and look at the 

removal of any land from protection, Mr. Speaker. And that was 

there because the people of this province wanted it that way. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, with the change a little over a year ago and 

now 3 million acres aren’t protected in the same way, the 

government ministry can sell off or de-designate that land 

without debate in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, without the 

people of Saskatchewan even knowing. Mr. Speaker, the people 

of Saskatchewan wouldn’t know about it until after they’d done 

it, Mr. Speaker, and when, Mr. Speaker, we would see an order 

in council posted that it had occurred and we’d find out only 

after it had occurred. 

 

In the past, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we had the ability to debate, 

challenge, re-evaluate each and every situation prior to it being 

removed from protection, Mr. Speaker, prior to it being sold 

off, Mr. Speaker, and today we don’t have that protection. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s part of this province’s heritage, part of this 

province’s environmental value, the fact that we had protected 

prime land, Mr. Speaker, that had special environmental value 

to the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. And now we don’t 

have that level of protection because the existing government 

removed that protection and put it in the hands or the control of 

the cabinet, Mr. Speaker, of the ministry. And only after, only 

after the action is completed would the opposition find out or 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we’re dealing with legislation that deals 

with the protection of our natural resources, the people of this 

province want the opposition to be very diligent in their 

examination of the legislation, to look very carefully at the 

aspects of and implications of that legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

because we’ve already seen a very detrimental change made by 

this government, a very detrimental change that takes away the 

protection from very important habitat land in our province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we’re looking at this particular 

piece of legislation, on the surface, the Bill looks innocuous. It 

looks like there is very little to be concerned about. It looks like 

there’s very little to be . . . that very few implications, Mr. 

Speaker. But as you see in every piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, the devil’s in the detail. The devil is always in the 

detail, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, so what are the implications of the changes 

under this legislation? And that is what we’re here to debate 

today and what we will need to debate over the next several 

weeks, Mr. Speaker, and in committee because the people of 

Saskatchewan have a right to know what the potential 

implications are. We need to expose what pitfalls there are in 

this legislation, Mr. Speaker, and we need to examine whether 

this is the right course for the people of Saskatchewan and the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with the history of the current government and 

their removal of land from protection under The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act, Mr. Speaker, we need to question 

whether or not these changes are in fact removing the role of 

protecting, Mr. Speaker, protecting our fisheries and protecting 

our hunting and the responsibility of government to an 

advisory, an advisory council, Mr. Speaker, appointed by the 

government. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, how do we know then what happens? Again 

because it’s once removed again from government, the 

accountability, the transparency, the reporting, Mr. Speaker — 

those are things that are of absolute importance to the people of 

this province because it’s our heritage. It’s in fact the peoples’ 

land. It’s the peoples’ resources. It belongs to future 

generations. It belongs to our children and our grandchildren, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

It doesn’t belong to those of us who just sit in this Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t belong to the members of the cabinet. It 

doesn’t belong to the Premier. It belongs to every single person 

in this province, Mr. Speaker. And it’s put aside and protected 

not just for this generation, Mr. Speaker, but for future 

generations — our children, our grandchildren, Mr. Speaker. 

And it is our responsibility to continue to protect, protect, Mr. 

Speaker, our land, our habitat, and our wildlife so that those 

children can enjoy the things that we can enjoy today, and that 

we don’t have to worry about our children having pristine lakes, 

Mr. Speaker, wildlife areas in which to hunt, beautiful forests in 

which to visit and camp, Mr. Speaker. It’s important that we 

today, in establishing our practices and our rules and principles 

on a move-forward basis are absolutely certain that we are 

protecting those things for our children and our grandchildren. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, those of us who are elected have an 

opportunity to influence the outcomes of even something as 

important as the environment, Mr. Speaker. And we have to 

take that responsibility seriously because I want my grandson, 

and I would like your grandchildren, Mr. Speaker, and other 

grandchildren across this province to have the opportunities to 

have those pristine lakes to fish and to hunt, Mr. Speaker, to 

have forests to visit, to camp in, Mr. Speaker. The protection of 

our environment, the protection of our wildlife, and the 

protection of what is important to future generations rests with 

us. Ultimately we have the responsibility of making the rules. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And there’s also the concern any time, Mr. Speaker, when 

we’re pushing that responsibility off to a third party. Because as 

we push the responsibility of government further away from the 

control of government, Mr. Speaker, it becomes more difficult, 

more difficult and more timely to understand exactly what’s 

going on. Now I’m not saying that other organizations and the 

council, Mr. Speaker, advisory council is necessarily bad. But 

again it doesn’t flesh out exactly what decisions will be made 

by the environment . . . the advisory council, pardon me, Mr. 

Speaker. It says that any other responsibilities that are assigned 

by the minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the responsibility for the protection of our 

wildlife, the protection of our environment, our habitat for 

future generations doesn’t rest with an advisory board. It rests 



7258 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2011 

with those of us who are elected by the people of Saskatchewan 

to represent them in this legislature. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, any time that the responsibilities of 

government and the responsibilities of the legislature are being 

pushed to another party further out from the influence of 

government, further away from the ability of members of this 

Assembly to debate, to talk about, and to influence the 

outcomes, Mr. Speaker, I have concerns, as should all the 

people of Saskatchewan. Because, Mr. Speaker, an advisory 

council appointed by the minister doesn’t have the same 

responsibilities. They’re accountable to a minister or to a 

government, not accountable directly to the people of 

Saskatchewan in the same way the members of this Assembly 

are. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I could be held to account for the positions I 

take in this legislature directly by the people of Saskatchewan. 

An advisory board appointed by the minister cannot. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that is an important differentiation. It’s an important 

difference that really needs to be understood as we look at 

whether or not we should pass responsibility to third parties for 

something as important as the environmental protection of our 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, on the surface this Bill 

looks innocuous; it looks like there are very few implications to 

the changes. But as I indicated, the devil’s always in the detail, 

and, Mr. Speaker, we don’t have a great deal of detail here. 

What we have is the responsibility of what used to be the Fish 

and Wildlife Development Fund being placed in a new advisory 

council, Mr. Speaker, including greater responsibility for the 

fund’s finances, Mr. Speaker, what the money can be used for. 

And that leaves implications for the stability of the fund in the 

long run, Mr. Speaker. It leaves questions about who the fund is 

accountable to, Mr. Speaker. Does it still remain totally 

accountable to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? Those 

are all questions that are important to the people of this 

province. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to discredit in any way anybody 

that would be appointed to this advisory council. I believe 

people who are appointed to these councils or to the wildlife 

fund have the absolute best interest of the people of 

Saskatchewan in their interests. But, Mr. Speaker, they don’t 

have that same level of accountability as members of this 

Assembly do, because ultimately the responsibility for the 

protection of our environment and our wildlife habitat and our 

wildlife itself rests with the legislature of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, those elected to have that responsibility, Mr. Speaker, 

not advisory boards or councils. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the organizations that receive support from 

the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund do valuable work in 

our province, and none of us are going to question the valuable 

work those organizations have done and continue to do, Mr. 

Speaker, and we expect will do into the future. That’s not 

what’s at question here. What’s at question is: where should the 

role start and end, where should the responsibility lie, and who 

has the final accountability, Mr. Speaker? And I think that final 

accountability should be clearly defined. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a year ago, as I indicated a few minutes ago, we 

were dealing with The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, and I 

can tell you many in the province, many in the province 

including our First Nations, were not in favour of removing the 

wildlife habitat from legislation, Mr. Speaker. The protection of 

that wildlife habitat from legislation was important to the 

people of this province. It had been protected by legislation for 

about 30 years prior to this change, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And actually the concept came into being under a Conservative 

government in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 

Colin, I believe it was Colin Maxwell was the minister 

responsible at the time who put in place the concept or premise 

that we would protect habitat land through legislation in such a 

way that we’d set aside reserves of land so future generations, 

our children and grandchildren, can enjoy the same beautiful, 

pristine environment that you and I had the opportunity to see 

when we were children, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, over the years that land has been protected up 

until a year ago. And now it’s been removed from legislation, 

and its protection is no longer the subject of debate in this 

Assembly before changes can be made. And that was an 

important step. Now some could say it’s wasted time and it 

doesn’t . . . It has implications that delays changes, Mr. 

Speaker. And yes, it does. Clearly democracy takes time. But 

there’s a reason that it was protected. It was protected for future 

generations. It was protected for our children and grandchildren. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act there 

are implications to changing the scope of the responsibilities of 

the advisory council, of the fund itself, what can be charged to 

the fund, what can be paid out of the fund, Mr. Speaker. It has 

implications dealing with the stability of the fund. It has 

implications dealing with the longevity of the fund, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The fund has traditionally been there to restock the fisheries, 

Mr. Speaker, and to protect wildlife in our province, Mr. 

Speaker. It is funded by fishing licences and hunting licences, 

Mr. Speaker. Those who use, users of those services paid for 

the fund, Mr. Speaker, and the fund was used to ensure that 

there was a plentiful supply of wildlife and fish, fisheries, Mr. 

Speaker, in which future generations would have the same 

opportunities to be involved in the activities of fishing and 

hunting that we currently have. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the changes can have implications on future 

levels of angling and hunting, Mr. Speaker, whether or not the 

sufficient amounts of funds are available to continue with the 

restocking at appropriate levels in lakes across the province, 

Mr. Speaker, or whether or not there’s adequate species out 

there to hunt in various areas of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

Those things can change over time. And so there may be fewer 

licences sold and less money going into the fund, Mr. Speaker. 

So if you drain more money out of the fund, which was 

designed originally for one purpose, Mr. Speaker, and allow it 

to be used for much broader purposes, Mr. Speaker, does in fact 

the fund deplete itself over time? And does that then put at risk, 

does that put at risk, Mr. Speaker, the future restocking of lakes, 

Mr. Speaker, the future wildlife management of our province? 

And I think those are things that need to be considered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the activities seem to be continuing to grow. Both 



April 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7259 

angling and hunting are growing. Then the scope of what’s 

available will grow as well, Mr. Speaker. But if we have a 

downturn in the activities of angling and hunting, Mr. Speaker, 

and we have less funds going into the fund over time, Mr. 

Speaker, then we’re going to have a problem, particularly if 

we’re spending the reserves today for purposes other than what 

they were intended to when the fund was put in place. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have a responsibility as the members of 

the legislature to ensure the long-term prosperity of those 

resources for future generations, Mr. Speaker, and for those 

who use, Mr. Speaker, these resources as a way of life as well, 

Mr. Speaker. Many of our First Nations and Métis people in 

northern Saskatchewan, fishing, hunting, and living off 

trapping, Mr. Speaker, is fundamental to their way of life. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we need to ensure that we are protecting, we are 

protecting those resources for future generations in the North as 

well. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, responsible management of our resources is 

a responsibility of government. It’s important that we not 

deplete funds by allowing diversion of funds from the wildlife 

habitat fund to other purposes, Mr. Speaker, without close 

examination. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m also concerned any time we see a reduction in 

accountability of government and less transparency. As we 

move the accountability and transparency one level away from 

the government directly, Mr. Speaker, then it becomes less 

transparent, Mr. Speaker. Members of this Assembly have less 

opportunity and ability to directly see where those funds are, 

Mr. Speaker, how they’re being spent on a yearly basis, and to 

question the spending of those funds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s very important, very, very important, that we 

continue to have the level of accountability, a greater level of 

transparency and openness around these funds, Mr. Speaker, so 

that we can in fact exercise the rights to ensure that we are 

going to provide for future generations the same level of 

wildlife protection, wildlife habitat, Mr. Speaker, and wildlife 

species for those generations and children, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the changes are going to give additional authority 

to the advisory council to determine how the funds are spent, 

Mr. Speaker, including how much remuneration and expenses 

will be paid to those who sit on the advisory council, Mr. 

Speaker. Those are things that traditionally in the past were set 

by government. Now it’s going to be set by a body itself that 

has control of the fund, Mr. Speaker — money, by the way, that 

is coming through the Government of Saskatchewan. It’s 

taxpayer-funded, Mr. Speaker, funded by the people of 

Saskatchewan through those angling licences and hunting 

licences. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m not in the least trying to say that these 

people who’d be on the advisory council are anything but 

dedicated to the purpose of which the advisory council is being 

put in place for. So, Mr. Speaker, it’s one step removed from 

the current level of accountability. It’s one step removed from 

the accountability of government, and one step removed from 

the accountability of this legislature, Mr. Speaker, and that 

concerns me. It concerns me because this is public dollars, Mr. 

Speaker, and transparency and accountability of public dollars 

is absolutely important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we as members of the legislature were 

elected by the people of Saskatchewan to represent them on 

these types of issues. We’re there to make the decisions on 

behalf of our constituents and on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan. And it’s our responsibility to be accountable to 

how government money is spent on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, everything we do should 

increase accountability and transparency, Mr. Speaker. It 

shouldn’t decrease accountability and transparency by moving 

it further away from the decision makers, Mr. Speaker, the 

people who in fact have that accountability and responsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in fact the current government will have an 

opportunity before the end of this session to deal with the issue 

of accountability and transparency on all contracts, leases and, 

Mr. Speaker, agreements that would be entered in upon by the 

people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, by the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the official opposition today, at first reading of a 

piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, that’s all about openness, 

accountability, and transparency, Mr. Speaker, this piece of 

legislation would in fact make it so that any member of this 

Assembly can get any contract the government enters into so 

that the official opposition could hold the government 

accountable for its actions and how it spends money on behalf 

of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So the people of 

Saskatchewan can have a much greater opportunity to see how 

the government is spending money, Mr. Speaker, and to hold 

the government accountable for spending money in a manner in 

which the people of Saskatchewan would want it spent, Mr. 

Speaker, not necessarily just the Government of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So today people in this province are wanting, as they are across 

the country, Mr. Speaker, greater openness and transparency, 

less secrecy from government. They want to know what their 

government is doing. They want to be able to understand what 

the government’s doing on their behalf, Mr. Speaker, and how 

the government is spending their money. Because ultimately, 

Mr. Speaker, the government doesn’t have money that doesn’t 

belong to the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

Governments don’t have money that doesn’t belong to the 

people of the province. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we’re spending public money, when 

we’re spending public money, Mr. Speaker, we have to be 

open, transparent, and accountable to the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, the official 

opposition is moving forward with very important legislation, 

Mr. Speaker, to increase accountability, create openness . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — What is the House 

Leader’s point of order? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that we are 

discussing Bill No. 155, The Natural Resources Amendment 

Act, not a private member’s Bill that the member’s just 

introduced. What is the relevance of the member’s speech, Mr. 

Speaker? 



7260 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2011 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I recognize the 

member from P.A. Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the point of order. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — You can speak to 

the point of order. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the Speaker will 

well know, with debates of these kind in the legislature when 

we’re speaking to Bills, there is some degree of latitude that is 

allowed in these debates. In order to make a point that’s 

relevant to the Bill, the member was getting around to making a 

point directly to this Bill with a short reference to another Bill 

that’s before the House in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 

something that’s very appropriate and is done often. And I 

suspect that the Speaker will note that in his ruling. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I was listening very 

carefully to the speaker, to Regina Dewdney . . . to the member 

from Regina Dewdney, and I have to admit that yes, it was 

getting a little carried away going over onto the private 

member’s Bill. So I would ask you to please stick to Bill 155, 

The Natural Resources Amendment Act. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I was 

talking about Bill 155, natural resources amendment Act, Mr. 

Speaker. And I was talking about in detail how the removal of 

responsibility to a third party, which was once a responsibility 

of government, delineates the responsibility of government, Mr. 

Speaker, and its accountability. I think that I’ve spoke for some 

time about that and talking about people’s expectation for 

greater accountability, transparency, Mr. Speaker, and how we 

can deliver that in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we move forward on a very 

important piece of legislation that deals with the protection of 

our natural resources in our province, Mr. Speaker, the people 

expect the legislature and expect members of this legislature to 

keep control of certain responsibilities, Mr. Speaker, and not 

push it further away where there’s less accountability, where we 

don’t know, Mr. Speaker, to the same degree what is being 

done by an advisory council, Mr. Speaker, and when public 

funds are being expended in a less transparent way than they 

would have been in the past, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we look at Bill 155, as I said 

earlier, it looks like an innocuous Bill until you start getting into 

the detail, Mr. Speaker. And we see a change in the 

responsibilities of the current wildlife fund to an advisory 

council, Mr. Speaker. And any responsibility that the minister 

deems necessary can be transferred to that fund, Mr. Speaker, 

and that will include and does include transfer of employees, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

My understanding of this Bill would see the potential transfer of 

some employees that are currently employed in the Department 

of the Environment, Mr. Speaker, to be employed by an 

advisory council, Mr. Speaker, so that biologists that would 

have the responsibility of monitoring the species and fish in our 

lakes and in our forests and across our province, Mr. Speaker, 

would now be monitored by an advisory council where those 

employees doing that same monitoring in the past would have 

been directly responsible to the ministry, directly responsible to 

the legislature, Mr. Speaker, the department, the minister, and 

ultimately then to this legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So removing that responsibility one level further out, Mr. 

Speaker, goes to my whole issue about accountability, 

transparency, Mr. Speaker. And I talked about how people of 

this province want us to be more open, more accountable, and 

more transparent, Mr. Speaker, not less. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, moving forward, particularly with the 

protection of the environment and our wildlife, Mr. Speaker, 

there are concerns. And these concerns need to be fully fleshed 

out and fully debated and fully talked about prior to moving 

forward with this legislation, Mr. Speaker.  

 

Mr. Speaker, why would the government want to remove the 

responsibility of the protection of these species — fish and 

other forms of wildlife, Mr. Speaker — from direct government 

and have those biologists within an advisory council or 

employed by an advisory council, Mr. Speaker? Those are 

questions that need to be answered, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Those are concerns that need to be examined in detail, Mr. 

Speaker, because the people of this province want to protect 

their wildlife. They want to protect their environmental habitat, 

Mr. Speaker, and they want to ensure that future generations, 

our children and grandchildren, have the opportunities that we 

had. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the responsibility of a 

government. It’s a responsibility of the government to protect 

the environment, protect the habitat, and protect the wildlife 

species in our province, Mr. Speaker. And we need to take that 

responsibility seriously. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as we’re moving forward and examining what 

should be contained in legislation in this province, Mr. Speaker, 

and what should be passed off to third parties, Mr. Speaker, or 

pushed more distant from direct control of government, we 

need to understand whether or not, one, it’s better; two, do the 

people want it; thirdly, Mr. Speaker, does it benefit the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we’re pushing or we’re moving employees out 

of government departments because the Government of 

Saskatchewan of today picks a number out of the air and says 

they’re going to reduce the civil service by 15 per cent over four 

years, so they start pushing employees into third party agencies 

that the Government of Saskatchewan still funds and pays, Mr. 

Speaker, well then that becomes a mug’s game, or it becomes, 

you know, what’s under cup number one, what’s under cup 

number two, Mr. Speaker. The end result is the people of 

Saskatchewan are still financing that employment, Mr. Speaker, 

they’re still expecting them to do a job. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we need to understand that. We’ve seen this 

government make a promise to reduce the civil service by 15 

per cent and then create a number of independent agencies they 

pushed employees to, Mr. Speaker. They’re still being paid for 

by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They’re still, 

Mr. Speaker, there to carry out largely the exact same function, 

Mr. Speaker. But they pick an artificial number out of the air, 

Mr. Speaker, and then they try to live up to it. 

 



April 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7261 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a mug’s game. It doesn’t change things. It 

doesn’t make any real difference except they’re trying to make 

the people of Saskatchewan believe one thing, when in reality it 

hasn’t changed. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we need to understand that fully before we’re 

prepared to look at moving this legislation forward, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s legislation that isn’t clear and transparent in what 

its final outcomes are going to be. It creates an advisory council 

without saying what the total role of that advisory council will 

be. It gives the ability of the minister to give additional 

responsibilities to that advisory council without coming to this 

legislature for debating what those are. It gives the advisory 

council the ability to spend money, Mr. Speaker, without 

coming back to this Assembly for approval, Mr. Speaker. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that is money that has been set aside by the people 

of Saskatchewan through their government, Mr. Speaker, 

through their government for the protection of wildlife species 

in our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think it’s important for future generations and for future 

families that we have adequate opportunities for future 

generations to fish and trap and hunt in our province, Mr. 

Speaker, for those who do it recreationally, Mr. Speaker, but 

also for those who make a living doing it as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to understand that the 

outfitting and trapping industry in our province brings literally 

millions of dollars into our province, Mr. Speaker, through 

others who come to our province to take advantage of our great 

environmental opportunities, to take advantage of the beautiful 

lakes and forests that we have and the hunting opportunities we 

have, Mr. Speaker. It is an economy in itself, Mr. Speaker, 

where many, many communities and individuals make their 

living. Many communities benefit from the fact that people 

purchase their fishing equipment or they purchase food to go on 

hunting trips and their fishing trips, Mr. Speaker. Many 

northern communities benefit from the fact that we have the 

environmental opportunities or the wildlife opportunities we 

have in our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we need to ensure that we protect that, not just for those 

communities but for future generations, and that in everything 

we do, Mr. Speaker, we’re looking towards protecting that for 

future generations. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I look at this particular Bill and I 

understand that literally, you know, 3 or $4 million a year is 

spent just promoting hunting and fishing in our province, Mr. 

Speaker, just promoting it. And it brings great economic 

opportunity to our province, Mr. Speaker. And we need to 

ensure through our actions and activities through this fund, Mr. 

Speaker, that we are continuing to restock our lakes, that we are 

continuing to ensure that we have a vibrant and vital wildlife 

habitat in our province so that hunters and fishers continue to 

want to come to this province as well, Mr. Speaker, for its 

economic opportunity for those communities and for those 

outfitters and businesses that make their living through this 

activity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So there are many, many aspects to the changes that are being 

made and potential implications on various areas in our 

province, Mr. Speaker, both on the business side, both on the 

environmental side, Mr. Speaker, and of course on the impact to 

future generations, our habitat, Mr. Speaker, and our wildlife 

species, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think I have several members who would 

like to speak on this Bill in the future, Mr. Speaker. This is an 

important issue. Our environment and our wildlife habitat and 

the wildlife species of our province, our people, are important 

to the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. And it is our 

responsibility to protect it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have to take that responsibility very 

seriously. We have to consider, prior to passing any legislation, 

what the impacts are on future generations, on our lakes and 

environment and on our habitat, Mr. Speaker, and on those 

businesses and the economy that comes from the opportunities 

that they present for the people of our province and for those 

individuals who are involved in the outfitting and the sale of 

products used in hunting, camping, and fishing in our province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I am at this time not prepared to pass this Bill 

to committee. I think it needs to have further examination by a 

number of my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, prior to it going to 

committee, Mr. Speaker. So I think I need at this time to 

adjourn debate on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, to allow my 

colleagues in the future to have the opportunity to speak to this 

Bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — The member from 

Regina Dewdney has moved adjournment of debate on Bill 155, 

The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 164 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert that Bill No. 164 — The 

Police Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I recognize the 

member from Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to follow the hon. member for Dewdney, only on a 

different Bill of course. I’m speaking to Bill 164, An Act to 

amend The Police Act, 1990. 

 

And this Act, Mr. Speaker, we’ve only had three speakers on it 

so far, so it’s fairly new to the Chamber for our ability to look at 

the Act, our ability to reach out and try and connect with people 

that are affected by this significant Bill. And I call it a 

significant Bill partly for some of the things that are in the Bill, 

that it purports to do or tries to do. But I call it a significant Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, because The Police Act . . . Well let me just 

describe it. 

 

We have a municipal police Act that affects Regina, Saskatoon, 

Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Corman Park, and the cities of 



7262 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2011 

Estevan and Weyburn, and there’s part of this Bill that will just 

enfold all of the rest, all of Saskatchewan. So we have literally 

thousands of police officers. When you take the municipal 

police forces that I listed here and then you add in the RCMP 

[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] that are spoken to in this Act 

as well, we have literally thousands of active police officers that 

are affected by this very Bill, Bill 164. 

 

And then you have to throw in a little bit of consideration for 

their spouses, their families because any time we’re changing, 

potentially changing terms of employment — and I’ll get to that 

later in my speech — but any time we’re potentially changing 

employment or terms of employment, it affects not just the 

employee and employer. It affects the families, and it reaches 

out and affects the communities right across Saskatchewan. 

 

[16:30] 

 

So what I’m suggesting, Mr. Speaker, is this is a very 

significant Bill. It affects literally thousands of active police 

officers and then many more people that are involved in their 

families and friends. And it clearly is an issue for every 

municipality in Saskatchewan because municipalities have to 

deal with policing, in it’s a responsibility to deal with policing 

in their municipalities, certainly the major centres that I 

described. 

 

And I’ll go through the list because I represent a Regina riding. 

I don’t want anyone to get the impression that I just want to 

centre this around Regina or Saskatoon because there is also 

Estevan and there is Weyburn and there’s Moose Jaw and there 

is Prince Albert and there is Corman Park. I hope I mentioned 

Prince Albert. But those are the centres that have their own 

police forces. And it’s important that we . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . I look forward, you know, Mr. Speaker, to 

government members standing and speaking to their own 

legislation, and I won’t get involved in the sidebar conversation 

because I have some things that I do feel are important to say in 

this Bill, and I want to stay focused on that. 

 

Every community, every community is involved in this, every 

single community, and every citizen is affected by this. Next to 

health, you know, health affects every citizen in the province, 

and I know that the Minister of Health understands that. 

Policing also affects every citizen in this province, and I know 

that the minister that sits right behind the Minister of Health 

understands that too because that minister introduced this Bill 

not very long ago in this very Chamber. 

 

The Bill is significant in who it affects and who will be affected 

by it. But it’s also significant, Mr. Speaker. There’s 24 clauses. 

Many of our Bills are, some as simple as three clauses, some 

six, eight, ten clauses. This one’s got 24 clauses in it, so it’s not 

some relatively minor changes to the way that the policing will 

take place. It’s significant changes. 

 

We have the spectre in Saskatchewan of a government that has 

said they’ve done the consulting. They’ve said they’ve done the 

due diligence. Frankly, Mr. Speaker, we have to question that 

for two reasons. One, it’s the job of the opposition to question 

whether the government has in fact done the consulting that 

they claim they have and to make certain that that consultation 

is adequate. That’s part of our responsibility as Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

But part of it too is we’ve had a little example earlier today in 

question period. We have the St. Peter’s College and Carlton 

Trail community college where the government claimed to have 

done its due diligence, claimed to have done the consultation. 

And as that mystery unravels more and more, as that unravels 

more and more, it becomes apparent that the government’s 

claims of having done its consultation, Mr. Speaker, have not 

happened. 

 

If they missed it, if they missed it so badly in the St. Peter’s 

College and Carlton Trail community college amalgamation 

that was being forced by the government, if they missed the 

consultation and they missed the warning signs so bad in that, it 

does not lend itself for us having confidence that Bill 164, An 

Act to amend The Police Act, has had the adequate consultation. 

If a government . . . once every time you misrepresent the 

accuracy of what actually happened, every time you 

misrepresent that, it takes away the credibility of all else that 

you try to do. 

 

I recall as one of the very earliest stories I ever had, ever heard 

and ever learned, was the little boy that cried wolf. And I mean, 

we all know that fairy tale, the little boy that cried wolf, and it 

led to tragic, tragic end. Had the little boy simply told the truth 

at every point, at the critical juncture, people would have 

believed him and the day would have been saved. 

 

So the consultation and the due diligence on this, frankly, we 

have to question whether it’s adequate or not. I hope that it is as 

was portrayed by the government, that it’s an adequate and a 

good consultation. We owe that to the police forces of 

Saskatchewan. We owe it to the municipalities and the 

ratepayers that fund it, the municipalities that look after the 

administrivia of it and making sure that the police forces are 

paid for and that they’re properly adjudicated. We owe that to 

all of those, and we certainly owe it to the population of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We owe it to make sure that that 

due diligence was done. We owe it to make sure that the 

consultation was done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill itself, Bill 164, has some things that we’re 

told, on the surface, we’re told are good changes. And there is 

always some good and often a bit of bad with the good. And by 

that, I want to just pick up on one of the little . . . I shouldn’t say 

little. It’s a significant thing. It’s we’re told that the potential 

cost is upward of $100,000 which could . . . you know, when 

it’s spent here, it’s not available to be spent somewhere else 

because governance, governing is all about choices. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the costs of investigations when there is a 

complaint against a police force or against an officer or a police 

chief or, you know, a complaint against the force, much of 

those costs are currently picked up by the municipality that is 

responsible for that police force. This Act removes a significant 

part of that cost and puts the burden on the provincial 

government, and that’s not entirely a bad thing. Where it runs 

into what we have to guard against is we have to guard against 

removing responsibility to try and make sure that your police 

force is properly run and properly governed and that things are 

being done lawfully and carefully and adequately. That is, we 

have to make sure we have the proper governance of all of our 



April 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7263 

police forces. 

 

If we don’t, the risk that we have by the provincial government 

picking up an increasing part of the tab for investigations into 

complaints, the downside of that is there is less reason for a 

police force or a local municipality to even worry about it. Who 

cares how many complaints there are? The provincial 

government will fund, massively fund the majority of the cost 

of investigations. So there’s less responsibility to make sure that 

your police force is adequately governed and adequately 

operated in your own municipality. 

 

The same can be said for the mediation services. The one 

typically will lead to the other. Once you’re finished with the 

investigation part, then you have to somehow square the 

situation with the complainant on the one hand and the police 

force on the other hand. You have to somehow get the 

complainant and the police force to agree to a go-forward 

position because it’s just untenable otherwise. It’s not good for 

the complainant. Before somebody complains, they should feel 

legitimately that they have a real concern. 

 

So you want to address those concerns. It isn’t something that, I 

think, people, individuals would take lightly to complain about 

a police force or a police officer or a police chief. It would be 

something that an individual would feel typically powerless 

when they’re making the complaint. So they’d want that 

complaint, if they had the courage — I’ll describe it that way — 

to make the complaint formally, they would expect that it would 

be dealt with in an adequate way. And they deserve then, at 

minimum after the investigation, a proper mediation so that 

they’re not left out all on their own, that they understand what 

happened in its entirety, and that they’re accepting and able to 

accept not only what happened, but how that policing will go 

forward in the future because often, quite frankly, there is 

lessons to be learned, either by an individual police officer, 

police force, what have you. 

 

Police do a tremendous job every minute of every hour of every 

day throughout Saskatchewan. Our police forces just really do a 

tremendous job. But they’re not perfect. And they’re no more 

perfect, Mr. Speaker, than certainly I am or anyone I know. I 

just don’t know anyone that is absolutely perfect. I can’t 

involve the Speaker or else I would say with the exception of 

but, Mr. Speaker, this is the reality of our lives. 

 

So it’s a double-edged sword when the province decides its 

going to pick up some of the increasing amounts of cost of the 

investigations and the mediation, and we would want to make 

sure that part of our consultation made sure that it’s reaching an 

appropriate level of payment by the province and an appropriate 

level of responsibility of the police force involved. 

 

It’s much like the education system where none of us want to 

pay education property tax, but we want to have the 

responsibility to elect a local school board. It’s the same 

principle. If you don’t pay any taxes to a local school board, 

why do you have the right to elect them, you know? And that’s 

the same principle that I would see with the amendments to The 

Police Act. 

 

The Act, one of the very positive things it does is it allows now 

or says that the reporting of items under The Police Act must 

now go to two ministries, one of course being Justice, where it 

has always gone, and the other one being Corrections, Public 

Safety. And that’s appropriate with the current alignment that 

the Sask Party government has for division of responsibilities. 

 

And I know that at any point in the future, whether it’s next 

week, next year, 10 years from now, or at some point in the 

future, government will realign itself again. We just know that. 

That’s the way things operate. And when that realignment takes 

place, we’ll have an amendment to the Act because instead of 

there being Public Safety and Corrections and Justice, we might 

have a third ministry involved. Or maybe it’s reduced to just 

one ministry. And at that point we would, we would be able to 

make that work and make sense of it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The question that troubles me the most in this Bill is the 

removal of a cap that previously there was a population cap of 

20,000 people where, when your population got over 20,000, 

you had a responsibility to set up your own police force. That’s 

now removed. 

 

Now under this Act what can happen is, for example, the RM of 

Regina could collapse its police force and ask the RCMP, enter 

into a contract with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police to take 

over the policing of Regina. The same could happen in Prince 

Albert or Moose Jaw or Corman Park, Weyburn, Estevan, 

Saskatoon. I hope I mention P.A. again. I’m sure I did. I think 

P.A. is getting double mention in my speech, Mr. Speaker. But 

any one of these municipalities could collapse their police 

force, their existing police force and enter into a contract with 

the RCMP. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And what troubles me about this is it begs the question of, what 

municipality asked the Sask Party government for this 

amendment? What municipality is having difficulty with its, so 

much difficulty with its police force that they need this bigger 

stick for the next round of collective bargaining, this bigger 

stick that says, it’s our way or the highway? It’s our way, or 

we’ll bring in the RCM Police, and you’ll be unemployed. You 

will not have a municipal police force. 

 

Now it leads to speculation. And we all know that Saskatoon 

has had some difficulty in recent years. And I’m wondering, is 

it that Saskatoon is looking at having that big stick for 

collective bargaining, Mr. Speaker? Is that why the change from 

20,000 and the elimination of that 20,000 population cap, so 

that literally anywhere, any municipality can invite the RCMP 

to take over the policing? 

 

Who asked for it? It was absent. Who asked for it was totally 

absent in the second reading speech by the minister. No 

mention at all of who might have requested this change. 

 

But I have a profound respect and have had for all of my 

working life, a profound respect for collective bargaining. And 

this doesn’t sit well because this one, in the absence of a better 

. . . of an explanation from the government, in an absence of an 

explanation, Mr. Speaker, this just looks like it’s designed to 

undermine collective bargaining. 

 

You might ask, why is it that the member for Regina 



7264 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2011 

Coronation Park has those doubts? Well we don’t need to go 

very far. We can go to the last session of the legislature when 

there was some draconian legislation introduced that set up 

essential services by the Sask Party, essential services. 

 

And as an example, as an example, in some hospital settings 

under the legislation that talks of essential services, we could 

actually have in a strike situation, we have to, by law that was 

passed, have more people working in the hospital during a 

strike than are working there today. Imagine that. This level of 

employment, of numbers of workers, is safe and it’s good 

today, but as soon as you have a strike, you’ve got to have more 

people showing up. How do you have a strike? How can you 

have collective bargaining when you’re not just one hand but I 

mean you’re just tied right up? 

 

I’m not advocating strike, Mr. Speaker. I’m saying that the 

police forces deserve the right to have fair collective bargaining. 

As we said all along, that public servants, hospital workers 

deserve the right to have fair and open and honest collective 

bargaining. It doesn’t mean that every side is always happy. We 

know from, I know from 16 years experience in government 

that’s not what happens. It doesn’t matter how good a collective 

agreement is; some people will say it’s not good enough. But 

that’s the way it works. At least you have the opportunity to 

have an open dialogue. And workers have the opportunity to 

take job action that is legitimate and that is meaningful and that, 

quite frankly, disrupts things for the employer. Why do you 

have that? You have it, Mr. Speaker, so that you have some 

equalness at the bargaining table. 

 

And I know many people say, oh well, you know, the golden 

rule — whoever’s got the gold rules. And if you don’t want to 

work, you know, put in its simplicity, if you don’t want to work 

for me for $10 an hour, well don’t work. You know, and I guess 

there’s some legitimacy to that argument. But people enter into 

careers. You train to enter into whatever career it is. In a 

hospital . . . You train greatly to enter into policing. It’s difficult 

enough to get into a police force. You don’t go through all of 

that training and find yourself with 12 or 14 or some other 

number of years service in a police force, Mr. Speaker, and then 

say, oh I don’t like that collective agreement so I’m going to 

leave. You just don’t do that. You try and negotiate a fair 

collective agreement, one that you can hold your head up and 

say, I’m a member of this community. I’m respected. I’m 

appreciated. And you know what? My employer appreciates the 

job I’m doing. 

 

That’s the best world of all is when you have a willing 

employer, willing employee, and going out and every day trying 

to do the job as best we can. And that’s what the majority of 

Saskatchewan people do day after day is we get up and we try 

and do our job as best we can. But this removal of the 20,000 

person cap, the population cap, really fundamentally changes 

the collective bargaining strength and the situation. 

 

And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I think this Bill quite frankly 

should not go forward until the government can explain what it 

is they’re driving at with clause . . . I just want to make sure it’s 

clause 4. Let me read clause 4 and that’ll help me make sure 

that that’s the clause I wanted to speak to: 

 

“(1) Subject to the approval of the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council, a municipality having a population greater than 

the minimum size prescribed in the regulations may enter 

into an agreement with the Government of Canada to 

employ and pay for a sufficient number of members of 

the Royal Canadian Mounted Police to provide policing 

services within the . . . [community]”. 

 

And that’s what section 23 amended, clause 4, reads in the 

proposed Bill. And that’s, there’s no adequate explanation of 

that, and quite frankly I don’t think there’s, if there’s . . . If 

there was consultation done around that cap, it would be most 

interesting to find out which municipalities, if any, asked for 

that, that change. Is it something driven by a right wing Sask 

Party ideology? Or is it something that is being asked for, Mr. 

Speaker, by a municipality? It’s one of the two. Maybe it’s 

both. Maybe it’s both. But we have no explanation of it 

whatsoever, and so clause 4 is just totally unacceptable to us 

because of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I never got to the section 55 amended. And it is, 

and I’ll quote from that: 

 

“(1.1) If an allegation of misconduct by a chief is made to 

the board by a member, any disclosure of information for 

the purposes of that allegation does not constitute an 

offence for which the member may be disciplined 

pursuant to this Act or the regulations, unless it is 

determined that the allegation is: 

 

(a) trivial, frivolous or vexatious; or 

 

(b) unfounded and made in bad faith”. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I read that, and I’ll tell you it takes one brave 

police officer to bring a complaint against his or her own police 

chief. You are really, really — despite what may be the best of 

intentions — you are really, really at a disadvantage. In a 

municipal police force, promotions all will go through the chief 

of police. It might be recommendations come up there, but 

promotions that affect pay, that affect, you know, all sorts of 

things come through the chief of police. 

 

And I can just imagine, you know, if — I’ll pick on my 

seatmate — just if my seatmate were the chief of police and I 

was a police officer, and I had a legitimate complaint and I 

raised it, I can just see how far I would go in the future. So it is 

really a tough, tough piece of legislation that is required. And 

this is not even close, in my opinion, to tough enough. 

 

None of us want to have a frivolous or a vexatious allegation 

made against us. If I were a chief of police, I would not want a 

frivolous or vexatious accusation made against me. But I would 

want to have my police force know that if they’re convinced 

that I’m doing something wrong, they can blow the whistle. I 

would want that. I would want that. And I think that that would 

be a position that police chiefs unanimously would take. 

 

What it requires is a maturity of all to know that even though I 

may be chief of police, I am not, I am not infallible. I may make 

a mistake. And, Mr. Speaker, I may unknowingly make a 

mistake. And so if someone brings a complaint against me, I 

should be able to learn from it. 

 



April 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7265 

And you know what? If the police officer’s been harmed 

through missing a promotion or, you know, I mean pick your 

circumstance, part of it should be trying to make them whole 

again. At no point should the chief of police ever be able, in a 

position, to go after that police officer unless it is just clearly a 

personal vendetta by the police officer and clearly no other 

agenda at all other than to create trouble. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I see this section 55 amended, and I point out 

in my opinion this is a totally inadequate protection. My note on 

the Bill is, not much protection here. And that’s my note that I 

put on my copy of the Bill: not much protection here; 

whistleblower protection that is inadequate and that does not do 

what might have been the intent of this legislation. I absolutely 

say that might have been the intent of the legislation. But it does 

not go far enough because of the power situation that exists in 

particularly in a policing organization. There is just no question 

that it is very hierarchical and everything flows downhill. And 

so the whistle-blower protection is totally inadequate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill has more than its share of problems. Bill 

164, the Act to amend The Police Act, has plenty of things that 

clearly need to be better explained. Clearly if not just better 

explained they need to, they need to be changed. We need the 

whistle-blower strengthened. We need a clear explanation of the 

20,000 cap in population. We need all kinds of . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — The time now being 

5 o’clock, this Assembly stands adjourned until 10 o’clock 

tomorrow morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7235 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7235 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7235 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7235 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7236 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7236 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7245 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7246 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7236 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7236 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7237 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7237 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7237 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7237 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 National Volunteer Week 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7237 

 Day of Pink 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7238 

 Celebrating A Saskatchewan Snowboarder 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7238 

 La Ronge’s Ice Wolves Win Credit Union Cup 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7238 

 Regina Chamber of Commerce Paragon Awards 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7239 

 Highway 378 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7239 

 Remembering Gary Hyland 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7239 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Natural Gas System 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7239 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7240 

 College Merger 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7240 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7241 

 Reporting Political Donations 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7242 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7242 

 Arrangements for Office Space 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7243 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7243 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7244 

  Deputy Speaker ....................................................................................................................................................................... 7244 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Main Street Saskatchewan 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 7244 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7245 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 624 — The Contracts, Lease Agreements and Tenders Accountability and Transparency Act 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7246 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7246 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 169 — The Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Amendment Act, 2011 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7246 



 

 Bill No. 167 — The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7248 

 Bill No. 168 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7250 

 Bill No. 155 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7256 

  D’Autremont (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................ 7259 

  Furber (point of order) ........................................................................................................................................................... 7260 

  Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw) (point of order)................................................................................................................. 7260 

 Bill No. 164 — The Police Amendment Act, 2011 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7261 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


