




















































Hansard: March 23, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 36A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 23, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6865 

 March 23, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 

the interests of time, obviously we want to be a bit cautious 

about introducing all of the guests that have joined us in the 

legislature today. So may I just say, on behalf of the 

government side, how much we want to welcome all the guests 

who have come, not only I’m sure for the budget, but perhaps 

to see question period as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s an important day in the life of a province, and 

given the road conditions, we’re just very encouraged by the 

sizeable group that’s joined us here today. And so through you 

and to all members of the Assembly, we introduce our guests 

and we welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the 

Premier in welcoming all our friends, neighbours, families from 

around the province. And in light of the Premier’s comment 

about the highways, we’ll look forward to a lot of money in the 

budget for highways. But having said that, I do want to 

introduce and welcome all the people to their legislature. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan residents that 

speaks to the issue of rising rents and very low vacancy rates in 

many communities across the province. And it recognizes also 

that a majority of Canadians now live in provinces with rent 

control guidelines, including Manitoba, British Columbia, 

Ontario, Quebec, and Prince Edward Island, and that the 

argument that the private market would deliver sufficient 

affordable housing in the absence of rent control has proven to 

be false. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to consider enacting some form of rent 

control with a view to protecting Saskatchewan renters 

from unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of residents in Moose Jaw 

and Regina. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. And we know that freedom from poverty is an 

enshrined human right by the United Nations and that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security. 

Saskatchewan’s income gap between the rich and poor 

continues to grow, and now one in five children in 

Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Government of Saskatchewan act as quickly as 

possible to develop an effective and sustainable poverty 

elimination strategy for the benefit of all Saskatchewan 

citizens. 

 

And this petition is signed by citizens right across the province. 

I do so present. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition on behalf of Northern Trappers Association 

Co-operative. The fur industry has so much potential for our 

northern trappers. It is a way to educate and empower our 

northern youth and to connect them with their culture. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the provincial government to recognize that the Northern 

Trappers Association maintains the traditional values of 

hunting and trapping and also brings in millions of dollars 

to the provincial economy every year from the proceeds of 

fur harvesting combined with the economic spinoff to the 

tourism sector and to the local economy; and in so doing, 

to cause this government to stop turning their back on not 

only northern trappers, but all people who live and work 

in northern Saskatchewan; and in so doing, to cause the 

provincial government to immediately reinstate the 

funding to the Saskatchewan Northern Trappers 

Association. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of Air Ronge, La Ronge, 

Stanley Mission. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of my constituents who live in the 

neighbourhood of Hampton Village: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes to the provincial government, including education 

property taxes; that children in Hampton Village deserve 



6866 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2011 

to be able to attend school in their own community instead 

of travelling to neighbouring communities to attend 

schools that are typically already reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition live in 

Hampton Village. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition 

regarding restoring funding equity to Regina Catholic schools. 

Mr. Speaker, currently Regina Catholic school students receive 

$275 less per pupil than Regina public schools, amounting to a 

funding inequity of $2.7 million in total for Regina. That 

funding inequity places program delivery and staffing levels at 

risk. The Government of Saskatchewan has denied Catholic 

school boards in the province representation on the 

government-appointed committee mandated to develop a 

long-term funding formula for Saskatchewan school boards. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to address the funding inequity between 

Regina Catholic schools and Regina public schools that 

provides $275 less per pupil funding for Regina Catholic 

school students, totalling $2.7 million, and make known 

that the continuation for another school year of funding 

inequity places program delivery and staffing levels at risk 

in Regina Catholic schools; and in so doing, immediately 

restore funding equity to ensure that every student in 

Saskatchewan, whether enrolled in a Catholic or a public 

school, receives equitable resources to ensure every 

student in Saskatchewan has access to a quality education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition calling for community-based organization worker wage 

equity: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: workers in community-based organizations in 

Saskatchewan have traditionally been underpaid, and they 

continue to earn poverty-level wages; CBO workers care 

for and provide valuable services to some of the most 

vulnerable members of our society; the low wages of CBO 

workers results in high staff turnover, and the subsequent 

lack of caregiver continuity has a negative impact on the 

quality of care clients receive. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Government of Saskatchewan to 

implement, act as quickly as possible, a multi-year 

funding plan to ensure that CBO workers achieve wage 

equity with employees who perform work of equal value 

in government ministries, agencies, and offices. 

 

And the petition is signed by people from Willowbrook, 

Melville, Yorkton, Preeceville, Weldon, Wilkie, and Regina. I 

so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today 

to present a petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan 

concerned that the introduction of Bill 160 and its passage, if 

that indeed takes place, will have a detrimental effect on human 

rights law in the province. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

withdraw Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public 

consultations informed by a public policy paper before 

any amendments to the Human Rights Code, the law that 

supersedes all others in our province, are even considered. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Regina, Weyburn, 

and Pilot Butte, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud 

once again to rise and present petitions on behalf of concerned 

residents from across Saskatchewan as it relates to the 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

specifically to the two consecutive deficit budgets, the two 

years of debt growth, all at a time, Mr. Speaker, of revenue 

highs, unprecedented revenue highs in this province, and in fact 

adding $400 million in this past year to our public books, Mr. 

Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Carievale, Carlyle, Alida, Lampman, and White Bear Lake . . . 

Alida. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 



March 23, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6867 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Top Employer 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it is truly an honour and a pleasure to rise in the House 

today to recognize a Saskatchewan business success story. 

Magna Electric was recently named one of Saskatchewan’s top 

employers for 2011 by Mediacorp Canada. To be considered a 

top Saskatchewan employer, companies are evaluated by the 

editors of Canada’s Top 100 Employers, using the same eight 

criteria as the national competition. 

 

Magna Electric has been serving the industry and institutional 

sectors for nearly 30 years. They started out small, experienced 

steady growth, and are looking forward to a promising future 

here in Saskatchewan and beyond our provincial borders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Magna has earned the reputation among its peers 

as one of Saskatchewan’s best electrical engineering 

companies. They provide core engineering and technical 

services, electrical testing, high-voltage and relay testing, with 

an in-house electrical contractor division. Magna Electric 

acknowledges their strength to their people and focuses on 

relationships with their clients, vendors, and staff to create an 

inclusive, respectful environment for everyone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like this Assembly to join with me in 

congratulating Kerry Heid, Magna Electric, along with other 

Saskatchewan businesses that were recognized as 

Saskatchewan’s top employers for 2011. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Government Spending 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, today this government and their budget will attempt to 

draw our focus towards their 2007 election promises. This is all 

well and good, Mr. Speaker, if not for the fact that they have 

conveniently forgotten one of their most fundamental promises. 

In 2007 this government promised to keep government 

spending to 3 per cent per year, and somewhere along the line 

these Tories stopped being Tories. But don’t take just the 

opposition’s word on this. Some conservatives would agree. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Prairie director of the Taxpayers Federation, 

Colin Craig, claims the government needs to shift its focus 

from spending to debt reduction. And in a CTV [Canadian 

Television Network Ltd.] interview he said, and I quote, “If the 

government isn’t going to pay off debt during the good times, 

how will it pay off during the bad times?” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party government continues to 

use an outdated accounting system that fails to comply with 

public sector accounting standards, the only province in Canada 

to do so. Mr. Speaker, this government’s focus on spending has 

meant an increase of 32 per cent over the last three years, well 

above the 3 per cent per year promise — clearly a promise that 

was broken. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Elite Barley Top Producer 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Elite Barley 

program recently named its top 10 producers of malt barley in 

Canada, and Biggar’s Jeff Wheaton was one of the crème de la 

crème. The Elite Barley Canadian malting barley grower 

recognition program named Wheaton one of the 10 farmers 

selected by industry as top producers for the year. The goal of 

the program is to promote grower best-management practices 

for malting barley and showcase the value that malt and malt 

barley bring to Western Canadian agriculture and the Canadian 

economy. 

 

When Wheaton started farming in 1994, he started producing 

malting barley. He has grown it ever since, building a 

reputation for consistency, trustworthiness, and as a reliable 

supplier of choice of quality malt barley. Barley makes up 

around 17 per cent of crop acres. Wheaton likes the crop 

reliability. He likes the incentives it has provided over the 

years, the fact it is a lower cost crop to produce that is generally 

good for the soil compared to some alternatives. He has found 

other crops perform well in barley stubble. 

 

Wheaton straight-cuts barley, believing swathing is unpractical 

and risky because untimely rain can have such a dramatic effect 

on quality. He strongly believes in not taking barley off at 

higher than 13.5 per cent moisture and waits for acceptable 

moisture levels to help ensure his barley will last in storage. 

Wheaton was nominated for the honour by Biggar’s Prairie 

Malt Ltd. Congratulations, Jeff. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

The Spaceship Enterprise Club 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to pay tribute to the spaceship enterprise club. No, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s not a club for fans of a certain TV show featuring 

a starship named Enterprise whose fans like to attend 

conventions wearing Vulcan ears. It’s a club for those who 

want to go where no ordinary man or woman can afford to go, 

where paying $1,000 guarantees you a piece of the Sask Party 

government. 

 

That was the Premier’s prime directive in his Enterprise Club 

invitation, Mr. Speaker: pay up; we’ll beam you up; and then 

we’ll listen up. I don’t know who they’re mind-melding with 

when they came up with that scheme, Mr. Speaker, but it 

sounds to me that their brains were set on stunned. 

 

No worries though, Mr. Speaker. Members in the Enterprise 

Club will still have a few privileges to cling on to, like advance 

notice of party events where $1,000 will still buy you a seat at 

the leader’s dinner next to some of the most shining stars in the 

Sask Party universe. At a time, Mr. Speaker, when 

Saskatchewan families are struggling, it’s too bad that this 

government finds it logical to focus on making sure Enterprise 

Club members are the only ones to live long and prosper. 

 



6868 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2011 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Regina Citizen of the Year 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House to 

congratulate Renu Kapoor for being CTV’s Regina Citizen of 

the Year for 2010. Her history of volunteer service has been 

extraordinary. In the past 15 years she’s been involved in 

dozens of fundraising projects that have raised over $1 million 

for charity. It is because of tireless volunteers like Renu that so 

many of our local organizations and events are so successful. 

 

Renu is a registered social worker and certified addictions 

counsellor. She has worked in the field of mental health and 

addictions for over 35 years. Her volunteerism extends to the 

fundraising of local, provincial, national, and international 

projects. She has played a leading role in funding the treatment 

of osteoporosis. In 2002, she received the National Builder 

Award from Osteoporosis Canada. In 2010, she was a board 

member and fundraising Chair for the Regina Public Library. 

She is also named the honorary ambassador for Mosaic. In 

2011, she will chair the Year of India in Canada for the 

celebration, a year-long event. 

 

Renu Kapoor has been recognized previously with her YWCA 

[Young Women’s Christian Association] Volunteer of the Year 

Award in 1995, and in 2007 she received the YWCA Women 

of Distinction Lifetime Achievement Award. I would like all 

members to join in congratulating Renu Kapoor for her 

extraordinary achievements in volunteerism. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Respect Our Democracy 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. People are concerned 

about the Sask Party’s mishandling of democracy. Keeping a 

grip on $3 million from the PC [Progressive Conservative] trust 

fund, they weakened the Progressive Conservatives in the 2007 

election and want to do so again in 2011. Mr. Speaker, the 

province’s top judges turned down their attempts to have the 

Premier’s and his deputies’ names dropped from the PC Party’s 

lawsuit. 

 

Then there’s the fumbled issue of the Acting Chief Electoral 

Officer, Mr. Speaker, whose appointment was approved by a 

bipartisan committee of the legislature. Like many agreements 

made with the Sask Party, this too was torn up. The public 

learned that the hiring was vetoed by the Sask Party caucus for 

reasons the Premier still won’t disclose. 

 

Now the government is trying to stop voters from casting their 

ballots on election day. The Minister of Justice is forcing 

through rules requiring voters to show photo ID [identification]. 

Rather than treating voting as a right of Saskatchewan citizens, 

he treats it as a privilege to be handed out by his government. 

 

Finally the Minister of Advanced Education has shed light on 

the infamous Sask Party Enterprise Club. A $1,000 fee opens 

the door to VIP [very important person] access to the Premier 

and his ministers. Mr. Speaker, it’s no wonder the people of 

Saskatchewan are saying, respect our democracy. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

New Program for Safer Streets 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

announce that a new program was introduced in Moose Jaw 

yesterday that will add an element of safety to the streets of our 

city. The program is the expansion of the report impaired 

drivers program. It was originally implemented in Saskatoon in 

March and has expanded to Regina and now to Moose Jaw. 

 

The report impaired drivers program or RID is in partnership 

led by SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance], the 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority, and the Moose 

Jaw Police Service. RID also has the support of Mothers 

Against Drunk Driving along with Students Against Drinking 

and Driving, with representatives there from Vanier and 

Riverview collegiates. 

 

RID encourages the public to call 911 if they see a driver they 

suspect is impaired. Since its introduction, RID calls have led to 

over 150 impaired driving charges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, drinking and driving is the number one cause of 

fatal crashes in Saskatchewan. This program empowers the 

people to help law enforcement find impaired drivers so they 

can be removed from our streets. It also serves as a warning that 

there is now a whole city on the lookout for anyone driving 

under the influence. With initiatives such as the report impaired 

drivers program, we are one step closer to getting rid of 

drinking drivers and making our streets safer. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

College Governance Issues 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, an important principle of 

parliamentary democracy is the concept of ministerial 

responsibility. To the Minister of Advanced Education: what 

does ministerial responsibility mean to him? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in the case in hand, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen is a 

grassroots idea that began while the members opposite were 

still in government, Mr. Speaker. A proposal was submitted last 

June. Mr. Speaker, what we did is we employed Meyers Norris 

Penny to go through on an independent basis and make sure 

that the proposal actually met some key criteria. The proposal 

was ultimately rejected, Mr. Speaker. We reported that last 

week. 

 

In addition to Meyers Norris Penny reporting that the colleges 

were not ready to actually see this amalgamation, Mr. Speaker, 



March 23, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6869 

they alerted us, the government and me specifically, Mr. 

Speaker, that they had a number of questions. We’ve been 

working with Justice, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been working with a 

number of other entities. We’ve said we’ll continue to work 

with the auditor, with Meyers Norris Penny, and with Justice to 

ensure that every taxpayer dollar is accounted for, Mr. Speaker. 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, after the minister’s remarks 

yesterday about soul-searching, I would have expected a more 

thoughtful response with respect to ministerial responsibility. 

Ministerial responsibility is about being transparent and 

accountable, and that’s what Saskatchewan people want from 

their government. Yet today as the Minister of Finance delivers 

his budget, a cloud continues to hang over this government. 

 

The Minister of Advanced Education directed a merger of the 

public Carlton Trail Regional College and the private St. 

Peter’s College. When serious ethical concerns were emailed to 

the minister and when the opposition raised significant 

concerns with him last May, he ignored them. Only after an 

independent report reiterated those earlier concerns did the 

minister finally take action. Seven people have now lost their 

jobs over this mess, Mr. Speaker, yet the man who was most 

responsible is still running the Ministry of Advanced 

Education. 

 

To the minister: how can he defend throwing everyone else 

under the bus when he is ultimately responsible as minister and 

when he is the one who ignored the very serious concerns? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I think the context is vitally important to understand. 

In fact the Canadian University Guide, 2011 edition, has said 

this: “There has never been a better time to consider 

Saskatchewan as the place to attain a great post-secondary 

education,” Mr. Speaker. That’s just been stated, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, because of our vital investments across 

the post-secondary sector, to date more than $2 billion. And 

obviously the members opposite will be staying tuned to see 

what comes next, Mr. Speaker. We can talk about investments 

in student housing of more than 3,000 per cent increase from 

when the members opposite were in power, Mr. Speaker — 

more than 3,000 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the case that the member opposite references, a 

grassroots group got together even before the last provincial 

election. They submitted a proposal. The proposal was vetted 

by Meyers Norris Penny, Mr. Speaker. What we did is then 

accept that proposal. The recommendation was not to move 

forward. We accepted that. I went to Humboldt. I delivered that 

last week, Mr. Speaker. We continue to be serving the best 

interests of the students in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the day discussions about a 

merger started to go horribly wrong was the day that the 

minister started putting his fingerprints on it, and that was a 

very long time ago. 

 

At least two separate emails were sent to the minister last May, 

which should have raised significant red flags. For context 

about the minister’s merger mess, on May 11th, 12th, 13th, and 

17th, I questioned the minister extensively on this issue in 

committee hearings and in question period. Had he listened to 

those questions instead of dismissing them, we wouldn’t be in 

this mess today. It’s the height of arrogance, Mr. Speaker, to 

simply dismiss everyone’s concerns and plow straight ahead. 

And we’re getting this from a government, Mr. Speaker, after 

only three years. 

 

Again to the minister, he’s the one who gave the direction. He’s 

the one who ignored the very serious concerns along the way. 

So why is it acceptable for him to blame everyone else and not 

take responsibility for his own inaction? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I have here a document, Mr. Speaker — and the 

members opposite have seen this — and that is: 

 

In 2007, between April and October, under the guidance 

of [the respective college boards] . . . senior management 

teams meet approximately 20 times [it’s reported] with 

respect to pursuing partnership/merger discussions . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, those discussions began while the 

members opposite were actually in power. 

 

What we did is made sure that there was a formal proposal that 

was submitted. That proposal was submitted last June, Mr. 

Speaker. Then we made sure that it was vetted, Mr. Speaker, 

through Meyers Norris Penny, making sure that the highest 

corporate standards were in place, Mr. Speaker. The 

recommendations were that, no, the merger should not go 

forward. We acted appropriately. We said no; the merger’s not 

going to go forward. 

 

In the process of actually pursuing that, Mr. Speaker, there were 

a number of questions. Those questions are being addressed by 

the auditor, by Justice, by Meyers Norris Penny, with the full 

co-operation of the ministry. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, that is the minister who appointed 

Sask Party members to the regional college board. That is the 

minister who approved the joint CEO [chief executive officer]. 

That is the minister who gave instructions for the merger to go 

ahead. Mr. Speaker, the decisions and the responsibility rest 

with that minister. That is very clear. 

 

His attempt now to shirk responsibility, in his attempt, he has 

tarnished the reputations of every single Carlton Trail board 

member. There’s no question that there were serious 



6870 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2011 

governance problems with the board at Carlton Trail, but the 

internal documents show that at least two of the board 

members, Aaron Behiel and Maureen Doetzel, tried to address 

some of those problems. They were overruled by other board 

members, the board Chair, Marlene Latreille, and another board 

member and former Sask Party candidate for nomination, Islay 

Ehlert. 

 

To the minister: after ignoring concerns and failing to do his 

job, how is it fair for him to shirk ministerial responsibility 

while tarnishing the reputations of every single board member, 

even those who actually tried to do the right thing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the proposal was submitted 

last June. We used Meyers Norris Penny to make sure there was 

an independent third party, Mr. Speaker. As far as doing our 

job, Mr. Speaker, the press release, March 17th, “Minister says 

Humboldt area colleges not ready for merger.” We did our job, 

Mr. Speaker. We saw that the proposal was undertaken. We 

ensured that there was an independent process, Mr. Speaker. 

We then rejected that. 

 

There were a number of questions that came forward, Mr. 

Speaker. At the time, we went to Justice. Justice said 

unfortunately there’s not enough here to act on. You need to go 

back in the field and actually see if these allegations and 

questions actually stand any test of evidence. We’ve been 

working with Justice. We’re working now with the auditor, and 

certainly, Mr. Speaker, we continue to work with Meyers 

Norris Penny. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we allowed this grassroots initiative that initiated 

under those individuals opposite to ensure, Mr. Speaker, that 

there was a grassroots opportunity. The proposal was 

submitted. Ultimately it was rejected based on the 

recommendations of Meyers Norris Penny, an independent 

entity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this minister will blame everyone 

at any chance that he has, but he refuses to look in the mirror. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a whistle-blower sent a memo to the board, raising 

serious financial irregularities. On May 8th one of the board 

members, Maureen Doetzel, replied saying, “I feel this must be 

addressed ASAP.” Another board member, Aaron Behiel, 

replied, “I couldn’t agree more. I think we need answers before 

we can proceed further.” But the board Chair, Marlene Latreille 

disagreed because the whistle-blower hadn’t followed proper 

“chain of command.” Another board member, Islay Ehlert said, 

“This is totally insubordination.” 

 

That’s four board members, Mr. Speaker, but two very different 

approaches. It’s clear how it’s convenient for the minister to 

tarnish all their reputations equally, but is it fair and does it 

amount to ministerial responsibility? 

 

[14:00] 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the auditor recently 

undertook a review of a number of post-secondary institutions, 

Carlton Trail among them. The auditor reported to this 

Assembly and to the people of the province in November. 

 

I quote, Mr. Speaker, “The ministry and the above listed 

agencies including Carlton Trail had adequate rules and 

procedures to safeguard public resources.” He also said, “The 

ministry and the above listed agencies complied with the 

authorities governing their activities relating to financial 

reporting, safeguarding public resources, revenue raising, 

spending, borrowing, and investing.” And finally, Mr. Speaker, 

he said, “The financial statements of the above listed agencies 

are reliable.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve made a decision, that is, the merger not to 

go forward. In the midst of undertaking that independent 

process, questions were raised, Mr. Speaker. We’re now 

working with Justice. We’re now working with the auditor. 

We’re working with Meyers Norris Penny to ensure that every 

taxpayer dollar is accounted for, Mr. Speaker. That work 

continues so that the students can succeed, can stay, and study 

in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the problems and the concerns 

weren’t just raised in the Meyers Norris Penny report. They 

were raised back in May, Mr. Speaker. They were raised by 

emails to the minister’s office, and they were raised in this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and they were raised in committee, and 

the minister chose to ignore them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on budget day the government unveils how it will 

spend taxpayers’ dollars, but Saskatchewan people expect more 

from their government than just pomp and circumstance. They 

expect their government to be responsible with taxpayers’ 

dollars year round and to provide adequate oversight of public 

spending. 

 

But the Sask Party government failed on that front in the 

minister’s attempt to merge these two colleges. To the minister: 

how much has this failed merger cost the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, the proposal 

was submitted, Mr. Speaker. We then went to Meyers Norris 

Penny. They undertook this independent study, Mr. Speaker. 

We know that’s in the range of $70,000, Mr. Speaker. That 

work actually helped us to raise a number of questions, 

certainly, Mr. Speaker. It also helped to ensure, Mr. Speaker, 

that we were able to make an informed decision, the decision, 

Mr. Speaker, not to allow that merger to go forward. That was 

important. The questions that are outstanding, Mr. Speaker, we 

are working diligently and with partners — with the auditor, 

with Meyers Norris Penney, and certainly with the Ministry of 



March 23, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6871 

Justice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the key here is to ensure that every taxpayer dollar 

is accounted for. That effort is under way, Mr. Speaker, to 

ensure that students can study in Saskatchewan, succeed in 

Saskatchewan, and stay in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

our commitment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we have heard the minister’s 

talking points. In fact I’m sure members in the gallery here 

would be able to recite them off by heart almost by now. What 

we haven’t heard, Mr. Speaker, is this minister stand up and 

take responsibility for his inaction and his involvement with 

this throughout the whole process. Mr. Speaker, while the 

minister likes to suggest he is rolling up his sleeves and getting 

to the bottom of this mess, the reality is he’s been too busy 

blaming everyone else. 

 

So let me help the minister with what this has cost 

Saskatchewan taxpayers so far. The taxpayers paid the CEO 

salary, benefits, and expenses even though he was mostly 

working for the private college. $273,000 was funnelled to the 

private college for furnishings and equipment. An extra 

$60,000 was added to St. Peter’s operating grant. $75,000 for 

market research was fully paid by the public college, and 

$100,000 has been spent investigating this mess so far. And 

that’s before we know about the financial irregularities, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

To the minister: he’s responsible for the Advanced Education 

spending in this province. He’s the one who should have put a 

stop to this last spring. When will he take responsibility for the 

significant cost to taxpayers that has resulted from his inaction? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, from across the province, in 

the process of putting together that proposal, there were a 

number of opportunities for stakeholders to weigh in and 

support it. There are a number of entities that actually came 

forward. 

 

From Doepker Industries, I quote, “We are writing this letter on 

behalf of Doepker Industries to show our support for the 

proposed merger.” From the village of Muenster, Mr. Speaker: 

we believe the proposed merger makes sense. Mr. Speaker, the 

city of Humboldt: community economic and social growth 

requires strong partners. The merger of SPC [St. Peter’s 

College] and CTRC [Carlton Trail Regional College] fulfills 

these roles. Mr. Speaker, from the town of Davidson: the CTRC 

and St. Peter’s have taken a great initiative. Mr. Speaker, the 

list goes on. 

 

That’s why we went forward, Mr. Speaker, with the proposal. 

We vetted it through Meyers Norris Penny, Mr. Speaker. The 

conclusion was and recommendations that we then adhered to 

. . . and that was the institutions are not ready. In the midst of 

undertaking that specific proposal and the review, Mr. Speaker, 

what we said is, they’re not ready. But we’ll make sure 

taxpayers’ dollars are accounted for. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, a discussion about the future of 

the colleges is just fine. What is not fine, Mr. Speaker, is a 

minister turning his eye to when problems are identified and not 

providing the proper ministerial oversight. That is the problem 

in this case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not just the upstanding members of the board 

who are upset. I can tell the minister and also the member from 

Humboldt, Mr. Speaker, that I’m hearing from many people in 

that area who are very upset with how the government has 

bungled this file. They want answers. 

 

An important part of getting those answers is through a review 

by the Provincial Auditor. Without direction from the 

legislature, the auditor cannot look into this until his next 

regular review in the fall. Earlier this week, I put forward a 

motion to speed that up and allow the Provincial Auditor to 

immediately investigate this mess. The Sask Party government 

said no. But yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the minister in a scrum 

said to the media, “I’m not opposed at all to speeding up the 

process.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: with hundreds of people watching 

in the gallery today, will the government finally agree to ask the 

Provincial Auditor to immediately begin an investigation of the 

very serious financial irregularities that are alleged in this case? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll repeat that the auditor 

just submitted a report, Mr. Speaker, to the members of the 

Assembly and to the people of the province. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that audit included Carlton Trail Regional College, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The conclusion says this: “the Ministry and the above-listed 

agencies had adequate rules and procedures to safeguard public 

resources . . .” He also says, “the Ministry and the above-listed 

agencies complied with the authorities governing their activities 

relating to financial reporting, safeguarding public resources, 

revenue raising, spending, borrowing, and investing . . . And 

finally, Mr. Speaker: “the financial statements of the 

above-listed agencies are reliable,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

The auditor continues to do his work, Mr. Speaker, and the pace 

that he does that, Mr. Speaker . . . we’ll certainly co-operate in 

any way that we can to ensure that we’re facilitating that work. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Party Memberships and Fundraisers 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, any way except to give him the 

power and the resources to actually do it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Glen Kobussen, former CEO of Carlton Trail 

College and St. Peter’s College, paid $1,000 to the Sask Party 



6872 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2011 

for membership in the Enterprise Club which was reimbursed 

back to him by St. Peter’s College. The membership entitled 

members to meetings with the Premier, cabinet ministers, and 

other government decision makers. The Sask Party return for 

2009 discloses no such donation. 

 

To the Minister of Justice: how many, if any, Enterprise Club 

memberships are disclosed, and will the government ensure that 

the full list is given to the Acting Chief Electoral Officer for 

review? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP [New Democratic 

Party] is trying to draw a line that does not exist between party 

donations and government policy. That’s simply not the way it 

works in our party at all. And I hope that’s not the way it works 

in the NDP. So we went back and checked a little bit on a few 

things with the NDP in the past. 

 

You will remember, Mr. Speaker, to great fanfare, they used to 

hold the Premier’s bus tour around Saskatchewan. Every 

summer they would hold these bus tours. And if you look, if 

you look in a recent edition, an edition back then I should say, 

of The Commonwealth, NDP paper for party members, you’ll 

see an ad in there that says, “To secure a seat on this bus tour, a 

fundraiser for the Premier’s constituency of Saskatoon 

Riversdale [will be held].” So the very thing that they are 

suggesting is exactly the practice that the NDP portrayed.  

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the question’s about disclosure. 

Mr. Speaker, St. Peter’s College reimbursed Mr. Kobussen for 

the $1,000 he paid to be a member of the Enterprise Club. At 

that point, the $1,000 became public money. Further, the 

donation was not disclosed as required by law. Given this, will 

the Minister of Justice agree to an open and transparent review 

by the Acting Chief Electoral Officer of all Enterprise Club 

memberships? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — On that page of The Commonwealth, just 

two inches away, is a picture of the member himself. So he 

ought to know what the practice of the NDP was back then. 

 

In addition to that, right beside them, right beside that ad is a 

good old NDP law firm of Olive Waller Zinkhan & Waller. But 

what was the practice of that party? You look at their donation 

list over the years, and what did they benefit from as a result of 

those donations? Tom Waller donated to the NDP in years 2004 

through 2007. And of course what did he get as a result of that 

from the NDP? He got to be the forestry secretariat up in Prince 

Albert. Then he was paid, him and his law firm were paid 

$417,000 for 13 months of work on that file. 

 

So when it comes to raising funds for parties, the NDP has a 

real good track record. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — As was the case yesterday, the minister, 

speaking for the Minister of Justice I suppose, can provide all 

that information on donations because it was disclosed as 

required by law, unlike the case of Mr. Kobussen which was 

not disclosed. Now under election financing laws, Mr. 

Kobussen appeared eligible in 2009 when his donation should 

have been disclosed for a $558 tax credit on the $1,000 paid 

with public money to the Saskatchewan Party. 

 

To the Minister of Justice: is this one of the matters that has 

been referred to him by the Minister of Advanced Education for 

investigation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, upon further review of the 

NDP’s practices of the past, you don’t have to look very far. 

Just go right to their caucus office over the years. You don’t 

have to go very far at all. 

 

Dale Schmeichel donated money to the NDP over the years, 

and of course what did he get as a result of that? He was made 

the CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] 

vice-president. Kathie Maher-Wolbaum, a former chief of staff 

to the premier of Saskatchewan donated money all of that time. 

And of course what did she get as a result of that? She was a 

vice-president for government relations for CIC as well. 

 

So I don’t think the people of Saskatchewan need to take any 

lessons from the members opposite when it comes to 

fundraising and the kind of tactics that they employed over the 

years. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday when asked to table 

the agenda for the Enterprise Club meetings, the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs and the Sask Party expert on party financing, 

Mr. Speaker, said there were no agendas. But Enterprise Club 

members were invited to bring their own agendas. Mr. Speaker, 

I would like to quote from a letter sent to Enterprise Club 

members: 

 

The Enterprise Club is an excellent venue to present your 

views and comments to the Saskatchewan Party MLAs 

and our Premier, Mr. Wall. Mr. Wall, along with other 

cabinet ministers and MLAs, meet with Enterprise Club 

members several times throughout the year. Joining the 

Enterprise Club ensures that your comments and ideas 

will be heard. 

 

To the minister: since the 2007 election, what were the dates of 

Enterprise Club meetings? What cabinet ministers attended and 

what Enterprise Club members attended? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 



March 23, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6873 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, our party discloses all of the 

donations, as always has, always will. And we make no . . . We 

certainly will continue to do that in the future. 

 

If you look at the list of NDP appointees over the years, there’s 

a rich tradition, there’s a very, very rich tradition: give to the 

NDP and get a patronage position. Wilson Olive, partner in the 

long-time NDP law firm, was appointed Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance director. And of course he was on the SaskFilm’s 

board of directors as well. And not only that, his most recent 

thing that he was involved in, he was the Leader of the 

Opposition’s campaign manager for his leadership. And all 

through that time frame, he’s donated money to the NDP. 

 

So I would say to the members opposite, before you start 

pointing your finger over here, you’d better take a good look at 

what you guys did. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, in a letter sent out to Enterprise 

Club members, Enterprise Club is described as “an excellent 

venue to present your views and comments to Saskatchewan 

Party MLAs and our Premier.” 

 

Yesterday the government said the list of Enterprise Club 

members is private. But if the donations are supposed to be 

public, how can the status the donations purchase be private? I 

understand that members of a secret society have private 

memberships, Mr. Speaker, but they don’t receive tax receipts, 

and the donations are not supposed to be publicly disclosed. 

 

To the minister: will he tell the people of Saskatchewan who 

the members of the Enterprise Club are and why they are 

entitled to special access to government decision makers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

true that for those individuals who support the Saskatchewan 

Party, they get some treatment. They get lower taxes. They get 

the roads fixed. They get better health care, Mr. Speaker. And if 

you vote and if you support the NDP, from this government you 

get lower taxes and better highways and better health care. And 

if you support the Liberals, Mr. Speaker, you’ll get lower taxes 

and better highways and better health care, Mr. Speaker. Even 

if you’re on the secret NDP fundraising bus, you’ll get lower 

taxes, better highways, improved health care. 

 

And in just a few moments, the Minister of Finance will take to 

his feet. He’ll table the best budget in the Dominion of Canada 

that will provide everyone lower taxes, better highways, and 

improved health care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. The member 

from Prince Albert Northcote will allow the proceedings to 

proceed. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 878 through 897. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 878 through 897 are tabled. 

 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES 

AND SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it is my 

pleasure to submit the estimates and supplementary estimates 

accompanied by a message from His Honour the Lieutenant 

Governor. 

 

The Speaker: — I would ask the members and our guests to 

rise for the reading of the message from His Honour: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of certain 

sums for the required service of the province for the 12 

months ending March 31st, 2012, and supplementary 

estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 

province for the 12 months ending March 31st, 2011, and 

recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. 

[Signed] the Honourable Gordon L. Barnhart, Lieutenant 

Governor, province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Please be seated. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, colleagues, guests, and 

visitors, it is an honour to stand before you today and deliver 

the 2011-12 budget, my first as Finance minister. 

 

Before I begin, I would like to introduce my very special 

guests: my brother Dave and his wife, Marlene, from Big River, 

Saskatchewan; my son Bryce and his wife, Olivia; my 

granddaughters Scarlett and Willow; and my wife of soon to be 

39 years, Gail. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Gail and I have two children and now two 

grandchildren. They serve as a reminder to me every day why 

I’m here and why I do this job. I’m sure members on both sides 

of the House would say the same thing. We all want to make 

life better for all Saskatchewan families. I would ask all 

members to join me in welcoming my family and all the special 

guests who have joined us here today. Welcome to your 

Legislative Assembly and welcome to your budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget will be quite unlike most others you 

will see across Canada this year. While other provinces are 

recording deficits, Saskatchewan will post a surplus. While 

others struggle to maintain programs, we will improve our 

public services. While other jurisdictions will see their debt 

loads increase, we will reduce our debt. And this budget will 

continue to strengthen our economy and make life more 

affordable by reducing taxes. 



6874 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2011 

Saskatchewan is blessed with so many advantages: our 

abundant natural resources, our pristine environment, our sense 

of community, our unique prairie lifestyle, and our greatest 

advantage of all, our people. Saskatchewan people. Proud and 

hopeful, resilient, patient and kind, those whose families have 

lived in this great province for generations and those who have 

just moved to Saskatchewan — together they make 

Saskatchewan better. Together they have created the 

Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

I wonder how the first premier of Saskatchewan, Walter Scott, 

would feel if he were sitting here today, seeing how far 

Saskatchewan has come since he sat in this Assembly 100 years 

ago. Premier Scott once said, “This province has at yet less than 

a half a million souls and there is plenty of room for at least 10 

million.” 

 

Well we’re not quite there yet, but everywhere you look in 

Saskatchewan today there are signs of growth. Our towns and 

cities are growing quickly. New businesses are starting up and 

people are moving back home from across Canada. We’re 

seeing a new, confident attitude across the province. It’s 

exciting to be part of it. 

 

We have always known this is a great place to live, but we 

haven’t always been able to talk about Saskatchewan being a 

leader in Canada. Today we can. This year we are projected to 

lead the nation in economic growth.  

 

More people now live in Saskatchewan than ever before. Our 

population has been growing faster than any other province in 

Canada. Saskatoon and Regina are the fastest and third fastest 

growing cities in the country. There is every reason to believe 

that this trend will continue. Housing starts are up. Wages are 

up. We have one of the lowest unemployment rates in the 

country.  

 

This is the story people are now hearing about Saskatchewan — 

people like Bob Stoyand, who moved here from Alberta to open 

a new business in Canora. Bob and his wife, Tracy, have family 

connections in the area and love Saskatchewan’s lakes. With 

our economy doing so well and the price of housing so high in 

Alberta, Saskatchewan looked like a good opportunity to Bob. 

He got a job in Yorkton, and when he became established, Bob 

started a business on his acreage repairing boats. Earlier this 

year he built his own shop in Canora and business is thriving. 

Bob works on boats in the summer and quads and snowmobiles 

in the winter. Right now the shop is full, and the future looks 

bright for Bob and Tracy and their two children. 

 

That’s just one story, but it’s a story that is being repeated in 

every corner of our province. More people are choosing to stay 

in Saskatchewan and more people are moving to Saskatchewan 

to start their careers, raise their families, and pursue their 

dreams. And every time someone makes that choice, they make 

Saskatchewan better. 

 

This combination of our growing economy and our tremendous 

quality of life create the Saskatchewan advantage. That’s what 

this budget is about. It’s about building on our strengths and 

maintaining the momentum we have achieved. To do this, our 

government will do three things. We will lower taxes. We will 

improve government services. And we will reduce the debt. 

Our government is committed to making life more affordable 

for Saskatchewan people. The best way we can do that is by 

leaving Saskatchewan people with more of their hard-earned 

tax dollars in their possession.  

 

From day one, this government has been committed to lower 

taxes. Our very first act in government was a tax cut 

eliminating the PST [provincial sales tax] on used cars. In the 

fall of 2008, we delivered the largest income tax cut in 

Saskatchewan history — raising the basic and spousal 

exemption, raising the exemption for dependent children, and 

removing 92,000 Saskatchewan residents from the provincial 

income tax roll. In the 2009 budget, we delivered the largest 

education property tax cut in Saskatchewan history, lowering 

property taxes for Saskatchewan homeowners, businesses, and 

farmers. 

 

We are proud of our record, but there is more to be done. Today 

we are increasing the basic and spousal personal tax exemptions 

by another $1,000 effective January 1st, 2011. And also today 

we are increasing the exemption for dependent children by 

$500, also effective January 1st, 2011. 

 

When you combine, Mr. Speaker, when you combine these 

increases with the low-income tax credit introduced by our 

government in 2008, a family of four in Saskatchewan will not 

pay tax on their first $45,550 of combined income. That’s the 

highest income threshold in Canada. In other words, that family 

can now earn more tax-free income in Saskatchewan than 

anyplace else in Canada. More to be done. 

 

This tax reduction, together with the previous reductions 

introduced by our government, means that a family of four with 

$50,000 income will save $2,447 in income taxes this year. It 

also means another 22,000 people coming off the income tax 

roll. In four years, in four years, Mr. Speaker, we have 

eliminated provincial income tax for approximately 114,000 

Saskatchewan residents. This is real progress on reducing taxes. 

 

The income tax reduction measures undertaken since 2007 will 

save Saskatchewan taxpayers $420 million this year. Lower 

taxes to make life more affordable and more tax-free income 

for families than anyplace else in Saskatchewan, that’s the 

Saskatchewan advantage. Anywhere in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A strong and vibrant business environment is an important part 

of the Saskatchewan advantage, and right now our business 

community is saying they see a bright future ahead for the 

province. A recent survey conducted by the Canadian 

Federation of Independent Business found that 79 per cent of 

small businesses in Saskatchewan have confidence in the 

provincial economy and the government’s economic policies. 

This is the highest rating for any Western province. 

 

Eighty-nine per cent of small-business owners would 

recommend starting a business in Saskatchewan, and 84 per 

cent of small-business owners see a bright future for young 

people in this province. This is a complete reversal from the 

situation in 2003 when 83 per cent of small-business people did 

not see a bright future for young people in Saskatchewan. All of 

this has been achieved by listening to and responding to the 

people who create the jobs in our province. We are proud of our 

record, but there is more to be done. 



March 23, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6875 

[14:30] 

 

We have heard the message that reducing taxes on small 

businesses is the best form of incentive and that small-business 

owners will reinvest tax savings back into their businesses and 

their employees. We agree. Today we are announcing that the 

small-business income tax rate will be reduced by more than 

half from 4.5 per cent to 2 per cent, effective July 1st, 2011. 

This tax reduction will give Saskatchewan small businesses the 

third lowest tax rate in the country and the lowest in the new 

West. We believe this makes Saskatchewan the best place in 

Canada to start a new business or expand your existing 

business. Lower taxes for Saskatchewan businesses, that’s the 

Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Of course the process of examining our tax structure and 

looking for improvements does not stand still. We have 

received a number of submissions from Saskatchewan business 

leaders. We value these recommendations and advice they have 

provided on tax competitiveness in Saskatchewan. 

 

Our government has a record of delivering affordable, 

sustainable tax reduction within a balanced budget. And this 

will continue should the people of Saskatchewan provide us 

with the opportunity of delivering future budgets. 

 

Now let me turn to one of my favourite topics — education 

property tax. Funding education through a property tax has 

been one of this province’s most difficult issues for a long time. 

For too long too much of the share of funding education fell on 

Saskatchewan property owners. That is why we pledged to 

reduce the burden of education property tax for all ratepayers 

when we took office. 

 

We made a great deal of progress on that promise with our 

2009-10 budget. That year the province increased its share of 

the cost of education from 52 to 61 per cent. As a result, the 

province increased its payments to school divisions by $241 

million and delivered the largest education property tax cut in 

Saskatchewan’s history. At the time we said that was phase 1 of 

education property tax reform, with a further reduction to 

follow. Today we are keeping that promise. 

 

Let me give you an example of how this will benefit 

Saskatchewan farm families. Terry Zavislak and his son Chad 

farm seven quarters of land north of Canora. In 2003 their 

taxable assessment on this land was $183,700, and their school 

division mill rate was 20. Today the mill rate on agricultural 

land will fall to 3.91 mills. Therefore in 2011, if the Zavislaks 

own the same seven quarters of land with the same taxable 

assessment, they will pay an education property tax of $718. 

That’s a savings of $2,956. Overall Saskatchewan farmers will 

see an average 80 per cent reduction in their property tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the residential tax will decrease from 10.08 to 

9.51 mills in phase 2. That’s a total reduction of about 21 per 

cent compared to 2008. The middle tier of the business tax will 

decrease from 15.75 mills to 14.75 mills, resulting in a $5.6 

million tax reduction on commercial assessments. Overall this 

is a massive reduction in the education portion of property tax 

— the largest in Saskatchewan history. 

 

As a result of this year’s changes, the province will provide an 

additional $55.6 million for the education budget each and 

every year. This will bring the province’s share of the cost of 

education to about 65 per cent, a far cry from just a few short 

years ago when it was approximately 40 per cent. A fairer 

balance for education funding and lower property taxes, that’s 

the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that sound financial management is the 

DNA [deoxyribonucleic acid] of Saskatchewan people and it’s 

what they expect of their government. Debt reduction has 

always been a priority for our government. The very first piece 

of legislation this government ever introduced, Bill 1, was The 

Growth and Financial Security Act. This required that half of 

any government surplus would go to reducing the debt. On top 

of that, when we had additional resources in 2008, we paid 

down $2.6 billion in government debt. 

 

We are proud of our record, but there is more to be done. Mr. 

Speaker, earlier I said tax reductions and government spending 

decisions must be affordable and sustainable. All over the 

world today, we are seeing the consequences of governments 

living beyond their means, governments struggling to control 

their huge deficits and growing debt. Today I am pleased to say 

that the Saskatchewan budget is balanced — in fact we have a 

surplus — and the provincial debt is going down. Today we are 

paying down the debt by another $325 million. This will bring 

government debt down to $3.81 billion, its lowest level since 

1988 and a reduction of over $3 billion since our government 

took office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, debt reduction is not just a lofty accounting 

principle. It means lower interest costs and more money to pay 

for important government services in Saskatchewan. This 

budget will also leave a balance of $710 million in the Growth 

and Financial Security Fund. This will protect our province 

against any sudden shocks in world commodity markets and 

ensure that our government is able to respond quickly and 

effectively to any unforeseen circumstances like the flooding 

that hit our province last year. The people of Saskatchewan can 

be confident that we have the resources to meet our 

commitments. Balanced budgets, debt reduction, and sound 

fiscal management — that’s the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Of course all of this is possible because of a strong and growing 

economy. Oil prices are high and we are projecting another 

great year for exploration. It’s important that we maintain the 

momentum that we have achieved. The Ministry of Energy and 

Resources will enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of 

services in the oil patch by spending $13.8 million to modernize 

our information systems. It costs companies tens of thousands 

of dollars a day when rigs are idle. That’s why we will spend 

1.4 million to reduce approval and licensing time. 

 

We also expect to see great things in the potash industry this 

year. In spite of the recent challenges, potash remains a source 

of good fortune and future growth for Saskatchewan. Even in 

the down year of 2009, our potash producers continued to show 

confidence in their industry and our province by moving 

forward with their multi-billion dollar expansion plans. In fact, 

with the expected increase in private and public investment in 

2011, total capital investment in Saskatchewan has nearly 

doubled since 2005 and is the highest growth among provinces. 

 



6876 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2011 

Our existing potash companies are expanding, and we welcome 

new entrants into the Saskatchewan potash industry. Together 

potash producers will spend almost $12 billion under current 

capital expansions. They will create thousands of new jobs. 

These expansions are due to a growing worldwide demand for 

potash and a stable tax and royalty structure that encourages 

new expansion and job creation. 

 

And it’s working. You can see it community after community 

throughout our province: the new houses and businesses in 

Esterhazy; the expansion of business and recreational facilities 

in Rocanville; the growth in engineering firms and 

manufacturing plants in Saskatoon. In Humboldt, Colonsay, 

Allan, Lanigan, and Jansen, these communities are growing and 

thriving because of a vibrant and expanding potash industry, 

because of the partnership that has been built between these 

communities, the potash industry, and the provincial 

government. Our government will oppose any attempt to 

jeopardize that growth. A competitive royalty regime, a thriving 

resource sector, and a growing economy — that’s the 

Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

International trade is a key part of the Saskatchewan advantage. 

Saskatchewan has what the world needs. We export about $24 

billion worth of goods around the world each year. About 70 

per cent of our economy is based on exports. We are proud of 

this record, but there’s more to be done. In the past year, the 

Premier led trade missions to the two largest markets in the 

world, China and India. Both are increasing their trade with 

Saskatchewan as their populations become more affluent. Our 

government will continue to support the excellent work of the 

Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership, STEP, with $2.9 

million in base funding this year, and will support funding 

requests for future trade missions. 

 

The recent trade mission to India and Bangladesh and the New 

West Partnership’s ongoing engagement with the world are an 

example of how we are expanding trade in every corner of the 

world. That’s the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Our government has always said we do not see growth simply 

for the sake of growth. We see growth because of the quality of 

life it provides for all Saskatchewan people. The strength of a 

diversified economy helps to fund important government 

services and helps cushion the blow when other sectors 

experience difficulty. 

 

As we know, agriculture had a challenging time last year. Our 

government acted to address this challenge by working with the 

federal government to make $360 million available through the 

excess moisture program to help producers affected by 

flooding. Most producers are optimistic for a better year in 

2011. While this is encouraging, we will be there for farmers 

when they need help. This budget allocates $320.8 million to 

fully fund the province’s 40 per cent share of farm income 

stabilization costs through the AgriStability, AgriInvest, and 

crop insurance programs. 

 

An increase of 13 per cent or $37 million from the 2010-11 

budget will help record crop insurance funding. Producers will 

be able to receive greater coverage on their unseeded acreage if 

it is too wet to seed. Coverage has been increased from $50 to 

$70 an acre, a significant improvement. Our government has 

taken important steps to support the farm sector in rural 

Saskatchewan. In addition to those previously mentioned, we 

have provided a half a million dollars to prevent and control 

flood damage caused by beavers. 

 

We have also provided $23 million to help communities 

manage, prepare, and prevent damage from spring flooding. 

And we have made historic improvements to municipal revenue 

sharing, benefiting both urban and rural residents. A strong 

farm sector and a vibrant rural economy, that’s the 

Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

A growing economy helps us fund important government 

services, improving the quality of life for all Saskatchewan 

people. Since taking office, our government has made 

important commitments to health care, setting and achieving the 

goal of hiring 800 new nurses, setting a bold new goal of 

reducing surgical wait times to three months by 2014, funding a 

new provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. We are proud 

of our record but there’s more to be done. 

 

[14:45] 

 

This budget increases funding to regional health authorities by 

$250 million. This will allow us to revitalize the kidney 

transplant program, recruiting more specialists and resuming 

donor transplants in Saskatchewan. It will also allow us to 

expand the colorectal screening program to the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region this year. The pilot program in the 

Five Hills Health Region has resulted in earlier detection of 

cancer and we look forward to continued success of this 

program. 

 

This budget will provide increased funding of $12.6 million to 

the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. This means that the agency 

can offer more chemotherapy treatments, more mammograms, 

and a doubling of the number of bone marrow transplants done 

in Saskatchewan, compared to last year. This will reduce the 

number of patients sent out of province. 

 

Our government will provide funding to support MRI 

[magnetic resonance imaging] scans for an additional 5,000 

patients and CT [computerized tomography] scans for an 

additional 13,000 patients. We will continue to move forward 

toward our goal of reducing surgical wait times through the 

Saskatchewan surgical initiative. We will continue with 

education, recruitment, and retention efforts for health 

providers, including an additional $1.5 million for the clinical 

and medical training units at the U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] and the Regina General Hospital. We will 

provide $10.9 million to address increased volume in diagnostic 

imaging services, cardiac care, and chronic kidney disease. We 

will provide $2.5 million to maintain a provincial HIV [human 

immunodeficiency virus] strategy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget also includes $5 million to introduce 

the STARS [shock trauma air rescue service] program to 

Saskatchewan, a helicopter-based emergency trauma response 

system to supplement our existing air and ground ambulance 

services. A health care system that puts patients first, that’s the 

Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Our government will spend $1.43 billion on pre-K to 12 



March 23, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6877 

[pre-kindergarten to grade 12] education this year, a 9.1 per 

cent increase from last year. This will allow us to make 

investments and improvements across the system. Last month 

we approved a significant investment of $60 million for 120 

school renovation projects in 65 Saskatchewan communities. In 

fact since coming to office, our government has invested over 

$400 million in 600 new school or school renovation projects 

throughout the province. 

 

We are proud of our record, but there is more to be done. This 

budget earmarks $6.1 million for planning of nine major school 

projects across the province. In order to ensure that children 

have the best start in life, we are spending $2.6 million to 

develop an additional 40 pre-kindergarten programs. This will 

provide new spaces for up to 640 youngsters in our high-needs 

areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget will also devote $2.1 million to 

develop 500 new child care spaces, bringing the total to 12,700 

spaces. This is an increase of more than 30 per cent since we 

took office. Investing in children and education, that’s the 

Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

It’s just as important to continue that advantage once our 

children finish high school. We will ensure tuition remains 

affordable by providing $24.6 million to help our 

post-secondary institutions limit tuition increases to an average 

of 3 per cent. 

 

This budget also fulfills our promise to provide $3 million to 

establish a Saskatchewan advantage scholarship program. This 

budget includes $6 million in funding to continue expansion of 

nursing and physicians training programs. 

 

We know that it’s important to ensure First Nations people 

receive the skills training and post-secondary education they 

need to succeed. This budget provides a total of $48.6 million 

for direct support for Aboriginal education institutions 

including adult basic education and the provincial training 

allowance, a $7 million increase to improve the education and 

employment outcomes for Aboriginal people. 

 

Across government you will find that this budget provides $167 

million for First Nations and Métis people. This amounts to an 

increase of more than $13 million. This includes money for 

Aboriginal retention coordinators to help ensure Aboriginal 

students stay in school. It also includes funding for addictions 

programs through the Health ministry. This budget provides 

funding for the Family Finders program through Social 

Services. Through the Ministry of First Nations and Métis 

Relations, we are supporting the northern action plan which is 

intended to address the serious problems of suicide and drug 

use among northern Saskatchewan youth. Of course there is 

much more to do, but we believe we are making progress. 

 

We are changing how we think about challenges facing 

vulnerable children. Government’s responses to these 

challenges involve different ministries, and often in the past 

they have not been well coordinated. It’s time to try a different 

approach. Working together, we can do better. In response to 

the recent child welfare review report, we are launching a 

children and youth agenda to bring a more coordinated 

approach to problems in child welfare. By targeting resources, 

we can prevent problems at an earlier stage and improve the 

well-being of children in care. 

 

We will improve our front-line capacity in the child welfare 

system and provide better support for foster parents. We will 

devote $34 million to focus on this effort. From Social 

Services, 15.3 million will be provided for better support for 

children in care. It will strengthen the relationships with First 

Nations through additional funding to First Nations child and 

family service agencies. It will increase the number of child 

protection workers in the system, and it will provide better 

family supports. 

 

Through the Ministry of Justice, it will improve personal safety 

for women in abusive environments and provide better court 

services for family issues. 

 

Through the Health ministry, we will step up prevention efforts 

for fetal alcohol spectrum disorder. We will increase funding to 

provide better rehabilitation therapies for those with autism. 

This response to funding programs such as FASD [fetal alcohol 

spectrum disorder] and autism is an important step in dealing 

with these very difficult issues. 

 

We are taking action to provide more affordable housing. In 

addition to Head Start on a Home, we will partner with 

municipalities on two programs. The first is a program to 

provide property tax abatements on designated new home 

construction. We have allocated 200,000 this year with $1 

million available for this program over the next five years. The 

second is an incentive to support the development of new rental 

housing. It will provide a grant of up to $5,000 per unit, with a 

goal of having 350 new units built each year. 

 

Additional revenue at the end of 2010-11 also allowed the 

investment of $33.9 million for renovation and construction of 

new housing. In March we provided $1.5 million to Habitat for 

Humanity to help build 30 new homes. We are working closely 

with the University of Saskatchewan on a major expansion of 

student housing on campus to reduce the stress on the local 

housing supply. And through the Ministry of Social Services, 

our government will continue to move forward on our 

four-year, $76.9 million commitment to provide group homes 

and eliminate the wait-list for adults with intellectual 

disabilities. Providing opportunities for affordable and 

low-income housing, that’s the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

To ensure Saskatchewan is ready for growth, in our first three 

years in government we have invested an unprecedented $3.5 

billion in building and repairing provincial infrastructure. We 

are proud of our record but there is more to be done. 

 

This budget devotes more than $400 million to provincial 

highways budget for repaving and capital projects, 

maintenance, and repair of roads and bridges. Over our term of 

government we will have spent $2.2 billion on highways, well 

exceeding our promise to spend 1.8 billion over four years. 

 

These critical investments in the infrastructure are essential to 

maintaining economic growth. In total this year, we will deliver 

a capital spending budget of nearly $600 million. This brings 

the total infrastructure spend over four years to more than $4 

billion. Infrastructure that meets the needs of a growing 



6878 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2011 

province, that’s the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Our government is also committed to safer communities. That’s 

why we promised 120 additional police officers. And this 

budget will complete that commitment with the addition of 30 

new police officers to complete our commitment of 120 over 

four years. Our budget for police services will go up by 8.5 per 

cent. 

 

This budget also keeps our promise to our municipal partners 

— Saskatchewan cities, towns, villages, RMs [rural 

municipality], and northern communities. As the Premier 

announced at the recent SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association] convention, this budget will see us 

complete our commitment to provide municipalities with 

funding based on the value of one full point of the provincial 

sales tax. This amounts to $216.8 million, an increase of 49.4 

million over last year or nearly 30 per cent. 

 

Revenue sharing with municipalities has gone up by $19 

million, 70 per cent since we took office, by far the largest 

increase in Saskatchewan history. More importantly, the new 

funding formula provides stability and predictability to our 

municipal partners. Growing, vibrant communities, that’s the 

Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

We believe that government must always be looking for ways 

to become more efficient. Every dollar we spend is a dollar that 

a Saskatchewan taxpayer worked hard to earn. That’s why we 

have embarked on a process of public service renewal, 

including LEAN that will improve the level of service we 

provide and boost the efficiency of our public service. That 

means eliminating unnecessary steps in our processes, making 

it easier for government employees to get their jobs done. The 

government remains committed to its target of reducing the size 

of the civil service by 15 per cent over four years, and we are 

confident we will reach that goal. 

 

Our government is committed to furthering the innovation 

agenda. This budget delivers almost $100 million in direct 

support to innovation and research development across 

government agencies and ministries. For example, this budget 

will provide $2.6 million to the Canadian Light Source — an 

increase of 1.6 million over last year — part of the four-year, 

$11.8 million commitment we made in 2010-11. 

 

This budget will devote $18.2 million to support agricultural 

research and development — an increase of 1.25 million over 

2010-11 — as a result of this province’s four-year, $5 million 

commitment to the agriculture biotechnology sector. 

 

[15:00] 

 

We are increasing our support for the Saskatchewan Research 

Council by 1.5 million for research and development projects in 

a wide variety of areas including agriculture, biotechnology, 

energy, forestry, manufacturing, and mining. 

 

On the energy side, we are devoting $2.3 million to the 

Petroleum Technology Research Centre. We are also 

maintaining our commitment to the development of alternative 

fuels. This budget provides funding for the ethanol grant 

program, and it adds $2.6 million in new funding for a 

renewable biodiesel grant program. This will provide biodiesel 

producers with 13 cents for every litre they produce and will 

result in production of as much as 40 million litres of renewable 

biodiesel every year. Not only will this provide a new market 

for our canola oil, it will mean we have a cleaner burning fuel 

that will help us reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 

 

We believe innovation will be the next engine of the economy. 

That’s why our government has established Innovation 

Saskatchewan with a mandate to drive innovation in areas of 

strategic importance to our province. This year our government 

is providing Innovation Saskatchewan with $3.5 million for 

research into areas with promising commercial potential in 

clean energy, nuclear science and medicine, and agriculture 

biotechnology. Over the next seven years, our government will 

invest $40 million to establish Saskatchewan as an international 

leader in nuclear medicine, science, engineering, and safety. 

The result may well be life-saving technologies and 

cutting-edge health care facilities. That’s innovation driven by a 

knowledge-based economy. That’s the Saskatchewan 

advantage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a budget Saskatchewan people can be 

proud of. It is a budget that builds on the Saskatchewan 

advantage and benefits all Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, 

you have heard some people say that this is the new 

Saskatchewan, that next-year country has become this-year 

country. Some may wonder what does that mean, this-year 

country? 

 

Here’s what it means. This year a family from halfway around 

the world will hear about a place called Saskatchewan for the 

first time. Before you know it, they will be living and working 

and building a new life in this new place. They will discover a 

land whose winters are colder and whose people are warmer 

than they could have ever imagined. They will learn that 

football is not played with a round ball. They will become part 

of the community. Their kids will make new friends at a new 

school. They will become hockey players and figure skaters and 

Rider fans and Canadians, and they will make Saskatchewan 

better. 

 

This year, a young woman with an intellectual disability will 

finally get a place to call her own. She has a job and she wants 

to be independent, but she has waited a long, long time for the 

dignity of her own place. This year, her wait will be over. She 

will get that place and that independence, and she will make 

Saskatchewan better. 

 

This year, a man in his late 50s will go to get screened for 

colorectal cancer. Because of early detection, he will get the 

treatment he needs from caring and highly trained doctors and 

nurses. That early detection and that treatment will make the 

difference, the difference between spending one more 

Christmas with his family or spending 20 more. He will get 

better, and he will make Saskatchewan better. 

 

And this year, a couple whose children have all grown up will 

be sitting at home one evening. The phone will ring and the 

husband will answer. It will be his daughter who lives in 

Calgary and she’ll say, dad, we’re coming home. He’ll say, 

that’s nice; how long can you stay this time? And she’ll say, 

you don’t understand, dad. I got a new job and we’re moving 



March 23, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6879 

back to Saskatchewan. Her dad will try not to act too excited 

because that’s not his way. But he might choke up a little bit 

when he tells his wife that this year, instead of seeing their 

grandkids just a couple of weekends, they’ll get to see them 

every weekend, Mr. Speaker, and that will make Saskatchewan 

better. That’s what this year country means. It means, our time 

is now. That’s the Saskatchewan advantage. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from 

Martensville: 

 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 

policy of the government. 

 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance, 

seconded by the member from Martensville: 

 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 

policy of the government. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my honour to respond 

briefly to the budget put forward here today and to do so with 

great respect to the people of the province that we represent. 

 

This budget highlights a prosperous time for government. And 

the resource boom certainly has provided prosperity to this 

government by way of record high revenues into a few 

corporations, and that’s important. But that prosperity 

unfortunately fails to be extended to and be felt by 

Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan families. The question is, 

a boom for whom, Mr. Speaker? The government says it’s 

doing well, that it has more money than ever before. But the 

government’s good fortune is not to be confused with the 

situation of Saskatchewan people and families who are 

increasing financial strain and burden, families whose 

consumer debt load is increasing at twice the rate the rest of 

Canada and is doing so primarily because of day-to-day living 

expenses. 

 

The fact is that families and people across this province are 

feeling strained by these cost of living increases — utilities, 

gas, and food — increases that are compounded by the 

complete lack of accessible and affordable housing for 

homeowners and renters, of affordable and accessible child 

care, affordable post-secondary, and quality senior care, Mr. 

Speaker, basic ingredients to a good life and the basics that 

Saskatchewan families deserve to share. 

 

The intercity comparisons in this budget highlight this concern. 

Lost is the once proud position in the national rankings of cost 

of living and quality of life advantages. We’re now just ranked 

fifth in Canada on this front for low-income earners. We 

recognize that for many families rents have increased, in many 

cases, over $5,000 a year, and that the previous reality of an 

individual studying, working hard, playing by the rules, and 

purchasing a proud place to call home is sadly becoming less 

and less a reality for many young people. 

 

And in response to these major increases to cost of living on 

Saskatchewan people, the government says they’re reducing 

taxes. The reality of today’s touted income tax announcement is 

a savings of less than $10 a month for an individual, $25 for a 

family of four, entirely outstripped by cost of living increases, 

representing a mere fraction of these actual costs. Quite simply, 

this budget fails the priorities of Saskatchewan people. 

 

And while the middle class, working people across 

Saskatchewan are increasingly burdened financially to keep 

pace with quality of life and to achieve their hopes and dreams, 

the fact is that many people in our province have been forced 

into the margins of society, displayed through a major increase 

to the number of people collecting social assistance, a huge 

increase and thousands of families on wait-lists for affordable 

housing, a 20 per cent increase in food bank usage in just one 

year, and the Aboriginal employment that has gone backwards 

under the Sask Party, representing a squandered opportunity. 

 

In 2009, a full one in seven Aboriginals lost their jobs, 

something that U of S economics professor Eric Howe directly 

attributes to Sask Party policies and said, I quote, “Decreasing 

Aboriginal employment spells economic disaster provincially.” 

So the boom may be on for the Sask Party government and a 

few corporations, but Saskatchewan people aren’t feeling the 

positive side of that boom. 

 

The budget not only fails to deliver on the priorities of people. 

It also fails to provide fiscal responsibility or good management 

of our finances. It’s fair to say that Saskatchewan people have 

lost trust in the budgetary spin this government puts forward, 

and for good reason. It has a history of being wildly off on 

projections in budgets, and being out of line with economic 

realities. 

 

We have a government that reports from an outdated, improper 

set of accounting rules. By public sector accounting standards 

followed by every other province, every territory, and the 

federal government, this budget is a summary deficit. The fact 

that Saskatchewan has failed to move forward and comply with 

accounting standards and is out of line with the rest of Canada 

is not only unfortunate, but also permits deception and reduces 

transparency. 

 

The direct result is that . . . And I hear members heckling 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, and what I would reference them to do 

is to open up the page of Estimates to see that this government 

grants an exception to transfers from the growth and fiscal 

stabilization fund as well as pension liabilities, and otherwise 

they comply with public sector accounting standards. 

Non-compliance with public sector accounting standards and 

the only province in Canada to be out of line, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The direct result is that this increases total public debt this year 

alone by $548 million, and an increase of more than $1.3 billion 

of total debt from 2009. This represents an increase of debt in 

times of plenty — a time when debt should be paid down, not 

expanded. 

 

This has become the story of the Sask Party: unprecedented 

revenues exceeding previous budgets by as much as 2, 3, or $4 

billion on an annual basis; massive windfalls. But despite this 

historic opportunity, our position as a province has not been 



6880 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2011 

advanced and our priorities not met. And it’s no wonder, Mr. 

Speaker, because this is a government that is lacking a vision it 

can share with the people and families of Saskatchewan. That 

lack of vision resulted in losing the historic opportunity 

provided by these unprecedented revenues. 

 

Beyond an initial debt payment in 2008, when the government 

was able to cash in budget surpluses resulting from NDP 

management, this government . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The money that was left in the books. 

This government has loaded debt for consecutive years. No 

debt reduction, three years of debt growth, Mr. Speaker — that 

lack of vision resulted in losing the historic opportunity 

provided by these unprecedented revenues to guarantee security 

and funds for the future. In fact, despite its record revenues, the 

Sask Party has drained our rainy day fund by more than $2 

billion and raided our Crown corporations for more than $1.7 

billion. This mismanagement is neither sustainable in the short 

term nor planning and preparing for the future. 

 

It is our belief as New Democrats that from one-time, 

non-renewable resource revenue windfalls, we are served best 

by setting some aside, by building a fund to ensure our 

province’s bright future. It is good policy. It’s the right thing to 

do. 

 

By contrast, when it comes to planning for the long term, we 

have a government that won’t agree to an independent review 

of our potash royalties to ensure the maximum benefit from 

these strategic resources in the years ahead for the benefit of 

Saskatchewan people, to address the priorities of today and to 

be planning for our future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a budget that fails on many fronts. It fails to 

address the priorities of Saskatchewan people and it fails to 

provide the financial responsibility that is deserved by the 

people of our fine province. And it fails to share an imaginative 

vision of our future with the people of our province, not only 

failing the needs of today but also failing to plan for our future. 

 

While I have many other things to say in this budget debate 

tomorrow, a more detailed analysis and critique, it has been my 

honour to join debate here today. Mr. Speaker, at this point in 

time, I move that this debate be now adjourned. 

 

[15:15] 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont has 

moved adjournment of debate on the budgetary question. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Deputy Government 

House Leader. 

 

Resumption of Budget Debate 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I move: 

 

That debate on the motion that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government be 

resumed on Thursday, March 24th, 2011. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 

House Leader: 

 

That debate on the motion that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government be 

resumed on Thursday, March 24th, 2011. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move the 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Before I place the question, I just want to say 

a thank you to all of our guests who have joined us today for 

your co-operation in how you have respected the rules of the 

Legislative Assembly. And thank you to the members. I would 

also like to let members and our guests know that there is tea 

available, I believe in rooms 318 and 255. And certainly feel 

free to . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — 218. 

 

The Speaker: — 218? 218. We don’t want you running 

upstairs. The Government House Leader has moved 

adjournment of the Assembly. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:16.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6865 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6865 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6865 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6865 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6865 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6865 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6866 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6866 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6866 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6866 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Top Employer 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6867 

 Government Spending 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6867 

 Elite Barley Top Producer 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6867 

 The Spaceship Enterprise Club 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6867 

 Regina Citizen of the Year 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6868 

 Respect Our Democracy 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6868 

 New Program for Safer Streets 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6868 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 College Governance Issues 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6868 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6868 

 Party Memberships and Fundraisers 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6871 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6872 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6873 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6873 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6873 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6873 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6873 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6879 

 Resumption of Budget Debate 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6880 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


