




















































Hansard: December 13, 2011


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 6A TUESDAY, DECEMBER 13, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 149 

 December 13, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce a lady that is very special in my life and that is my 

sister, Edna. She is seated in your gallery. And Edna usually 

comes up and spends a day or two with me each spring and fall 

session, so I look forward to the time that we’re going to have 

together today. So I ask all members to join me in welcoming 

her to this Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, through you and to the members of the Legislative 

Assembly, I’d like to introduce 65 grade 7 and 8 students in the 

west gallery today from Esterhazy. Mr. Speaker, the teachers 

are Meaghan Copp, Colleen Monahan, and Kristy Herperger; 

along with chaperones Melanie Anderson, Gilbert Moore, 

Carrie Nicholousan, and Janice Mozeski. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I might also add that my colleague — in fact 

new colleague — from Saskatoon Eastview, whose home is 

Esterhazy is very happy to see a student group from his 

hometown. So he’ll be joining me. We’ll have the opportunity 

to have our photo taken and meet with the group shortly after 

question period, Mr. Speaker. I would ask all members to 

welcome the Esterhazy school group here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d 

like to introduce no stranger to this House, sitting behind the 

bar, Mr. Rod Gantefoer. 

 

Rod spent 16 years in this Legislative Assembly, 12 on that side 

and 4 joyous years on this side. Rod was of course the Finance 

minister for the first three years of our government and did an 

absolutely amazing job, an excellent job. The people of 

Saskatchewan benefited from your intelligence and the way you 

handled such a very difficult file, especially for one year 

especially. 

 

Rod is now working for the STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue 

Society] program as a vice-president for fundraising for the 

STARS program. We look forward to dealing with him much 

more. You know, good people don’t stay unemployed for very 

long, and Rod didn’t stay unemployed for very long. 

 

So I’d like all members to welcome Rod to the House. I did 

want to say to the opposition though that, don’t worry, he’s not 

staying here permanently. That would put it as almost to 49 on 

this side. That’s just way too many. But I would say to all 

members if you would welcome Rod back to his Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and to all members of the House, Ms. 

Catherine Fuchs who is sitting in your gallery, an employee of 

the Workers’ Compensation Board that I met shortly, recently 

ago at a Christmas function who indicated that she had not been 

in the building for some years. And I’ve arranged for a tour for 

her today. And she’s gone through the building and would like 

to urge all members of the civil service to come back and revisit 

the Assembly if they haven’t or they should do that something 

on a more frequent basis. It is their Assembly as well. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker, and I ask all members to welcome her. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current regulations 

being enforced are creating challenges that concern our 

traditional trappers. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued, and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation and 

regulations with respect to trapping regulations and 

firearm use in consultation with traditional resource users. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many trappers and community members. I so 

present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Fundraiser Celebrates Broadway Theatre 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Broadway Theatre in the 

historic Nutana district of Saskatoon promotes the many facets 

of Saskatchewan’s multicultural community. The theatre 

provides diverse programming for people of all ages, ethnic 

backgrounds, and special needs, and promotes the use of the 

theatre by many cultural and social organizations for special 

screenings, ethnic film festivals, and special events. It is often 

said that the theatre is at once a community cultural centre and a 

window on the world. 

 

The mission of the Friends of the Broadway Theatre is to serve 

the arts and entertainment interests of the public by offering 

film and live performance in a community owned and operated 

heritage building. 

 



150 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2011 

In late November, from the 20th to the 26th, the Broadway 

Theatre held a week-long fundraiser. Each evening had its own 

theme celebrating diverse cultural and artistic entertainment. 

Patrons of the theatre enjoyed live music and films, and all of 

the dollars spent went to directly to the Broadway, as all 

performers donated their performances to the cause. PotashCorp 

generously donated to support the Broadway cause by matching 

all ticket dollars, donations, and memberships sold during the 

week for a maximum of up to $20,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank all of 

the volunteers and staff, especially the Friends of the Broadway 

Theatre, for all their fundraising. Due to its prime location, 

unique history, and its commitment to cultural entertainment, 

the Broadway Theatre is a treasure of the Saskatoon Nutana 

constituency. Please join me in recognizing this amazing 

institution. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 

Christmas Concert in Marysburg 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The tiny community 

of Marysburg is located about nine miles north of Humboldt. 

Marysburg has a very large and beautiful church that has the 

most awesome acoustics imaginable. The church was not being 

used enough to justify its upkeep, so to rectify this, the 

community formed the Marysburg Centre of the Arts Inc. 

 

On Sunday afternoon, I had the great pleasure of attending their 

14th annual Christmas concert. The concert was made up of 88 

voices from 13 different communities. There was an adult choir, 

the men’s choir, the ladies’ choir, the youth choir, and the 

children’s choir. As well there was piano by Sharon Guina, 

organ by Greg Schulte, clarinet by Dale Avison, violin, and 

even a handbell quartet. The youngest performer was eight 

years old and at the other end of the spectrum, two singers at 80 

years young. 

 

The concert closed with the ageless Christmas favourite, Stille 

Nacht — for you non-Germans, Silent Night. 

 

Many thanks go out to the community of Marysburg for 

organizing this event and to Sharon Carter of Middle Lake for 

conducting. In the words of one of the guests, “The music was 

nourishment for the soul and enriched the spirit.” As we were 

leaving, a friend said to me, “Now it feels like Christmas.” God 

bless and Merry Christmas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Children’s Hospital Fundraiser in La Ronge 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, Missinipi Broadcasting 

Corporation teamed up with Cameco to host a six-hour 

radiothon on Friday, November 25th, 2011 from the La Ronge 

Hotel & Suites. The live event was a fundraiser for the 

Children’s Hospital Foundation of Saskatchewan. The 

Children’s Hospital Foundation is currently trying to raise $25 

million for the creation of the new children’s hospital to be 

constructed in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the six-hour radiothon raised over $625,000. Over 

300,000 was raised through the generous support of northern 

First Nations, northern communities, individuals, and 

companies. Cameco agreed to match all donations raised on 

November 25th, dollar for dollar. This brought the total raised 

to $625,856. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Kitsaki Management Limited Partnership and 

Lac La Ronge Indian Band, departments, communities, 

individuals gave a combined donation totalling $115,685. Mr. 

Speaker, another major supporter was the community of 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, where the combined donation from the 

development corporation, schools, individuals, within the 

community totalled 25,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Deborah Charles from Missinipi Broadcasting Corporation and 

Gary Merasty from Cameco for their sponsorship and great 

work. I wish to recognize all companies, organizations, and 

community members who volunteered and pledged financial 

support for this worthwhile event. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Dream Brokers Program 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Mr. Speaker, it is with great pleasure that I 

rise in the House to extend congratulations to the Dream 

Brokers program on their successes in providing youth facing 

social and economic challenges with opportunities to participate 

in sport, culture, and recreation activities. Mr. Speaker, aside 

from the many positive benefits of becoming involved in 

physical activity, programs such as Dream Brokers provide 

children and youth with a sense of pride in their 

accomplishments and confidence to pursue additional 

challenges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Dream Brokers are employed by Sask Sport in 

partnership with the Saskatoon and Regina public and Catholic 

school boards. The Dream Brokers work in the schools to 

respond to the interests of underprivileged youth who are 

seeking out recreational, sport, and cultural opportunities but 

may have existing barriers such as lack of finances, 

transportation, or access to the potential opportunity. Once a 

youth expresses interest in a particular activity, the Dream 

Broker works with organizations, agencies, and groups to 

explore ways in which these barriers to participation can be 

eliminated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like this Assembly to join me in 

recognizing the Dream Brokers for their many successes. I am 

sure I can speak for the House when I say that we look forward 

to hearing more success stories as the program continues to 

grow. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Cultural Fair Raises Multicultural Awareness 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, on December the 

7th, Central Collegiate hosted the second annual Cultural Fair 

in Moose Jaw. The Cultural Fair raises awareness of 



December 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 151 

multiculturalism. It empowers students and their families by 

showcasing traditional food, music, and dance performances 

from a variety of countries. Some of the festival organizers 

were staff from the Moose Jaw multicultural centre’s settlement 

support workers in schools program. 

 

The settlement support workers in schools is a school-based 

outreach program offered throughout the province, and it is the 

first year of operation in Moose Jaw. SSWIS [settlement 

support worker in schools], as it is commonly referred to, 

connects newly arrived families to services and resources in the 

school and in the community in order to promote settlement and 

foster student achievement. The front line service these support 

workers provide to newcomers and their children is an 

important part of the settlement service program offered by this 

government. The SSWIS program consists of a partnership that 

includes the Moose Jaw Multicultural Council, the Prairie South 

and Holy Trinity boards of education, and Citizenship and 

Immigration Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask this Assembly to join me in 

recognizing the students and the staff of Central Collegiate and 

the staff of the settlement support workers in schools program 

for the valued services they provide to Saskatchewan 

newcomers and other population. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 

Services. 

 

Saskatchewan Company Achieves Milestone Revenues 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased to stand in this House today and recognize the 

incredible accomplishments of Brandt Industries Ltd. Brandt 

Industries has recently surpassed the milestone of $1 billion in 

annual revenue for 2011. One billion dollars in sales is rarely 

achieved by Canadian companies, let alone privately owned 

companies. 

 

Brandt is one of Canada’s largest privately owned companies 

and is operated so well that they are among an elite group of 

platinum members of the Canada’s 50 Best Managed 

Companies program. Brandt Industries has been moving 

forward in global economic hard times. They have 27 locations 

across North America, and they are still expanding with a plan 

to invest an additional 50 million in capital assets to continue 

growing the company. 

 

As a show of thanks to the employees of Brandt industry for 

their contribution to the success of the company, profit-sharing 

bonuses and preloaded Brandt Visa cards have been distributed 

to the employees. Brandt is also giving back to the people of the 

province. They have given 100,000 to United Way and 50,000 

to the Canadian Wish Foundation. Under the leadership of 

Gavin Semple, Brandt Industries has become a global industry 

leader. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

New Affordable Rental Housing 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 

I had the pleasure of accompanying Minister Draude to the 

official naming ceremony of a new, three storey, multi-use, 

affordable rental housing project in Regina. 

 

This affordable rental housing unit will give Regina’s 

individuals with chronic mental health conditions and cognitive 

disabilities a steady foundation to stabilize their lives and build 

their futures. This is a state of the art facility that affords 

comfort and security in an atmosphere of dignity and respect. 

 

The building, which will open its doors in early 2012, was 

officially designated today as McEwen Manor after former 

long-serving board member and former Chair of Ehrlo 

Community Services, Bob McEwen. In his years of service, Mr. 

McEwen has made a tremendous impact on the Ranch Ehrlo 

organization and, most importantly, on the people it serves. His 

compassion, dedication, and optimism are very much evident in 

the existence of this project and the work that will take place 

within it. This project has become a reality due to the excellent 

partnerships, collaboration, and funding provided by the city of 

Regina, the Ranch Ehrlo organization, and both federal and 

provincial governments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like this Assembly to join me in 

acknowledging Bob McEwen for his years of dedicated service 

to the Ranch Ehrlo organization and congratulate him on this 

recent honour that has been bestowed upon him. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Protection of Information 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Information 

Technology Office, ITO, contracts with ISM [Information 

Systems Management Corporation] to provide data 

management services. These contracts have grown by more 

than 150 per cent over the past four years. ISM is a subsidiary 

of IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], a 

wholly owned US [United States]-based company. 

 

To the minister: what assurances can he provide Saskatchewan 

people that their private, personal information is protected from 

inappropriate access by American authorities? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Information Technology Office. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 

opposite references a comment made by the auditor in her 

recent report. I’ve met with the auditor. I’ve talked to her about 

the issues she’s identified, the ones related to the PATRIOT 

[Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and 

Obstruct Terrorism] Act. Mr. Speaker, in her report she states 

that different governments have looked at the PATRIOT Act. 

It’s an Act that applies to American companies around the 

world. ISM is a Canadian company operated in Canada. It does 



152 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2011 

have a parent company — IBM — that is operated out of the 

US. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in her report she states that the federal 

Treasury Board also looked at the PATRIOT Act. Much of their 

data, much of government data in Canada is held by companies 

like ISM. And the federal Treasury Board saw it as a low risk. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we take her comments very seriously and we 

work to address many of her concerns. 

 

This is one that we will likewise ensure that we have as much 

ability to mitigate risk as possible. And we will continue to 

move forward to ensure that the people of Saskatchewan’s data 

is as safe as absolutely possible. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we know 

that’s not the case right now, though. And from Public 

Accounts in June of this year when the opposition raised these 

questions, we highlighted at that point in time the need for 

greater security. The report of the auditor reinforced those 

pieces. 

 

In fact at the time in the Public Accounts in June, the question 

was, can we be assured that the personal information cannot be 

accessed by Americans under the PATRIOT Act? And at that 

time, the government gave assurances that there was no risk. 

But since the auditor’s report has been released, that has 

changed. She stated otherwise, and I quote: “The protections 

put in place by ITO cannot assure that information will not be 

accessible through the operation of the USA Patriot Act.” 

 

So the question to the minister is simply: what measures is he 

taking to assure Saskatchewan people that their private, 

personal information is safe and secure and not being 

inappropriately accessed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Information Technology Office. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I laid out 

in my first answer, this is something that every government in 

Canada utilizes the private sector, Mr. Speaker, that we utilize 

ISM to keep much of our data. And it’s a move, Mr. Speaker, 

that in years past, under the former government, they didn’t 

have a data centre with appropriate protocols. They didn’t have 

a data centre that had security around the servers. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, when we became government, there were servers in 

closets. There were servers in buildings that did not have 

appropriate protocols, appropriate security. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have taken a very serious approach. We 

have taken security of people’s data to a new level, Mr. 

Speaker. It is something that we are going to continue to work 

on, Mr. Speaker. The PATRIOT Act is one aspect, but there are 

many aspects of security, of expectations the people of 

Saskatchewan have for the security of their data. It’s a 

work-in-progress, and we will continue to work towards the 

goal of ensuring that our data is as safe as possible. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that is something that we feel we’ve improved 

dramatically in the last four years. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — It appears, Mr. Speaker, that that 

minister is trying to dismiss this matter, make it trivial. In fact 

it’s not a small matter. This is Saskatchewan people’s private, 

personal information that we’re speaking of and ensuring that 

it’s not accessed inappropriately by the US government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The auditor’s report does lay out some specific mechanisms and 

recommendations that can be put in place to help safeguard the 

personal information of Saskatchewan people, highlights that 

other provinces have put forth legislation, has highlighted that 

there’s different pieces around encryption, highlighting that we 

should be understanding these risks as we’re entering into 

contracts with these third party providers, Mr. Speaker. And we 

know that this government’s spending significantly more to 

these private sector contractors. This contract alone, which was 

$6 million, is now over $15 million, Mr. Speaker, and there’s 

information that’s placed at risk. 

 

So I guess the question to the minister is: is he prepared to 

follow the recommendations of the auditor and to ensure that 

Saskatchewan people’s private, personal information is 

protected with the kind of certainty that Saskatchewan people 

expect and deserve? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Information Technology Office. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

references the recommendation put forward by the auditor. I 

have met with the auditor. We are working to address the 

concerns that she has put forward. In her report she states that 

the federal Treasury Board has indentified this as a potential 

risk. They put a great deal of due diligence in it. And Mr. 

Speaker, in her report she states that the federal Treasury Board 

has put it as a low risk. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, also in her report she talks about ensuring 

contracts are written in a specific manner to say that this data is 

not to be shared. That is something that is in this contract, Mr. 

Speaker. In every contract as we move forward, in every 

security mechanism we can put in place, Mr. Speaker, it is our 

intention to ensure that the data of the people of Saskatchewan 

is as safe as possible. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that the members 

opposite, when I talk of four years ago under their watch there 

were servers in closets in insecure places, and they laughed, Mr. 

Speaker. That is the kind of not taking the issue seriously that I 

think has landed them over there, Mr. Speaker. We will 

continue to make sure that data is handled in appropriate 

fashion as we continue to move forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The auditor’s report is clear, Mr. 

Speaker. And it highlights that there’s a risk to Saskatchewan 

people as it relates to their private, personal information being 

accessed by US authorities. I think Saskatchewan people would 

see this as a significant challenge and a significant priority. For 

the minister to continue to suggest that somehow this is a 



December 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 153 

low-level priority or a low risk simply isn’t enough, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There’s options that exist here and there’s recommendations 

that have been put forward. And here in Saskatchewan we have 

a great resource by way of our Independent Officer of this 

Assembly, the Privacy Commissioner, who’s been actually 

making this offer and this plea for some period of time to make 

the improvements to privacy legislation in this province. That’s 

one of the recommendations, as well, of the auditor’s report. 

 

So I guess my question to the minister is: will he commit today 

to working with the Privacy Commissioner here in 

Saskatchewan to bring forward legislation that in fact protects 

and brings forward the absolute certainty that Saskatchewan 

people deserve as it relates to the storage and access of their 

private, personal information, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Information Technology. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

again talks about, will we work with the auditor? The answer is 

yes. The auditor said that we should ensure that our contracts, 

Mr. Speaker, contained a provision that makes the data 

something that cannot be shared. That is something that we 

ensured was in the contract, Mr. Speaker. Again, the auditor 

spells this out as something that is a potential risk. She then puts 

in a report that this is something the federal Treasury Board 

took a very in-depth look at and held out as a low risk, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I will say it again to the members opposite: we take security 

very seriously. We take the data of the people of Saskatchewan 

very seriously, Mr. Speaker. As we move forward, we have 

improved the data in a very large way, the security of it. And 

we will continue to do so as long as we are in government. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Wetland Conservation and Drainage Management 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you know, 

wetlands are an important part of our watershed system. Sadly 

Saskatchewan has one of the highest wetland loss rates in the 

country. It’s estimated that 28 acres of wetlands are lost every 

day in southern Saskatchewan alone. It’s also well documented 

that the drainage of wetlands leads to downstream flooding and 

destruction of municipal infrastructure and personal property. 

What is not documented is the full extent of the destruction of 

these seasonal wetlands in Saskatchewan, considering that there 

is no baseline data available to monitor and track this disturbing 

trend. 

 

To the minister: is he prepared to direct the Saskatchewan 

Watershed Authority to gather relevant data so that the 

authority can properly monitor the status of Saskatchewan 

wetlands? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

And I want to thank the member for her question. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m in agreement with the member that wetlands are a valuable 

resource in Saskatchewan. They provide many benefits — 

storage of greenhouse gases, the storage and filtration of water. 

We’ve seen a number of benefits by wetlands during a year of 

excess moisture in the province where wetlands were able to 

store additional water that the system couldn’t hold, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I want to, I can tell the members, the member and the members 

of the House, that our government is developing a new policy 

framework for wetland conservation in collaboration with not 

only the Ministry of Environment, with the Watershed 

Authority — with the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities as well as Ducks Unlimited, Mr. Speaker. And 

that final plan will address wetland conservation and drainage 

management issues. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The number of 

complaints about illegal drainage has risen drastically in the last 

couple of years, and the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority has 

a backlog of complaints that they can’t keep up with as they 

don’t have sufficient resources to manage the volume. The 

existing penalties, which even the minister himself has 

acknowledged are not steep enough, are not even being used. 

 

To the minister: when and how will the Saskatchewan 

Watershed Authority send a message to producers that this is a 

serious issue and start properly investigating and prosecuting 

these offences? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

And I want to inform the member that this is a very serious 

issue for the province, especially in light of the last two years 

where we have had excess moisture in the province. That is 

why, Mr. Speaker, I met just recently, with several of my 

colleagues, with the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities who are hearing from their ratepayers on an 

ongoing basis about the problems that unauthorized drainage is 

causing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I have told that group, and I will tell others, that we are 

working with the Watershed Authority to reduce that backlog as 

quickly as we can, knowing full well that this has been a very 

busy year on a number of fronts for the Watershed Authority, 

especially in light of the excess moisture. And we will be 

looking at all avenues, including the regulations and the 

legislation, as it comes, when it comes to penalties involved for 

unauthorized drainage. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Wednesday, 

Ducks Unlimited issued a press release pointing out the lack of 

commitment to this issue in the Throne Speech. I am glad to 

hear that the minister met with SARM [Saskatchewan 



154 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2011 

Association of Rural Municipalities] last Thursday to discuss 

this issue and he agrees it’s a serious matter needing attention 

by this government. 

 

If producers leave these wetlands out of production, it affects 

their bottom line, so there’s little incentive for them to be 

proactive. They are also suffering the effects of drainage from 

neighbours up the watershed from them so are being forced to 

pass the flooding they get down the line. 

 

Last year alone, the flooding costs of this government were 

$240 million, Mr. Speaker. This government should know that 

an ounce of prevention leads to a pound of cure. To the 

minister: when will this government introduce legislation to 

give producers the necessary incentives to protect and reclaim 

these precious wetlands? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I do want 

to, I do want to again say that I did meet with SARM and 

discussed this very issue. I do also want to say that I have met 

recently, in the very recent past, just prior to the last, this 

previous election, with Ducks Unlimited to discuss this very 

issue. I had the opportunity to spend some time with a number 

of Ducks Unlimited officials. We toured some of the projects, 

not only that they’re working on but also ones that private 

landowners are concerned about when it comes to drainage. 

 

And we are working on a framework as it relates to a 

comprehensive wetlands policy, not only in co-operation with 

those outside agencies but as well consisting, the steering 

committee consisting of the Ministry of Environment, the 

Saskatchewan Watershed Authority, SARM, as well as 

Agriculture. And we look forward to moving forward on the 

development of that new policy. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I spoke this morning 

with a reeve from eastern Saskatchewan who told me that the 

number of incidents of illegal drainage has “gone beyond 

craziness.” The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority is 

underfunded, under-resourced, and does not have the capacity 

to enforce its existing illegal land drainage penalties. Municipal 

infrastructure is taking a pounding. Producers and the taxpayers 

are suffering. 

 

To the minister: given his recent assurances to SARM, when 

will he be announcing this plan that he has promised them? 

When will we see real action instead of vague promises? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, on the issue of the 

unauthorized drainage, we do know that . . . Specifically on that 

issue, we do know that the Watershed Authority is dealing with 

a large backlog, not only through the informal complaint 

process, but also when it gets to the formal complaint process. 

The Watershed Authority is actively working on a plan to move 

through all of that backlog, whether it be using their own 

internal resources, Mr. Speaker, or looking at some outside 

resources that may help deal with that backlog for this specific 

year — when over the last two years we have been dealing with 

excess moisture throughout large parts of the province — in an 

attempt to, in an expedited fashion, reduce that backlog for the 

benefit not only of the RMs [rural municipality] that are dealing 

with this issue with their ratepayers, but also of course those 

downstream landowners whose operations have been impacted. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Combatting HIV 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know that 

Saskatchewan faces the biggest HIV [human immunodeficiency 

virus] epidemic in all of Canada. Last year we saw 174 new 

HIV cases, including one newborn baby. Throughout this past 

year, we’ve had over 200 new HIV cases. The HIV infection 

rate in Saskatchewan is 2.5 times the national average per 

capita, and we have one-quarter of all HIV-related deaths in 

Canada. 

 

While the provincial government does have an HIV strategy, 

those on the front lines working on this issue, Mr. Speaker, tell 

me that the strategy is simply a drop in the bucket. My question 

to the minister: when will his government realize that there is an 

HIV epidemic and act accordingly? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, this government is very aware of the HIV issue 

that’s taking place in the province. We’ve seen other provinces 

go through this as well. Manitoba has faced serious increases of 

HIV cases. We are right now, Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing an 

increase over the last number of years. I would say that our last 

year’s numbers dropped down, although it may be an anomaly; 

it may be a one-time incident, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we are looking to make sure that we have our 

HIV strategy in place which we put in place a couple of years 

ago, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that we do address this issue. 

Part of the strategy, Mr. Speaker, is greater testing, is making 

sure people that have HIV know they have HIV and then take 

the precautions not to spread HIV, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I realize our strategy is only within its first year 

and a half, Mr. Speaker. But I can tell you that it is a strategy 

that has been proven to work in other jurisdictions, and I 

believe it will work here to help drive down the numbers into 

the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s fine for the minister to give 

very predictable speaking points. But we know when we speak 

with individuals working on the front lines that the strategy that 

the government has simply is not good enough. On many 

occasions, Mr. Speaker, we see members from the front bench 

dismiss concerns that are raised, only later to recognize that it is 



December 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 155 

a problem. Mr. Speaker, this is a serious problem, and it 

deserves better from this government. When we look at the 

trends for HIV infection in the province, we see a huge 

increase, Mr. Speaker, among young people, young people aged 

14 to 17, teenagers in this province. 

 

So my question to the minister: beyond the points that he has on 

his paper, when is this government going to take this epidemic 

seriously and act accordingly, putting real resources behind 

what needs to be done? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we saw 

the numbers increase over the last number of years, four years 

that we’ve been in government and certainly before that, we 

know that it is a unique situation in Saskatchewan, a unique 

situation, Mr. Speaker, in that the spread of HIV in 

Saskatchewan is mainly through intravenous drug use. In other 

words, sharing of needles is the biggest contributor, Mr. 

Speaker. And to that, that’s why we are working on a strategy 

to certainly educate those that are in the drug habit, Mr. 

Speaker, to make sure that they know the risk, but more 

importantly is to do point-of-care testing, Mr. Speaker, so that 

we test more individuals on a regular basis so they know 

whether they’re affected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have more work to do in this area, absolutely. 

This is a tough community to reach. And so we’re looking at 

many different ways to reach this community, whether it’s 

through social media or whatever, because we know the 

mainstream media, perhaps papers and perhaps TV, isn’t the 

way to get to address this community. So we’re looking at 

various ways, Mr. Speaker. But I will tell you that our 

government takes this issue very seriously, and we’ve invested 

time and money to address the issue. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad he’s brought up the issue 

of funding because that’s where this question goes. The 

government’s own HIV strategy says that “A conservative 

estimate of direct costs to the Saskatchewan health care system 

is approximately 40 million per year.” According to the 

government’s own figures, when you factor in the indirect cost 

attributable to HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency 

virus/acquired immune deficiency syndrome], the estimated 

cost is 136 million per year, Mr. Speaker. And this doesn’t take 

into effect, take into account the huge toll that it has on lives, 

Mr. Speaker, yet the Sask Party’s approach to this issue is only 

spending $2.5 million a year. 

 

So my question to the minister: when the human toll is so great, 

when the social costs are so great, when the financial costs for 

the province are so great, why is he taking this 

drop-in-the-bucket approach? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as we move forward in 

this front, we are certainly working with all our health regions, 

as well as community-based organizations, to address this issue. 

Some of the strong community-based organizations that are 

front line that are dealing with this issue are very valued 

partners, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are investing $2.5 million annually into an HIV strategy. 

Mr. Speaker, HIV did not start in this province this year, the 

year before, or even in 2007, Mr. Speaker. It had been in this 

province for many years. The numbers are increasing. But we 

are investing $2.5 million into a strategy, Mr. Speaker, which is 

$2.5 million more than the former NDP [New Democratic 

Party] government did. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Housing 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

Moose Jaw Housing Authority now is being forced by Sask 

Housing to increase rents by 22 per cent over the last year. 

Here’s a quote from a letter from the housing authority board 

chairman: 

 

The MJHA Board of Directors is not supportive of these 

increases, and has made that view known to Sask Housing, 

but as the property management agency of SHC, we are 

required to carry out SHC directives. 

 

To the minister: why is the Sask Party forcing local housing 

authorities to significantly increase rents on units that are 

supposed to be affordable? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know that 

everyone in the province, the members opposite, know that 

Sask Housing is committed to having safe, affordable housing, 

and social tenants continue to pay rent based on their income. 

Some tenants are eligible for rental supplements and shelter 

allowance as well. Mr. Speaker, combined, this will add to 100 

per cent of the average market rent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that we have to, in the province, make sure 

that Sask Housing rents stay comparable to the private market. 

In the last number of years, this has dipped considerably. And 

we want to make sure that Sask Housing has an opportunity to 

serve the people that need social housing and affordable 

housing, and that the rental, the private market does actually 

increase. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a continuum along the shelter rate that we 

have. We need more work to do. We know that we need houses 

in every area and that’s why we developed a housing strategy 

plan, Mr. Speaker. The housing authorities are important to the 

work that we do, and I assure you that we listen to them with 

the greatest of intent. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Shame on that minister for talking about rental 

supplements because she knows full well seniors do not qualify 

for rental supplements. She knows that. So right across this 

province, we are seeing rents go up in the affordable housing 



156 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2011 

units. We’re talking about the affordable housing units, not the 

social housing. 

 

And today we learned from CMHC [Canada Mortgage and 

Housing Corporation] that the rents, the vacancy rates have 

gone up, or gone down in Saskatchewan. They have now fallen 

in this province to 1.9 per cent from 2.6 per cent. This came out 

of Ottawa this morning. And Regina now has the worst vacancy 

rate in the entire country. It was 1 per cent. Now it is point six 

per cent. 

 

And I wrote the minister in June asking that she rescind this 

increase in affordable housing but she had her officials say, no, 

no this wasn’t going to happen. I am asking her now, in the 

spirit of the season, where these seniors and low-income people 

are going to be in the streets in January looking for new 

accommodation because the rents do go up in February, will she 

rescind this rent increase? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — We know the rents must be adjusted 

periodically to remain within the private market. And also I 

think the member opposite knows that when they were in 

government, they increased rents every year between 2002 and 

2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am also well aware that the vacancy rate right 

across Canada today through CMHC was noted as in, 

decreasing from 2.2 to 2.6. Mr. Speaker, the vacancy rate in 

Saskatchewan is about the same as it was last year. 

 

The last year these people, the NDP, were in government, the 

vacancy rate was 1.2 per cent. Since then, we’ve had 50,000 

more people come to this province and the vacancy rate is 1.9 

per cent. In other words, Mr. Speaker, we are building houses. 

We have built 968 new units since November of 2007. We have 

invested $309 million into projects like Headstart and rental 

incentive construction program. Mr. Speaker, there’s more 

work to be done and I assure you that that is what we’re doing 

in every part of the province. And I’m proud of the work we’re 

doing. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

New Online Campsite Reservation System 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 

House today with some exciting news about our beloved 

provincial park system. 

 

This morning I announced the opening date for Saskatchewan 

Parks’ new online campsite reservation service, and it’s ready 

just in time as the numbers are in. And in 2011, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan Parks set a new record for visitations. Mr. 

Speaker, despite some pretty cold and wet weather early on and 

lingering high water in some locations, this year has been the 

busiest ever for our provincial parks. In fact visits overall have 

gone up by more than 11 per cent since 2007. 

 

As the popularity of camping in our provincial parks grows, so 

does the use of our reservation service. In this record-setting 

year, some 28,000 reservations were made in our parks, and 

many more were requested. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on March 12th, 2012, starting at 8 a.m., park users 

will be able to book a campsite in real time online or by 

telephone at all our provincial parks and major recreation sites. 

People can go to a website called saskparks.net to select and 

reserve a campsite, pay for it, and receive confirmation in a 

matter of minutes, all with just a click of a mouse or the tap of a 

finger on the screen of their mobile device. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with this new service, campers will now be able to 

search by park, by date, or by campsite type. They will be able 

to choose their site and, with photos of every campsite online, 

people will know in advance that it will accommodate their 

trailer or other camper unit. While we are encouraging everyone 

to book their stay online, for those who are not able to do so, 

they can phone or call our call centre toll-free, where agents 

will make the booking and provide an instant confirmation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the past four years, our government has 

invested more than $33 million into upgrading our parks, 

including an increase of 250 per cent to the Parks capital 

budget. We’ve added electricity to almost 1,100 sites. We’ve 

built new service centres, boat launches, playgrounds, and 

change houses. We’ve even opened up the first new 

campground in a Saskatchewan park in more than 20 years. 

And as we heard last week in the Throne Speech, the 

improvements will continue with a further $10 million 

investment over the next four years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the trend is clear. Enjoying a Saskatchewan park 

is an increasingly popular pastime. Mr. Speaker, with this new 

real time online system, we will improve the overall reservation 

experience and provide our park users with what they’ve been 

asking for to make their visits memorable and hassle-free. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to start out 

with thanking the minister and his staff for providing me with a 

copy of his statement today. 

 

I guess there’s an opportunity for people. And I know people 

have brought concerns forward about having an opportunity to 

reserve a campsite, and there is going to be an opportunity for 

them to go online and do that. And I looked through the report 

and his statement and some of the information he shared today, 

and hopefully people will use that. We have a lot of, I guess, 

tourists that come out of the province but also we have a lot of 

people in the province that use the parks right now. They are 

beautiful parks. We are proud of them whether it’s northern 

Saskatchewan, southern Saskatchewan. Wherever you go in this 

beautiful province, the parks are there for them. They have been 

there for many years and will continue to be there if we take 

care of them. 

 

So at this time, I would just like to say we’ll monitor, making 

sure this new announcement, an opportunity for people to 

utilize, is properly utilized and make sure that it’s well used and 



December 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 157 

making sure that it meets all the hurrahs that the minister has 

announced. Anyway thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 19 — The Assessment Appraisers 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 19, The 

Assessment Appraisers Amendment Act, 2011 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs first reading of Bill No. 19, The Assessment 

Appraisers Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

Bill No. 20 — The Planning and Development 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 

No. 20, The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2011 

be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs first reading of Bill No. 20, The Planning 

and Development Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 21 — The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 21, 

The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011 be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General first reading of Bill No. 21, The 

Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 22 — The Commissioners for Oaths Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 portant modification 

corrélative à la loi intitulée 

The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 22, 

The Commissioners for Oaths Consequential Amendment Act, 

2011 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and the Attorney General first reading of Bill No. 22, The 

Commissioners for Oaths Consequential Amendment Act, 2011. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — The next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 23 — The Occupational Health and Safety 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 23, 

The Occupational Health and Safety Amendment Act, 2011 be 

now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General first reading of Bill No. 23, The 

Occupational Health and Safety Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 



158 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2011 

The Speaker: — When will this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — The next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 24 — The Advocate for Children and Youth Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 24, 

The Advocate for Children and Youth Act be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General first reading of Bill No. 24, The Advocate 

for Children and Youth Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — At the next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 25 — The Ombudsman Act, 2011 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 25, 

The Ombudsman Act, 2011 be now introduced and read a first 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General first reading of Bill No. 25, The 

Ombudsman Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — The next sitting of the house, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 26 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 26, 

The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved first reading of Bill No. 26, The Miscellaneous 

Statutes Repeal Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next meeting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 27 — The Education Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 

2011 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l'éducation 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 27, 

The Education Amendment Act, 2011 be now introduced and 

read for the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Education first reading of Bill No. 27, The Education 

Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall it be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 28 — The Education Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2011 
 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 28, 

The Education Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 be now 

introduced and read for the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Education first reading of Bill No. 28, The Education 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall it be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, according to the 



December 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 159 

Legislative Assembly Act, I table the annual report of 

Saskatchewan Legislative Library. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to 

make a motion regarding committee membership. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked 

leave to make a motion regarding committee membership. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Committee Membership 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That the name of Corey Tochor be submitted for that of 

Wayne Elhard on the Standing Committee of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That the name of Corey Tochor be substituted for that of 

Wayne Elhard on the Standing Committee of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 6 — The Miscellaneous Business Statutes 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Information 

Technology Office. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 

to introduce for second reading a Bill that will have a great 

impact on the business community of Saskatchewan. The 

Miscellaneous Business Statutes Amendment Act, 2011 outlines 

legislative requirements to streamline business registration and 

reporting across Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British Columbia. 

It’s part of the New West Partnership Trade Agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the New West Partnership is a far-reaching 

economic partnership designed to foster prosperity through 

meaningful interprovincial collaboration that will build on 

Saskatchewan’s opportunity-rich economy and competitive 

business environment. Working together has allowed the three 

provinces to harness its strengths and use our tax dollars more 

effectively to make the region more attractive to businesses and 

workers. Our agreement with Alberta and British Columbia to 

streamline the requirements needed to start and operate a 

business across our three provinces will make it easier to do 

business in the West. 

 

Effective July 1st, 2012, businesses registered as a corporation 

will no longer need to be registered separately in each of the 

three jurisdictions. By choosing extra-provincial as an option 

when they register in their home province, business 

corporations will automatically be registered in the other two 

westernmost provinces, and registration fees for the other 

provinces will also be waived. It also allows business 

corporations to file one annual return in their home province 

instead of three separate returns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, streamlined regulation and processes across the 

three provinces will produce great benefits for the business 

community and for government. It will reduce the 

administration burden on government and businesses, provide 

cost savings through reduced registration requirements and 

elimination of annual reporting other than in the home 

jurisdiction, reduce impediments to trade and investment in the 

West, and ensure equal treatment of all businesses regardless of 

their home province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the administrator of Saskatchewan’s Corporate 

Registry and Business Registration Saskatchewan, Information 

Services Corporation is focused on ways to streamline 

processes across government with the goal of reducing efforts 

and costs for businesses and government. ISC [Information 

Services Corporation of Saskatchewan] is working closely with 

Alberta and British Columbia to ensure compatible policies and 

regulations with common data exchange processes are 

developed together for the July 1st implementation date. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is another aspect of this legislation that is not 

related to the New West Partnership that will also support 

streamlined services to the Saskatchewan business community 

through ISC’s business portal initiative. The first phase of the 

business portal is up and running now. The Business 

Registrations Saskatchewan website provides one easy-to-use, 

online process to complete the steps required to: one, register a 

business with the corporate registry; two, as an employer of a 

workmen’s compensation board; and three, the provincial sales 

tax with the Ministry of Finance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation will provide ISC with the ability to 

add the Canadian revenue agency business number as an 

identifier to facilitate the sharing of information among the 

three levels of government — municipal, provincial, and 

federal. 

 

The Canada Revenue Agency already has agreements with five 

other provinces and several federal ministries with respect to 

the use and exchange of the business number — the nine-digit 

number assigned to a business that registers with the agency. 

Using the business number will provide a common identifier, 

making it easier to interact with multiple government agencies 

and support the overall goal to expand the business portal to 

provide a single point of access to most business services 



160 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2011 

provided by government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the legislation related to the New West 

Partnership and the Canadian revenue agency business number 

is another step in this government’s focus to provide more 

convenient and cost-effective means to deliver government 

services to business. 

 

To be competitive in attracting businesses and support the 

growing private sector, Saskatchewan must improve its online 

services to business. These initiatives will enhance services and 

make it easier to do business in our province by streamlining 

processes across government, ultimately reducing costs for 

businesses and government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it therefore gives me great pleasure to move that 

The Miscellaneous Business Statutes Amendment Act, 2011 be 

now read a second time. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Information Technology Office, Bill No. 6, The Miscellaneous 

Business Statutes Amendment Act, 2011. Is the Assembly ready 

for the question? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too am 

pleased today to offer some of our insight, and certainly some 

of my insight, as to what the Bill proposes to do. And as we 

indicated on numerous occasions, the role of this Assembly is to 

ensure that we properly look at the documentation and the Bills 

that are being proposed. We ask the questions that need to be 

asked, and we certainly want to also consult and seek advice 

from those groups that are impacted or certainly affected by this 

Act. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that at the outset when 

you look at some of the Bills being proposed by this 

government, whether it’s this minister or another minister, we 

want to make sure that . . . Again what is being proposed may 

seem innocuous, but we want to make sure that we take the time 

to understand where these Bills are going and why they’re 

being proposed at this time and what is the objective of some of 

these Bills. 

 

Again under the New West Partnership, I understand the 

minister to indicate that these Bills are really to streamline the 

regulations between the three provinces of the West — 

Saskatchewan, Alberta, and BC [British Columbia] — to try 

and ensure that they do put the least amount of obstacles in 

front of the business community. 

 

And certainly from the NDP caucus, the opposition caucus, we 

understand the importance of the private sector. We understand 

that the business community has to move. We understand that 

they’re a vital cog in our provincial economy. We want to 

continue building on their success, Mr. Speaker.  

 

So I think there’s no question in our minds, as we begin to look 

at the history of what the NDP done to encourage and foster 

that private sector growth, I can remember a number of years 

ago where we made the commitment to reduce regulations as a 

priority of this government and to really work with the private 

sector to make sure they knew that Saskatchewan was a great 

place in which they could live, invest in, and certainly raise a 

family. So, Mr. Speaker, any time we hear of some opportunity 

and some better business opportunities to build on the success 

of the private sector, as a New Democratic caucus, we certainly 

want to look as to how we could accommodate that and support 

that. 

 

So again at the outset I think the attitude that we have towards 

the business community is good. I think that the whole notion 

of streamlining regulations . . . And certainly working with the 

Canada Revenue Agency is certainly an aspect that I wasn’t 

aware of but certainly been made aware of it now. And to also 

look at the whole issue of having to only register in one of the 

jurisdictions and being recognized by the other two, and I think 

in terms of the returns on some of the documents that these 

businesses have to submit, whether it’s for taxation purposes or 

information purposes, and having that streamlined as well is not 

a major problem. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think overall when you look at the Bill that’s 

being proposed now, at the outset I think our attitude toward the 

business community has always been good, and we want to 

continue building on the success we had and certainly build on 

the success of the economy that’s in place now. 

 

That being said, I want to also point out that we need to make 

sure that this Act that is being proposed by the minister is not an 

avenue in which some of the other business communities in 

other jurisdictions would come along and say, well if we can 

register in Saskatchewan and avoid doing all these other things 

that are attached to some of the regulations of Alberta or some 

of the needs of BC, and that Saskatchewan’s, as an example, 

their labour laws are weaker. We can use that particular 

standard in Saskatchewan. If we register there, we might be able 

to use that avenue of weaker labour laws to, you know, to make 

sure that Alberta and then Saskatchewan could recognize that 

and lower that level playing field in both those provinces to 

match the Saskatchewan’s laws. And what happens at the end 

of the day, Mr. Speaker, is you have the three jurisdictions 

looking and collaborating as to how they could weaken the, as 

the case I use, some of the labour laws, when you look at some 

of the activity happening on the business front. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what you don’t want to see is, don’t want to 

see that aspect of any Bill come forward. And that’s one of the 

reasons why as an opposition we embrace the role of making 

sure that if you do have an idea that deserves praise and has 

great merit, so be it. But people have to know that every time 

the Saskatchewan Party government proposes a concept or a 

new Bill, that you have to look at a bunch of things that they 

might be after. 

 

And what we fear in the opposition is they use the great 

opportunity attached to the business side of things, as the case 

with this Bill, but they turn around and they try and sneak other 

issues through the process that the minister has spoken about. 

And then we begin to see a race to the bottom on things like 

workers’ safety, on things like certification of all your workers, 

on things like environmental standards, and the list goes on and 

on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we need to make sure that if this is a simple case, a simple 



December 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 161 

case of trying to make sure that there’s a streamline of 

regulation for the business community, that when they want to 

incorporate one jurisdiction that they are recognized in another 

jurisdiction, whether it’s Canada or the taxation purposes, that 

there’s some streamlining there. There’s nothing wrong with 

streamlining and having those regulations certainly operate in 

sync with Alberta and with BC as well. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, again at the outset you look at the Bill itself, 

and in its purest form there may be some great ideas here. But 

there is always an ulterior motive, and that’s exactly what we’re 

trying to find out. 

 

So the question that we have for the minister: in looking at all 

these particular Bills and trying to streamline their operation, is 

there any impact on workers’ safety standards? Is there any of 

that particular aspect, that a company could use our weaker 

standards, as the case may be, to try and register their company 

and thereby get away with more of a challenge to worker safety 

by simply coming to Saskatchewan or for that case maybe 

going to Alberta and forcing the Saskatchewan government to 

recognize how different jurisdictions might undertake worker 

safety standards? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of regulation attached to the 

business community. It’s not just about taxation. It’s not just 

about recognizing the fact that we’ve had to streamline some of 

the rules, but also to make sure that we look at the, as I 

mentioned, the environmental standards and how they treat their 

ways, how they treat their employees, workplace safety. The list 

kind of goes on and on and on as to some of the challenges that 

the business community should and must face. 

 

So in that regard, Mr. Speaker, as I look at the Bill itself, we ask 

the simple question as to which groups and organizations have 

had an opportunity to look at this Bill. Is this Bill part of a 

larger package? And obviously that should be the case. And 

when is that larger package coming forward? Because what I 

feel is going to happen, Mr. Speaker, is you’re going to have the 

ministers try and sneak in four or five little, smaller Bills here, 

meanwhile avoiding the big question of the New West 

Partnership and having the public or giving the public the 

opportunity to debate that partnership and seeing where the 

weakness is and make sure they expose that weakness and get 

the people of Saskatchewan to also look at that particular Act or 

the particular actions of this government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at the outset as I indicated, it seemed like a 

great idea to have a streamlined process for all the businesses 

and that if they do register in one jurisdiction, that it’ll 

recognize in the other three. There is certainly a merit in 

looking at that option. But as you undertake to do this in the 

business community, is there other avenues of coordination that 

we could possibly look at that could have some impact on our 

provinces for the better? 

 

Now I look at some of the examples that the current Bill has 

shown, and it talks about the administration. It talks about the 

fact that all three provinces are agreeing to this. And you got to 

ask, on some of the understandings, interpretation of the other 

two partners, namely BC and Alberta, what are their positions 

on a number of fronts? Have we heard any information from 

them? We’ve heard from this particular minister, and he’s 

saying that there’s great co-operation from our two other 

partners in this New West Partnership. But we haven’t heard, 

Mr. Speaker, what exactly their aspirations are around this Act 

and how they interpret this Act from their perspective. 

 

Now again, I go back to my earlier statements. Are they going 

to insist that Saskatchewan follow their standards on a number 

of other fronts as part of this Act? Is this Act part of a larger 

picture under the New West Partnership? Where are things at 

when it comes to the bigger top of mind concepts such as the 

environment? And we don’t see any connection here and no, 

certainly, comments from the minister in relation to those 

challenges. 

 

And that is why it’s important to take the time, as I’ve 

mentioned on all of the Bills that we’ve spoke about yesterday, 

to take the time to consult with all the groups, take the time 

that’s necessary to see where the labour groups are on some of 

these fronts, to take the time to see where the other 

jurisdictions, how they perceive this particular Bill, to take the 

time to see how the business community may like this Bill. And 

I’m assuming that they probably like it, but is there other areas 

that they would be concerned with? And these are some of the 

things that’s really, really important. 

 

Now the premise that we want to support our business 

community is great. But as we all know, we have to make sure 

that we balance that particular aspect of the economy with 

things like the environment and certainly things like having 

access to a skilled labour force. That’s also very important in 

building this brave new economy. And that’s one of the reasons 

why we should have a lot of respect for the labour unions and 

the groups that provide those particular skilled workers. So 

have they had any consultation with that particular important 

group? Has the environmental sector, have they had any 

discussions on this New West Partnership? 

 

So all these Bills that are being proposed, as innocuous as they 

may seem at the outset, there are some motives that we do 

suspect would be contrary to Saskatchewan’s health. And that’s 

one of the reasons why the opposition is certainly going to take 

the time to look at these Bills and seek consultation and seek 

advice from a number of groups that would be actively 

involved. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I always sit back and listen carefully to what 

the ministers have to say because at the very least, you know, 

we should afford them the opportunity to explain what their 

Bills are. Now has the minister consulted with any other group 

outside of this Assembly, like the chamber of commerce? Have 

they had any consultation with them? The small-business 

associations, have they had any comments from them? There’s 

a different organization probably for a lot of the aspects of this 

Bill. Have they been in touch with any of those other 

corporations that may have some timely advice for this 

particular Bill? 

 

And that’s what’s also very, very important I think overall, is to 

make sure you have some good discussion. And there may be 

things in there that we can add to strengthen the Bill. There may 

be things that we need to delete to strengthen the Bill. There’s 

different ways and mechanisms, and we can’t assume that in the 

Assembly itself that we know everything and we can provide all 



162 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2011 

the answers to the questions people have. And that’s why it’s 

important to reach out, and that’s why we question the minister 

as what kind of consultation did he have on this Bill with a 

number of other groups and organizations that are out there that 

this Bill would impact. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, without question I am going to tell the people 

of Saskatchewan that as an opposition we are and will take the 

time. We are going to see if there’s groups out there that’ll like 

this particular Act. And if they like this Act, as I mentioned 

yesterday, come on to the Assembly, send us letters of 

encouragement, and saying this Act is good based on this part. 

And equally we need to ask the different organizations out there 

that if there’s certain parts of the Act that they do not like, to 

also contact the opposition because this is important for us to 

make sure we hear from both sides and all the parties on this 

Bill and other Bills. 

 

Now I think one of the things that’s really, really important is 

the whole New West Partnership. As a single Bill, as a single 

item that this government keeps speaking about, we don’t seem 

to have a single, major presentation from that government 

saying, here is our Bill on the New West Partnership and here’s 

all the different aspects of the Bill that we think that the people 

of Saskatchewan ought to see and ought to have the opportunity 

to really, really begin to assess whether this New West 

Partnership is good or bad. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as long as we have some of these one-offs in 

terms of some of these particular Bills, then it begs the 

question: why aren’t they bringing in a major Bill to talk about 

the New West Partnership? Why isn’t all this coming forward 

in one solid opportunity for the people of Saskatchewan to have 

a look at this? And not just have it done in the Assembly. Have 

your public hearings, and have those that like the idea of this 

particular Act be at the Assembly and have other people that 

may not like this Act also be at the Assembly. Why can’t we 

have the public process to really determine whether the New 

West Partnership, which this Bill is part of, is really what the 

people of Saskatchewan want? Because what we fear on this 

side is while on one side it may be great, a great opportunity for 

the business community, in theory there’s a lot of other aspects 

of business that are attached to this file. We would like to ask 

those questions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve heard from a few groups on the New West Partnership, 

and what they fear is exactly what a lot of people in the back of 

their minds are fearing — that if you take the Saskatchewan 

Party and put them against the Conservative Party in Alberta 

and certainly the Liberal Party in BC, what will happen is 

you’re going to have those two bigger economies dominate our 

little Saskatchewan Party caucus. And what will happen is a lot 

of the Saskatchewan Party interests will be totally forgotten, 

and it will be simply one of the minor players in this New West 

Partnership. And that’s the fear that the people of Saskatchewan 

have. That’s the warning that people of Saskatchewan are 

giving us, and that’s the warning that we ought to heed, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I don’t have the confidence necessary to see the two or three 

ministers travel to Alberta and say, look this is our deal and 

what are you guys thinking? Because these guys are certainly 

going to use Saskatchewan as best as they can. They’re going to 

take what they can from Saskatchewan, as much as they can. 

And they’re also going to make sure that they use us for our 

weak aspects of labour as an example, and try and use that 

standard for the rest of Western Canada. And that’s one of the 

worries that we have as an opposition when it comes to this 

New West Partnership. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, no matter what the minister proposes, that this 

is all part of the puzzle, this Bill is all part of a puzzling strategy 

by this government. Why don’t they just come out and tell the 

people of Saskatchewan in one major Bill what the New West 

Partnership is all about? And why don’t they, why don’t they 

simply bring that forward to the people of Saskatchewan? And 

the opposition can certainly have a look at that Bill and have a 

look at it in a very public way. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to make sure we take the time, as I 

mentioned, to look at this Bill, and certainly from that 

perspective I move that we adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 

Athabasca adjournment of debate on Bill No. 6, The 

Miscellaneous Business Statutes Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 7 — The Co-operatives Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 

2011 modifiant la Loi de 1996 sur les coopératives 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Information Technology Office. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 

to introduce second reading of The Co-operatives Amendment 

Act, 2011. This is a bilingual Bill that reflects the same 

legislative requirements outlined in The Miscellaneous Business 

Statutes Amendments Act, 2011 with respect to co-operatives to 

support streamlined business registrations and reporting across 

Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British Columbia as part of the 

New West Partnership Trade Agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the New West Partnership is a far-reaching 

economic partnership designed to foster prosperity through 

meaningful interprovincial collaboration, and will build on 

Saskatchewan’s opportunity-rich economy and competitive 

business environment. Working together has allowed the three 

provinces to harness its strengths and use our tax dollars more 

effectively to make the region a more attractive place for 

businesses and workers alike. 

 

Our agreement with Alberta and British Columbia to streamline 

the requirements needed to start and operate businesses across 

the three provinces will make it easier to do business in the 

West. Effective July 1st, 2012, businesses registering as a 

corporation will no longer need to register separately in each of 

the three jurisdictions. By amending all of Saskatchewan’s 

business statutes, including our co-operatives legislation, we 

will be ready to expand beyond business corporations after 



December 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 163 

2011. By choosing extraprovincial as an option when they 

register in their home province, co-operatives will automatically 

be registered in the other two westernmost provinces, and 

registration fees for the other provinces will also be waived. It 

also allows co-operatives to file one annual return in their home 

province instead of three separate returns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, streamlined regulations and processes across the 

three provinces will produce great benefits for the business 

community and for government. It will reduce the 

administrative burden on governments and businesses. It will 

provide cost savings to reduce registration requirements and 

elimination of annual reporting other than that in their own 

home jurisdiction. It will reduce impediments to trade and 

investment in the West. And it will ensure equal treatment for 

all businesses regardless of their home province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the administrator of Saskatchewan’s corporate 

registry and business registrations, Information Services 

Corporation is focused on ways to streamline processes across 

government with the goal of reducing effort and costs for 

businesses and government. ISC is working closely with 

Alberta and British Columbia to ensure compatible policies and 

regulations and common data exchange processes are developed 

together for the July 1st implementation date for corporations, 

with the expectation that other types of business entities such as 

co-operatives will be brought on board by 2013. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is another aspect of this legislation that is not 

related to the New West Partnership that will also support 

streamlined services to the Saskatchewan business community 

through ISC’s business portal initiative. The first phase of the 

business portal is up and running now. Business Registrations 

Saskatchewan website provides one easy-to-use online process 

to complete the steps required to register a business in the 

corporate registry. It will also allow employers to register for 

workmen compensation board and it will also register 

provincial sales tax with the Ministry of Finance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation will provide ISC with the ability to 

add Canada Revenue Agency business number as an identifier 

to facilitate the sharing of information among the three levels of 

government — municipal, provincial, and federal. The 

Canadian revenue agency already has agreements with five 

other provinces and several federal ministries with respect to 

the use and exchange of the business number — a nine-digit 

number assigned to the business that registers with the agency. 

 

Using the business number will provide a common identifier, 

making it easier to interact with multiple government agencies 

and support the overall goal to expand the business portal to 

provide a single point of access for most business services 

provided by government. Mr. Speaker, this legislation, related 

to the New West Partnership and the Canadian revenue agency 

business number, is another step in this government’s focus to 

provide more convenient and cost-effective means to deliver 

government services to business. 

 

To be competitive in attracting businesses and support the 

growing private sector, Saskatchewan must improve its online 

service to business. These initiatives will enhance services and 

make it easier to do business in our province by streamlining 

processes across government, ultimately reducing costs for 

businesses and government. Mr. Speaker, it gives me great 

pleasure to move that The Co-operatives Amendment Act, 2011 

be now read a second time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for the Information 

Technology Office has moved second reading of Bill No. 7, The 

Co-operatives Amendment Act, 2011. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased to once again rise to offer our comments and certainly 

offer my perspective on the Bill that the minister has proposed. 

And that’s exactly the earlier comments I made, Mr. Speaker, is 

that this is another Bill that’s brought forward in terms of the 

New West Partnership, that they are trying to do as a 

government. And when you piecemeal presentations like this to 

the public, it really begins to beg the question: why aren’t they 

bringing forward a major file to have a debate and do it in a 

very public manner in which people that may like it or may not 

like it can come forward and offer their perspectives and offer 

their opinions? 

 

That is what’s really important, Mr. Speaker, and that’s another 

example when you talk about The Co-operatives Act. Like I’m 

not sure if the minister had the consultation with the different 

co-ops that exist in Saskatchewan and those that use the online 

service now to register their business. How is that going to 

impact these co-operatives? Is there going to be any kind of 

change of ownership or dominance or any of those questions? 

That is not being answered here at all, Mr. Speaker. And you 

look at whether, again, you throw in the streamlining argument, 

you know, that the Sask Party likes to use. And that’s fair 

enough. If you’re streamlined, do you go to workmen’s 

compensation, to PST [provincial sales tax] collection, or tax 

collection? 

 

Nothing wrong with streamlining, and especially if you’re 

going to do it where it really enhances the business community. 

We’re all for that, and as you know, as I indicated in the 

previous Bill, as a government we undertook to make sure we 

streamlined all the rules and regulations, and that we actually 

tried to restrict regulation and bring some of those, some of 

those regulations down as much as we can. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the question I have is, how many 

co-operatives are being registered with this minister now? What 

is the primary function of some of these co-ops? And again, 

when he puts this Bill forward, is there going to be other, other 

co-operatives that will be negatively impacted by this particular 

Bill? Because it appears at the outset that this is simply going to 

happen: that if you register in one province, it’s going to 

happen, it’s going to be recognized in all three. Now is that 

going to have an impact of a co-op here in Saskatchewan, that 

they might not want to have other co-ops from the other 

jurisdictions register? Does that bring a competitive 

disadvantage, you know, to them? 

 

So where is Saskatchewan in the scheme of things when you 

look at the population of Alberta — what is it? — two and a 

half, three million? And BC’s four times our population. How 

does that impact our economy? How does that affect our 

co-operatives? And the list kind of goes on as to all the 

questions that different groups have out there, Mr. Speaker. 



164 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2011 

And that’s one of the reasons why, you know, again you go up 

and you look at the Bills itself. They do seem to have very little 

information here; it’s on three or four or five pages. And when 

people of Saskatchewan, what they really want to have is a very 

thorough explanation as to what impact this particular Bill, the 

New West Partnership may have on this Bill. And that’s exactly 

what the opposition is arguing for, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So to the minister that just spoke on the Bill that he’s presenting 

here, we need to have that data. We need to have the 

consultation phase that he had with some of the co-operatives 

and the different associations that are involved. Does this affect 

how we develop our co-operatives in the future? And these are 

some of the questions that we have at the outset as a opposition 

caucus. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you look at the challenges, and I’d use the 

word, co-operatives. Does this restrict the co-operatives that 

may be formed outside of Saskatchewan? Like for example, if 

BC decided to set up a freshwater co-operative of some sort, 

does that subject Saskatchewan to adhere to some of the rules 

and regulations around registering a water co-operative in BC? 

Does that make Saskatchewan subjected to those kind of 

business practices or standards, Mr. Speaker? And we don’t 

know that. 

 

And I understand that the Premier spoke and said that water is 

not on the table in terms of some of these discussions. But 

you’ve got to understand is that you’ve got populations that are 

three, if not four, times bigger than us that are eyeing our 

natural resource base here in Saskatchewan. And if you don’t 

think they don’t want all the resources we have, then you ought 

to think again. 

 

And that’s one of the reasons why there is a bit of a lack of 

confidence, certainly from our perspective, when you look at 

what exactly does this Bill impact in terms of the co-operatives 

development in our province and other provinces. Because we 

have to find out what the residual action of some of those other 

jurisdictions will have on our province, and I don’t think that 

work has been done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would point out that the . . . We thank the minister for the 

information and the presentation. And we need to know some of 

the bigger questions attached to this New West Partnership and 

some of these smaller Bills that they’re positioning the 

co-operatives now, they’re positioned in the small business 

community in terms of streamlining opportunity to become part 

of this partnership. Now we have a whole whack of questions to 

ask before that’s done. Before you position all these groups and 

organization to be part of this partnership, have you answered 

the bigger questions? And I don’t think that work has been done 

at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And we spoke about water as one of the points. And if you look 

at the challenge that we have in our area, Mr. Speaker, in the 

northwest in general . . . And I know that a lot of people in our 

region, they begin to worry about water quality, land quality, 

and certainly air quality, when it comes to some of the activity 

associated with the Alberta oil sands, the tar sands project. 

While they talk about Fort Mac [Fort McMurray] in particular, 

we know that it’s not just in that particular area. It’s all 

throughout the northern part of Alberta where the impacts and 

certainly the pollution is being felt in the northwest part of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now does this co-operative movement, does this Act here, does 

that limit our argument as a people and as a province? Does that 

limit us to saying that we can’t go after them on the 

environmental front? And that’s exactly what my point is when 

we talk about some of the partnerships that that party is 

speaking about. How does this restrict us on environmental 

liability? How does it restrict us on the standards of care for the 

workers? How does that restrict us in terms of having things 

like water being on the table because we are dealing with bigger 

economies and more populated provinces? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would be encouraged if the minister, 

alongside his colleagues, would get up and say, well this 

co-operative process, while it’s a small piece of the major 

puzzle attached to the New West Partnership, we have had 

assurances on many other fronts — whether it’s an 

environmental front or labour laws or whether it’s protection of 

worker rights, whether there’s non-competition in certain 

sectors — we have all that figured out. And what I fear, Mr. 

Speaker, is that they don’t have it all figured out, that there’s 

many more things that they may have thought they had it 

figured out, but there are times when people come to the table 

from other provinces and other jurisdictions and they have 

ulterior motives when it comes to dealing with Saskatchewan. 

And we must make every effort to protect our province and the 

resources and the people as we can. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I use the example of the environmental 

standards that I worry about. And one of the things that people 

ought to know is that there’s research being done right now in 

my area when we find out that 70 per cent of the pollution of 

the oil sands activity in northern Alberta is being felt or is being 

dumped onto northwestern Saskatchewan. You know, that has 

been clearly identified where the westerly winds that bring all 

that pollution to our region. And right now the people of the 

Northwest are saying well, based on this New West Partnership 

that they’re talking about, is there assurances of cleanup? Are 

they going to make sure that they mitigate all the damage to our 

lands? And is anybody monitoring those effects? And right now 

I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, there is nobody monitoring those 

effects. They have four or five of those strategies and that’s it. 

 

Now does this New West Partnership, does it limit 

Saskatchewan’s ability to go tell these guys that we don’t like 

this idea, we think it’s a terrible idea? We haven’t even set the 

standards in terms of the baseline, in terms of what activity is 

occurring to our lands as a result of some of the oil sands 

pollution to our region. And the baseline that has not been 

established yet. As each year passes, Mr. Speaker, the idea that 

we can identify a baseline as to what pollution is occurring, it’ll 

start moving up. And the more time we waste not identifying 

that baseline, the less opportunity that we have to prove to the 

Alberta government that their activity is polluting our land and 

that they should be held responsible for that and cleaning up 

that land, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s exactly what I fear when we talk about the New 

West Partnership. Are we losing something in this whole 



December 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 165 

process and certainly in the Sask Party’s hurry to get this 

agreement done through Bills like this when the larger 

questions and the larger pieces have not been addressed? And 

that’s exactly why, Mr. Speaker, that we take our time to make 

sure we look at this Bill to see what the impact and what effect 

that it has on the big picture of the New West Partnership and to 

say, look, these little pieces that may be great for business — 

and we’re not arguing that — but you should have the bigger 

questions addressed. 

 

You should have the bigger answers prepared. You should have 

had the public consulted. You should have all these things 

figured out because, rest assured, if Alberta or BC have an 

opportunity to pull the wool over that government’s eyes, they 

certainly will. Because if it’s an advantage for them, they’ll take 

advantage of our Sask Party government. And you’ll see the 

challenge that we face after that and whether it’s worker safety 

or whether it’s environmental standards. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’d be nice to know that this Bill had 

far-reaching effect and impact and consultation with 20 

different departments of this government. But it doesn’t. It’s 

one-offing on one aspect of the Bill where they talk about 

streamlining. And at the outset, that’s exactly what this 

government does: it talks about the small things that people can 

grasp on without answering the bigger question of what 

challenges does the New West Partnership offer our province? 

 

So I think overall whether it’s the environment or worker safety 

— whether it’s ensuring that there’s good collaboration by the 

entire different departments, and that there’s things like 

environmental protection not being forgotten — it’s about 

worker safety, making sure water’s off the table. These are tons 

of the questions that we have when it comes to the New West 

Partnership, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s exactly why these Bills when they come forward, 

our role as an opposition is to engage the public, to warn them 

that this could happen and to ask them to heed our advice by 

doing two things: is paying attention to the file; and secondly, 

that there’s certain aspects that you don’t like about this 

particular file, to let the opposition know and join us to fight 

some of the aspects of this particular Bill so that Saskatchewan 

can be strengthened on its position when it comes to that 

government’s determination for this New West Partnership, 

even though they may not have had all the bases covered, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s an important message that I want to share 

with this Assembly, and I want to share with those that are 

listening. 

 

So again I would say that there’s many more questions we have, 

many more comments that we have, and I would ask that we 

adjourn this debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of Bill No. 7, The Co-operatives Amendment Act, 

2011. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

Bill No. 8 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2011 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Information Technology Office. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to introduce the second reading of a Bill that will enhance 

services to the customers of the land titles registry. The Land 

Titles Amendment Act, 2011 outlines legislative requirements 

that will enable Information Services Corporation to simplify 

processes in the land titles registry by creating a document 

storage library that will reduce the number of duplicate 

documents that are required to be filed with the registry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, ISC is a customer-focused organization that 

regularly consults with its stakeholders. This enhancement to 

service is a direct result of consultations with representatives 

from the legal and financial sectors who will use the document 

storage library the most, and the library is being designed 

specifically to meet their needs. These customers requested that 

a process be developed that allows them to file standard form 

terms and conditions and remove the current requirement of 

submitting duplicate documents with each transaction. 

 

The document storage library will also provide better search 

capabilities and access to documents for use in the land registry 

transactions. The functionality of the library will improve the 

ability of ISC and its customers to manage files and documents 

of all types of transactions including mortgages and leases, 

interests in such easements and assignments of rent, and various 

authorizations such as court orders, power of attorney, and 

letters probate. The ultimate benefit will be quicker and easier 

submissions of land transaction documents through all 

channels: online, by mail, and by fax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it therefore gives me pleasure to move The Land 

Titles Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for the Information Technology Office second 

reading of Bill No. 8, The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2011. Is 

the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I again 

am pleased to join the debate. And certainly I want to point out 

that the Bill, which is primarily An Act to amend The Land 

Titles Act, 2000, the focus of this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, is 

what the minister referred to as a document storage library. And 

I would assume that much of the information that he’s speaking 

about may be stored on disks. It may be stored certainly in 

written form, in filing cabinets, and so on, so forth. And to 

looking at establishing a document storage library may be a 

great idea. 

 

But the key thing about how user friendly is this service, is it 

meant to add more fees to what people are trying to do online? 

Because I know many people out there that are trying to look at 

land transfers and so on and so forth and begin to use the land 

titles services, there’s a lot of questions, you know, that they 

certainly have. And while this document storage library may be 

a great idea, we need to know how that improves services. And 

as the minister certainly alluded to, he spoke about the 



166 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2011 

consultation that he’s had with stakeholders. And I certainly 

wouldn’t mind knowing who the stakeholders were and what 

their opinions on how to improve this service would be 

enhanced with what he’s described as a document storage 

library. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in my area there’s a lot of people that 

struggle with the land titles issue. We know that there is tons of 

problems. We know of some people that have had titles in their 

parents’ names for years because the parents never had a will, 

that this land issue is up in the air, and they can’t afford the 

fourteen or fifteen hundred dollars that is necessary to hire a 

lawyer to do the transfer. And what kind of legal advice . . . 

You know, as we know, legal advice doesn’t come cheap. So a 

lot of them, what happens, the whole system grinds to a halt 

when there is not a clear title as to who the land should be 

transferred to nor the resources to figure this out. 

 

There’s examples of how we’ve seen spouses of people that 

have passed and the title is in both their names. And that again 

is another problem because they don’t have the will nor do they 

have the financial means to hire a lawyer to determine who 

would gain access to this property. 

 

These are some of the questions that I immediately had when 

this minister brought forward this whole Act to amend The 

Land Titles Act. And I was assuming that this would certainly 

enhance some of the services because the ISC, the parent 

company I guess of the land titles service, I think they’re a fine 

organization. I think they’re doing wonderful for the province. 

And I think all the streamlining and all the investment of 

dollars, taxpayers’ dollars, to make sure that the ISC operation 

work well, I can tell the people at the Information Services 

Corporation has done a tremendous job. They have done a great 

service to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

But there’s still a lot of questions. While they can process 

applications, there’s a bunch of questions that other people need 

to address. And while the document storage library may be set 

up and it may be enhanced and developed by the ISC, there’s 

still a bunch of folks out there that have a bunch of questions as 

to how they could access ISC services to finally resolve some of 

the long-standing issues around who owns what property or not. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask the minister to see how the 

document storage library would assist people that are trying to 

figure land titles transfers overall. And that’s something that’s 

really important because they obviously want to have the 

historical information available and as an added service, but 

there are still some gaps in the service that I think need to be 

enhanced. 

 

How user-friendly is the online service? Does the public have 

opportunity to go into the storage library and look through 

documentation there? Is that option available? I didn’t get that 

information from the minister and that, I think, is certainly 

important for the people to hear. 

 

So I think overall if you look at some of the challenges, whether 

it’s financial challenges that people have or whether it’s a will 

that has not been written or poorly understood or poorly crafted, 

that there is still some significant loopholes or areas of 

confusion, if you will, that ISC I think has to certainly act upon. 

And while the document storage library is one aspect of that, 

there’s probably seven or eight that could be enhanced and 

certainly seven or eight that could be of service to different 

groups of people that I spoke about earlier. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m just wondering again what the role of 

the document storage library might be about. ISC, as I 

mentioned in its early years, I think the gentleman that proposed 

ISC and brought ISC into being here, I think, was none other 

than the minister of the day at that time, was the Hon. Eric 

Cline. As we all know, Eric Cline worked hard to build ISC. 

There was great, great criticisms on behalf of the opposition in 

those days, and that was the Sask Party opposition. They were 

very, very critical of ISC saying, this is costing tons of money 

and that it wasn’t going anywhere. And they were complaining 

about how much the CEO [chief executive officer] was making. 

They were complaining about the process. They were 

complaining this thing will never work, and on and on and on 

about how the world was falling apart because ISC was born. 

And man, oh man, Mr. Speaker, that was the worst thing under 

the sun. 

 

And typical of this government, Mr. Speaker, very typical of 

them, they don’t recognize any of that early work, the work to 

establish ISC that this minister is speaking about and the work 

to build the economy that they claim credit for. And our side, 

we look at them and we say yes, go ahead, claim away. Claim 

away. We don’t mind, but please don’t mess it up because every 

person in Saskatchewan, every intelligent person in 

Saskatchewan knows exactly who built the economy and who 

built the vital cogs of the economy such as ISC. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it was none other than the New Democrats. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re very proud of that. And we sit as a member of a 

nine-member caucus, but we know in our hearts and our minds, 

as many people out there know, that it was us that done the 

work. It was the people of Saskatchewan alongside of the NDP 

that rebuilt everything, and those guys are just great pretenders 

that are claiming credit. 

 

And I notice, Mr. Speaker, even the Premier does that. He puts 

on this ready-for-growth speech. And all of us over on this side 

of the Assembly are sitting, oh okay, here goes another 

I-done-it campaign. But the people of Saskatchewan know the 

difference. They know the difference. And they are . . . The 

jury’s out, Mr. Speaker. The jury’s out on what these guys are 

made of in this term, Mr. Speaker. And we will see what 

happens, Mr. Speaker, in this term. We will see what happens in 

this term. 

 

And they laugh at that, Mr. Speaker. They laugh at that, and 

that arrogance will soon be a problem for them, Mr. Speaker. 

And that’s why it’s important for us to continue telling people 

that their arrogant attitude right now is going to become a 

problem for them. It’ll become a burden for them, Mr. Speaker. 

And that’s why we’re paying extra careful attention to the New 

West Partnership and how this Bill, how this Bill is going to 

impact the future of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I point out at the outset that we need to have the 

information as to which organizations that that minister had 

consultations with. He spoke about it. He mentioned that he had 



December 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 167 

consultation, and we’re pleased that he did. But we need to find 

the information to see exactly what the consultation was about, 

who was consulted, and what their position was. And was there 

any of the groups that he consulted with, were there any 

concerns raised or any issues flagged? We don’t have that 

information, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s why it’s important that if we do have organizations 

and people that were involved with that and they felt that they 

were not heard, to tell them that you do have the official 

opposition that you can contact and share that information with, 

so everybody has their opportunity to bring forward any 

information on any aspects of this government, including this 

Bill, the Information Services Corporation Bill which is really 

An Act to amend The Land Titles Act of 2000. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I go back to my earlier comment of how 

some families are struggling financially. They’re unable to 

afford a lawyer to do a lot of the land transfers that are being 

undertaken or that is necessary for a number of reasons. And 

we’re doing our best to certainly help them. And we have, we 

have a great number of confusion out there and a great number 

of cases. And that’s why it’s important to bring up these issues 

as we have the minister bring up different Bills or Acts within 

his portfolio, to tell him that, okay great, that perhaps the 

storage library idea is a great idea, but we need you to address 

these other issues. And that’s why it’s important that we take 

the time to raise those issues, to look through the Bill, to see 

what they have forgotten or what they ought to have put in 

there. And that’s one of the reasons why the opposition is very 

pleased to be able to take the time and reach out to different 

groups because that’s exactly what we’re here for, is to oppose 

this government and to make sure that what they’re proposing, 

that there isn’t any ulterior motive and that they’re not 

forgetting that the people of Saskatchewan have other wishes 

and challenges within each of their portfolios that they have not 

met. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again, I’ll take my place but I want to make 

sure that we adjourn the motion to deal with Bill No. 8, An Act 

to amend The Land Titles Act, 2000, to adjourn the debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 8, The Land Titles 

Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 11 — The Court Officials Act, 2011/ 

Loi de 2011 sur les fonctionnaires de justice 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of Bill No. 11, The Court Officials Act, 2011. 

 

Court officials play a key role in the effective and efficient 

operation of the courts in Saskatchewan. From the local 

registrars who accept statements of claim to the clerks of the 

Provincial Court who administer oaths to witnesses in criminal 

matters, these officials ensure the people of Saskatchewan have 

an effectively run court system. 

 

The current legislation has not been substantively updated since 

1984. In the meantime, significant changes have taken place in 

the operation of courts. The Court Officials Act, 2011 reflects 

those changes and the evolving roles played by court officials. 

 

The Bill establishes two new court officials, the registrar of the 

Provincial Court and court transcribers. The current legislation 

does not contemplate the appointment of a registrar of the 

Provincial Court. The Ministry of Justice and the Chief Judge of 

the Provincial Court recognized the need for such a role by 

creating the position of executive legal officer of the Provincial 

Court in 2008. It is appropriate that this position be reflected in 

the legislation as the registrar of Provincial Court. 

 

Various statutes and rules of court establish responsibilities for 

the registrar of the Court of Appeal, the registrar of the Court of 

Queen’s Bench, and the new registrar of the Provincial Court. 

However, the current officials Act does not provide an effective 

delegation of authority or a backup system in the event that one 

of the registrars is away, unable to act, or when a position is 

vacant. The new Act establishes a delegation structure and 

defines the relationship between the registrars to assist the 

courts to operate effectively when these situations occur. 

 

In 1984 most court proceedings were recorded by court 

reporters using shorthand. Today evidence in court is recorded 

electronically and then transcribed by private transcription 

agencies. This change is reflected in the new legislation by 

eliminating the role of court reporter and by creating a new 

court official called a court transcriber who is responsible for 

transcribing evidence recorded in court. 

 

The current legislation also sets out the hours that various court 

offices are open to the public. The provision has been updated 

to allow the hours of opening for the court and registry offices 

to be established by minister’s order rather than by legislation. 

This change will provide flexibility in setting the hours of 

operation to meet the needs of the court and its users. This Bill 

also contains consequential amendments that update the names 

of court officials and the references to this Act in various 

bilingual statutes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 

11, The Court Officials Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved second reading of Bill No. 11, The Court Officials 

Act, 2011. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize 

the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased to rise on behalf of the official opposition in this 

Assembly and to speak about some of the proposals that the 

minister spoke about under Bill No. 11, An Act respecting 

Court Officials and making consequential amendments to 

certain Acts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the things that really stood out as the minister spoke 

about some of the changes that he is proposing is setting hours 



168 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2011 

as per the minister’s direction. Mr. Speaker, I find that a bit 

confusing as to . . . You have your offices that are, court offices 

that are set up and you have standard hours, I’m assuming. And 

now some of the Acts that are putting in place is that he, as a 

minister, gets to set hours for the different courthouses. Now 

I’m wondering, where is that coming from, and what’s the logic 

behind that? 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, he spoke about the powers of the 

registrar in having an assistant to do some of the work that’s 

necessary. And during his presentation we looked at the Bill 

and we quickly picked up a few things that we needed to share 

with the public. And I think a lot of people out there know that 

the court system has its own diagram, if you will, of who does 

what, when, where, and how to ensure that you have the proper 

process of law. And I’m assuming that the police are there to 

again lay the charge and to investigate the crime. And they’re 

also there to make sure the people are going to court, and they 

really assist the prosecutors. And of course the prosecutors 

present their case and their job is to prosecute the folks as they 

see fit. And certainly the judges are there to determine whether 

the prosecutor is right or whether the defence person is right in 

terms of any trial. 

 

Now I’m assuming that some of the people that they have 

identified here when they talk about the court officials are the 

inspectors, the registrar, and now he’s talking about an assistant 

registrar which will help take care of all the information, 

perform other prescribed duties, advise and direct court officials 

in the provincial court. And again I’m reading as we go along 

that: 

 

12(1) Every local registrar of a court shall, for that court: 

 

(a) enter, record, issue, register and receive all court 

documents as required by law; 

 

(b) file all documents related to actions to his or her 

office; 

 

(c) make any returns required by law; 

 

(d) keep under separate headings a record of all 

proceedings taken in any cause or matter and an account 

of all fines, administrative fees and monies payable or 

paid into court; 

 

(e) deal with the moneys that are [left to be] paid into 

court in a manner directed by a judge or, in the absence 

of a direction, in a prescribed manner; 

 

He or she is also required to: 

 

(f) attend all sittings of the court or of a judge in 

chambers unless the local registrar’s attendance is 

dispensed with by a judge; and 

 

(g) perform any other prescribed duties. 

 

And certainly a second part of what they’re doing as the local 

registrar is: 

 

(2) All records and accounts mentioned in [this] clause . . . 

are to be accessible to the public. 

 

So the registrar will make sure that what he or she does, as I just 

indicated, the public has access to that and that certainly that’s 

their role. 

 

So it begins the question about, how many different players are 

there? There’s an inspector; there’s a registrar; he wants an 

assistant registrar — and all this in the name of making sure 

that the court system works well. And some of the points of the 

Bill that he’s described that sometimes that there isn’t the 

necessary assistants that are available to make sure that the 

registrar does their job in court, and that’s one of the provisions 

of this Bill, as I understand it. 

 

And certainly as I mentioned at the outset of some of the other 

Bills, we need to know what the total effect, the impact on the 

justice system in terms of the cost. And if there is a cost, does 

this hurry the process of justice up, which I think a lot of people 

might want to see that. But we say fine, it’s nice to be able to 

not have the courts tied up for years on some of these matters. 

It’s nice to have it great if justice was speedy, but you’ve got to 

make sure justice is still justice. And that’s one of the reasons 

why I think we want to make sure we take the time to look at 

this Bill and see where things are at. 

 

It’s a Bill that has a lot of information attached to it, which is 

great. And I think that’s important. The point that he made in 

terms of explaining what person does what, when, where, how, 

and what they’re supposed to do, I think that information is 

very helpful, and that’s some of the information in the Bill 

itself. 

 

But I’ll point out, Mr. Speaker, that we need to have a lot more 

of the information as to what’s being presented here. We need 

to know exactly how many assistants are needed, and has this 

been a complicating factor in the delivery of justice, and that it 

doesn’t compromise justice. Those are some of the things that 

we need to ask as we look at this Bill. 

 

And of course the only thing that I was a bit worried about right 

at the outset is the ability for the minister himself to set hours 

for some of these courthouses. And I’m just wondering where 

that comes from. It’s not clear as to why he’s putting this as part 

of his Act because obviously it needs to be further checked out. 

And I think a lot of groups and organizations need to have that 

information as to why this is being proposed in this Bill. 

 

So on that point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re going to look 

through the Bill. We’re going to continue consulting with 

different groups out there. We invite the different groups out 

there to give us their opinion and to see where this Bill is going. 

 

And as I mentioned at the outset of a number of other Bills that 

this particular minister has proposed, that we’ll continue to be 

paying due diligence and to make sure that what is being 

proposed is not being used in some other fashion to accomplish 

other objectives that are not complementary to the people of 

Saskatchewan and other groups affected. So on that note, Mr. 

Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate. 

 

[15:30] 

 



December 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 169 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on The Court Officials Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

Bill No. 17 — The Child Care Amendment Act, 2011 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 

today to move the second reading of Bill No. 17, The Child 

Care Amendment Act, 2011. The Child Care Act to promote the 

growth and development of children and to support the 

provision of child care services to Saskatchewan families is 

jointly assigned to the ministries of Education and Social 

Services. 

 

Research identifies quality early childhood education programs 

can improve child outcomes whereas poor quality programs do 

not show these positive effects. It is one of government’s 

priorities to increase the number of quality early learning and 

child care opportunities available for families who wish to use 

them. Children are in child care for up to 10 hours a day during 

a critical time in the child’s development. Both the quality of 

interaction with caregivers and the quality of programs are 

critical if we are to meet the needs of the child as well as the 

needs of the parents to go to work or to go to school. We have 

increased child care spaces in this province by over 35 per cent 

in four years, and we are continuing to develop new, licensed 

child care spaces. The Premier promised that the allocation of 

new, licensed child care spaces will continue to be a priority, 

with a promise of an additional 2,000 spaces over the next four 

years.  

 

Ensuring that government-funded child care centres adhere to a 

certain set of standards ensures accountability for public dollars 

and for the safety and well-being of the children. It ensures that 

the licensed child care facilities, in which children spend a large 

portion of their day, are safe, healthy environments where they 

can learn, play, and grow. 

 

Although not frequent, there are times where a person may 

disagree with a decision made by the ministry regarding their 

child care facility licence and request that the decision be 

reviewed. According to section 23 of the Act, the minister is 

responsible to review decisions with respect to licensing. There 

is also a provision for the minister to request the family services 

board review decisions. However no such board has ever been 

established. 

 

Typically, as a delegated authority for the minister, the deputy 

minister of Education performs the responsibility for the review 

of licensing decisions when requested by an individual who 

wishes to dispute the licensing decision made by the ministry’s 

staff. Past practice has been that the request for a review 

respecting a decision may be made to the office of the deputy 

minister. Upon receipt of the request, the deputy minister or a 

delegate will review the decision. The deputy minister or the 

delegate will confirm, reverse, or vary the decision and provide 

a written copy of the reasons for this decision to the individual. 

Since The Child Care Act passed in 1990, there have been 

approximately seven requests for a review respecting a 

licensing decision. Each of these reviews was performed by the 

deputy minister of the time either in the Department of Social 

Services or the Ministry of Education. 

 

We are proposing that The Child Care Act be amended to 

remove references to the family services board as a body that 

reviews decisions respecting child care licensing since this 

board was never created and is not required for this purpose. In 

1990 when Saskatchewan’s legislation was passed to include 

reference to a family services board, a number of the other 

provinces had legislative provisions for reviewing of licensing 

decisions by a review board. Currently, however, other 

decisions have adopted a variety of approaches from having no 

appeal process, to having a review board, to a process similar to 

the one described earlier. This wide variety of processes signals 

that our choice for this province is really about our needs for the 

volume of requests that we are receiving. The current legislation 

with the proposed removal of the family services board gives 

the ministry ample ability to effectively deal with requests we 

receive. This change will in no way interfere with any person’s 

right to an impartial and timely review of a licensing decision. 

 

We also propose amending section 27 of The Child Care Act to 

provide authority for regulations which will allow the provision 

of grant and subsidy rate increases approved through the 

provincial budget while amendments to the regulations make 

their way through the process. Currently The Child Care Act 

does not contain the authority to make retroactive regulations to 

establish new funding rates as of the new fiscal year. At present 

the earliest possible coming into force date is a day of which the 

regulations are filed with the registrar of regulations rather than 

the new fiscal year for which they have been approved. If the 

provincial budget intends for a grant increase to be effective 

April 1st, yet amendments are not filed with the registrar of 

regulations until September 1st, ministers orders or orders in 

council must be used to provide adjustments for the interim 

period. 

 

By amending section 27 of The Child Care Act a minister’s 

order or an order of council will no longer be necessary. When 

the authority exists to make retroactive regulations using the 

same scenario, operating grant rates could be adjusted effective 

April 1st to the new rates, pending the regulation amendments 

coming into force. Child care facilities would benefit from the 

proposed amendment to section 27 as it would allow grant 

increases to be implemented effectively immediately. 

 

Discussions have taken place with the Saskatchewan Early 

Childhood Association and the Saskatchewan Association of 

Child Care Homes Inc. on the proposed amendments and they 

are supportive. As I mentioned earlier, The Child Care Act is 

also assigned to the Minister of Social Services. We have 

consulted with the Ministry of Social Services, and they also 

support these amendments. 

 

I am pleased to move that Bill No. 17, The Child Care 

Amendment Act, 2011 now be read a second time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved 

second reading on Bill No. 17, The Child Care Amendment Act, 



170 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2011 

2011. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 

member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Of 

course again I’m very pleased to stand up today to speak and 

respond to this particular Bill 17 which is an Act to amend The 

Child Care Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I am certainly hearing what the minister has 

to say in terms of the early childhood learning value. There’s no 

question that as we know in government, and certainly they 

know as well, the value of investing into family and to children 

and early learning is something that is very, very important for 

Saskatchewan. And we all see the advantages of that. 

 

The big question that we have . . . the differences we have is we 

had more investment into that particular field than that party 

did, but they’re beginning to realize how important early 

childhood learning is, and which I can certainly go on for a 

number of hours on the value of things like early childhood 

learning, on the values of providing licensed child care service 

and certainly what it does for working moms and dads that use 

these services and how it helps the economy. And kind of the 

list goes on as to how great this whole concept of family 

supports would be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when you look at the early childhood learning as the 

minister has spoke about, there are tremendous values in putting 

children as young as possible — and of course when you say, as 

possible, there is a number of different organizations and 

professionals that determine that — but having them in a 

learning environment as soon as possible is something that is 

incredibly valuable. 

 

And I’m blessed, like many other people are in this room, to 

have watched your own children grow but now your 

grandchildren grow and how much more intelligent — and 

some would say better looking — they are than us. But 

certainly I would say that they are more worldly and they know 

more about things that when we were their age. They’re leaps 

and bounds ahead of us. And I think that certainly goes towards 

the importance of looking at early childhood learning and what 

incredible value that that investment has for our children, and 

not so much for the working parents who use these services, 

because that of course is valuable as well, but more so to the 

child. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s always a thing that I take a very special 

look at when I look at my own grandkids as they visit me. And I 

should point out that when I babysit, I never get paid for it. I’m 

kind of keeping my hours as I’m promised I’ll be paid. But I 

watch as they interact with games. I watch as they even watch 

programs on television that are good for them that the children 

pick up things so fast. You know, I have many, many hours 

with my grandchildren, and it’s amazing what they pick up, and 

it’s amazing what they’re able to do. And it’s actually, I think, 

makes you really feel good as a grandparent that they have 

these opportunities and that they’re much more, as I mentioned 

at the outset, much, much smarter than us and a lot better 

looking. And that’s what you’ve got to hope for as a 

grandparent. 

 

But the thing about it is that while I’m lucky in that sense, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, there are many other families that need that 

opportunity as well. And while my children aren’t involved 

with daycare or my grandkids aren’t involved with daycare, I 

know that they’ve had the access to daycare, and I know that 

they’ve had the advantages of early learning, and it’s just 

incredible as to what they’re able to pick up. 

 

So in that regard, it’s really important to watch what this 

government is doing as you look at what the minister is 

proposing to do. She indicates that in terms of having all the 

different aspects of evaluating some of these services, in 

particular with the licensed child care spaces, if there’s 

problems with the provider, where do they go? They just go to 

the deputy minister, as she spoke, you know, certainly as I 

understood it. And now they can go to a family services board. 

And that there’s different ways of making sure that they’re paid, 

whether there’s a subsidy rate increase or a different timetable. 

We need to look at all the proposals that the minister has spoke 

about to make sure that one thing doesn’t happen and that these 

proposals don’t hurt, or won’t hurt in the future, some of the 

great strategies attached to licensed child care spaces or the 

early childhood learning opportunities. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the questions I have at the outset in terms of 

the family services board: how will the structure . . . how will 

this board be structured? How many members are you going to 

be selecting to be on that particular board? And as I understood 

it again, this family services board would hear, would have the 

opportunity to hear some of the arguments that if some certain 

board doesn’t meet qualifications, that they would have the 

opportunity of going to this board and certainly appealing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I question the timetable when you look at 

the subsidy rate increase. What’s the purpose behind that? It 

may be great. I haven’t got that information readily available, 

but we need to know some of these questions. 

 

And there was consultation by some of the groups, as she 

mentioned, and I think that’s important that that consultation be 

undertaken. But we also need that consultation as well because 

a well-informed opposition is something that would be of value 

to this Assembly. And that’s the offer that we always, 

constantly make at different groups and organizations out there 

because some of these matters and some of these issues are way 

too important to be partisan. 

 

And that’s why it’s important that we encourage them to come 

forward with the information that they feel is necessary or some 

of the gaps that they feel are out there in terms of making sure 

that this is a better service. So I would point out that the family 

services board, we really need to know what the concept or the 

makeup of this board is, how the selection will be made, who 

will be involved with that. Will there be some administrative or 

some departmental officials involved with this? 

 

And when we look at all these aspects, you begin to wonder, 

you know, the board itself, like how much protection does it 

have? How many professional people are on this board? Like 

these are the questions that we have. Because when you’re 

dealing with such a sensitive issue as children and the care of 

children, there are so many different things that you have to 

watch out for and be very careful of. 

 



December 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 171 

I know from a number of times that the different officials that 

work for the, whether it’s the Social Services portfolio or the 

Education, that their information and their professionalism is 

valuable. So you know, many times there, they are to protect 

the minister to make sure that you’re not doing things that 

would be untoward in terms of your responsibility as a minister 

in your portfolio. So these quality people that have a great 

amount of experience and training, you know, they know what 

they’re doing. Now how does that compromise them? Or if it 

doesn’t compromise, how does a family services board, how 

does it complement what they have been able to do thus far, and 

that’s in terms of making sure that there isn’t any major foul-up 

in the minister’s role? 

 

[15:45] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, again I can go on about the early childhood 

learning and the value of that. We see evidence of that in a 

number of communities. When I say communities, I’m talking 

about the non-Aboriginal community, First Nations community, 

the Métis communities. It’s just amazing as to all the values that 

are being taught in these facilities. 

 

And it is our desire and our hope that not only will we protect 

the current programs that are out there now, that we actually 

build on them and strengthen them. Because what I foresee in 

the future is you’re going to have a strong group of young 

people, young children that in 10 years from now we’ll see the 

benefit of some of that work, that as these young three- or 

four-year-olds turn to become 13- or 14-year-old young adults, 

that they’ll really begin to build a brave, bold new 

Saskatchewan. And there’s nobody on this side of the Assembly 

that’s arguing with that because we all have great confidence in 

our future. 

 

And things like early childhood supports, such as the licensing 

of child care space or even the programs to teach children 

things earlier, those need to be protected, enhanced, and built 

upon. And when you have ministers that are involved with that 

particular aspect, you have to really be careful to make sure you 

take the time, make sure you take the time to see what is being 

done and ask if there’s any negative impact on this decision. Is 

there a way and means in which the government could walk 

away from their responsibility? Is there a way that you could 

actually reduce the amount to this new process? And that’s 

exactly what we need to ask. And that’s certainly the questions 

that I have at the outset. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the value of the actual 

program that the minister alluded to, and the overlapping 

between Education and Social Services on this whole front, that 

in itself too is kind of a problem because you can see the value 

of why the role is in learning. And then yet you see some of the 

actions in Social Services and you wonder where the 

collaboration, and certainly the co-operation, how we can build 

a better system. 

 

Now do we describe these ministers as associate ministers of 

child care in general? It’s difficult to ascertain that at this time 

because there’s so many different ways and means in which 

different groups deal with these groups, with these children. 

And you have Education’s aspiration. You have Social 

Services’ aspirations. And it just becomes certainly a challenge 

overall once you start thinking about it. But the key thing is we 

keep our focus and our mind on the value of the child itself and 

the early childhood learning tools that are available, the 

licensing daycare, those are all the subsidy attached to that. 

Those are all valuable things that we need to make sure we 

protect.  

 

So in that regard I think there is no question in our mind that the 

value of any investment into early childhood, whether it’s 

learning or licensed daycare is a tremendous value and 

importance to the future of our province, as it is important to the 

future of our families and certainly our children and, in my 

case, my grandchildren. You just see the tremendous value. 

 

So in that regard, we have to make sure we take the time to look 

at the make-up of this family services board, the processes that 

are in place now. And is this used to take an increase in subsidy 

from one group to another, and all of a sudden you start seeing 

a degradation of the service? Those are some of the things you 

want to be very, very careful about and pay very close attention 

to. And certainly that’s one of the purposes that we have when 

we want to take the time to understand this Bill. 

 

So, Deputy Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member of Athabasca has moved 

to adjourn debate on Bill No. 17, The Child Care Amendment 

Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Member: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

Bill No. 12 — The Court Officials Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2011 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — Thank you. I recognize the Minister 

of Justice and the Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of Bill No. 12, The Court Officials 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2011. This Bill consequentially 

amends a number of English language statutes that refer to 

court officials or to The Court Officials Act, 1984. There is one 

amendment in particular that I will bring to your attention. The 

Coroners Act, 1999 is being amended to update the section 

dealing with the recording of evidence at coroner’s inquests. 

 

Unlike court proceedings, the evidence given in coroner’s 

inquests is still often recorded by a court reporter using 

shorthand or a recording device. The new provision creates the 

role of official reporter who is sworn in by the coroner before 

recording the evidence at the inquest. The official reporter also 

prepares a transcript of the proceedings if requested to do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 

12, The Court Officials Consequential Amendment Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 12, The Court Officials 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2011. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 



172 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2011 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

again when we look at this particular Bill, we know that there 

are different parts of the justice system that the Minister is 

certainly paying some attention to. And some of the Acts and 

some of the amendments, I think we want to be extra careful in 

terms of what the whole purpose behind some of these Acts are, 

whether it is meant to speed up justice or whether it is meant to 

do fairly to the justice system what a lot of people ask for, and 

that is to make sure that the process is fair and that we don’t try 

to rush through some of these things. 

 

What Bill No. 12 is trying to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for those 

that may be out there listening to what Bill No. 12 is . . . And it 

talks about this Act, it may be cited in The Court Officials Act. 

And what it mainly deals with, and this is what is a bit of a 

concern to me. The short title it says: 

 

“Recording of evidence 

53(1) In this section, ‘official reporter’ means a 

reporter who has taken an oath and made a declaration 

pursuant to subsection (2). 

 

(2) Before recording any evidence, a reporter shall take 

an oath or make a declaration before a coroner that he or 

she will accurately report the evidence. 

 

Number two: 

 

(3) An official reporter shall record the evidence or any 

part of it by shorthand or by a recording device. 

 

(4) The coroner shall sign the transcript of the evidence 

taken by an official reporter, and that transcript is to be 

accompanied by an affidavit of the official reporter that 

it is a true report of the evidence. 

 

And: 

 

(5) The evidence taken by an official reporter need not 

be transcribed unless a transcription is ordered by: 

 

(a) the minister; 

(b) counsel appointed by the minister to act for the 

coroner at the inquest; 

(c) the chief coroner; or 

(d) any person who: 

 

(i) requests a transcript; and 

 

(ii) pays the official reporter the amount that a court 

transcriber may charge pursuant to The Court 

Official Act, 2011 . . . 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s pretty straightforward in terms of 

what the court reporter does. And certainly we know we don’t 

see anything untoward in this particular Act. But what kind of 

concerns me is on page no. 2, and that’s why it’s important that 

we go through the Act and we go through the time to see 

exactly what the impact and effect of any Bill may be on this 

Assembly, but more so on certainly the delivery of justice. 

 

On the second page it talks about amendments to different Acts 

like different clauses under The Court Security Act, they’ve 

amended and struck out a few words. And then they talk about 

The Creditors’ Relief Act. Again they amend and strike out a 

couple of words. And then they talk about The Executions Act. 

And I’m not sure that The Executions Act certainly doesn’t talk 

about executions in general. It talks about the delivery of 

written documents. And again there’s some changes there. And 

then it talks about amending or striking out, inspector of legal 

offices, and then it talks about subsection 4(2) which is The 

Pre-judgment Interest Act. 

 

So certainly there’s a number of other Acts that this impacts, 

and we need to take the time to make sure that the information 

that the minister presented and certainly the other consequential 

amendments or Acts that are impacted, that there isn’t anything 

untoward in this particular Bill. And that’s why it’s important 

that we take the time to review it and see where this is going. 

And that’s something that we certainly look forward to doing, 

and again, offering advice to the public to come forward if they 

have concerns about this particular matter and to seek our own 

legal counsel and legal friends’ advice on this Act to make sure 

that this is nothing that we should worry about. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 12, The Court Officials 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

Bill No. 15 — The Uniform Building and Accessibility 

Standards Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, at the end of my remarks today, I’ll move the second 

reading of Bill No. 15, The Uniform Building and Accessibility 

Standards Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

The Ministry of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing is 

responsible for helping ensure that buildings in the province are 

built to the highest safety standards. The Uniform Building and 

Accessibility Standards Act, or UBAS, adopts the National 

Building Code of Canada as the minimum standard for 

construction, renovations, additions, and change in use or 

occupancy of buildings. Although the provincial government 

adopts the National Building Code for the province, 

municipalities are responsible for enforcing the code within 

their jurisdiction, that is, they are provided autonomy with 

respect to whether they would like to adopt more stringent 

standards as well as autonomy to decide how those standards 

will be enforced. 

 

Currently the UBAS Act exempts farm buildings, including 

houses, from being required to meet these building standards. 

At the time this legislation was created it was thought that 

applying the National Building Code to farm buildings would 

be an added burden to the farming community. Today that 

thinking has changed. The farming community now believes 



December 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 173 

that they’re being treated differently because their health and 

safety isn’t being addressed through application of the National 

Building Code. My ministry has heard that many in the farming 

community would like to ensure that their homes and other 

buildings are built or renovated to the same standard as the 

non-farming community. 

 

I should point out that there are provisions in the UBAS Act 

that do allow rural municipalities to apply building standards to 

farm buildings. The rural municipality must pass a resolution 

and request a regulation change. Government must then 

consider this request and amend the regulations. This regulation 

change will then apply building standards to farm buildings in 

part or all of their respective municipalities. However, this 

provision only applies to rural municipalities. Cities, towns, 

villages, and resort villages are currently unable to apply any 

building standards to farm buildings that might be located 

within their jurisdiction. 

 

The legislative amendment I am proposing today will remove 

the need for government to amend the regulations every time a 

rural municipality wants to apply building standards to farm 

buildings in their jurisdiction. It will also extend this autonomy 

to all municipalities. With these amendments a rural 

municipality, city, town, village, or resort village will simply 

pass a bylaw declaring that the building standards apply to farm 

buildings in all or in part of their jurisdiction. By removing the 

need for a government regulation, we speed up the process 

while reducing unnecessary administrative work across 

government. 

 

I should point out that although this proposed amendment 

reduces the administrative burden, it is not a deregulation of 

building standards. That is, it does not remove the requirement 

for municipalities to submit their bylaw to the province for 

review. This important oversight will continue to ensure that 

building bylaws conform consistently throughout the province, 

providing residents with the minimum standards for safety and 

security. 

 

Since 1990, 20 rural municipalities have been granted 

regulation changes so that they can apply building standards to 

farmhouses. As you can see, simply allowing municipalities to 

apply the National Building Code across the board through an 

amendment to the Act makes this process less onerous on the 

farming community, less onerous on government, and ensures 

consistent protection across the province. 

 

Amending the UBAS Act so all municipalities can apply the 

National Building Code to farmhouses through their building 

bylaw would serve several important purposes. It would honour 

the autonomy extended to municipalities under municipal 

legislation, it would provide an adequate mechanism for 

applying building standards, and it would simplify the 

regulatory burden on municipalities. The result: safer, more 

secure homes, buildings, and communities that support this 

government’s commitment to safety and security and the 

growth of prosperity and opportunities in partnership with local 

government. 

 

The Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities has been 

consulted on this amendment and has confirmed its support for 

the amendment. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move that The 

Uniform Building and Accessibility Standards Amendment Act, 

2011 be read a second time. 

 

[16:00] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 15, The Uniform Building and Accessibility 

Standards Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to stand up 

today and certainly give our perspective of the Bill that the 

minister is proposing, An Act to amend The Uniform Building 

and Accessibility Standards Act and certain regulations. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I listened intently to what the whole intent of 

what the minister was proposing to do with this particular Bill. 

And again as I understood his motion and his update that what 

he wanted to do was allow the communities to determine 

whether some of their buildings should be subjected to the 

uniform building standards that the country has, and that we 

certainly don’t want to see the challenge of poor houses and 

poorly constructed buildings on farm property be exempted. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister may or may not know, but there 

has been a great amount of challenge in the First Nations 

communities and certainly in the northern communities and 

many Aboriginal communities and many smaller communities 

where this problem has not warranted this kind of attention. 

 

I’ve been to homes in northern Saskatchewan. I’ve been to First 

Nations homes where there’s mould growing on the walls in 

some of these houses. And I would assume that that uniform 

accessibility and certainly the standards, the standards Act 

would apply to these homes as well. 

 

So while it’s important for us to say that there should be no 

farm community, no farm family subjected to poorly 

constructed homes or dangerous homes or dangerous buildings. 

We agree with that 100 per cent on our side, Mr. Speaker. We 

certainly agree with that. 

 

But the problem we have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the fact that 

this problem is rampant all throughout Saskatchewan now, this 

despite the fact that this government has enjoyed spending over 

$40 billion in the last four years. So while it’s nice to determine 

that you want to have uniform accessibility standards and for all 

the community, for all the province, you need to make sure you 

have the resources and the commitment to follow through with 

some of the things that you are proposing to do today with this 

particular Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I would assume that the minister in charge of public safety 

would have discussions with the minister of Sask Housing. 

Because under her watch, we’ve seen very little action on 

addressing substandard housing and construction of those 

homes or health hazard of homes that are currently in existence, 

on top of what the farm families may be suffering through, Mr. 

Speaker. So when the minister talks about uniform building and 

accessibility standards Act, I’m assuming that he’s talking 

about safe, safe houses for the farm families and safe houses for 



174 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2011 

all, all the people of our province. And that’s what’s really 

important. 

 

And he’s had discussions with the RMs, and I’m not sure 

whether he’s had discussions with other groups. So it’s nice to 

be able to indicate that you want to have standards of housing 

construction right across the province, as for the national codes 

and in consultation with SARM, as I understand it, and 

certainly in consultation with a number of organizations and 

involving everyone and making sure that the farm families are 

included in this process. Nobody’s arguing that safe, safe homes 

are necessary for all families. Our point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

the fact that you’ve got to take care of the current problem 

that’s showing up in Saskatchewan right now and has been 

despite the fact that they’ve had $40 billion over the last four 

years. 

 

So my whole point is it’s great that we see the attention and 

focus on farm buildings, and I’m assuming farmhouses as well, 

that we don’t want to see farm families subjected to these kind 

of dangers. Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where that 

minister’s been for the last four years, but we have been talking 

about problems of safe houses and trying to make sure that they 

have safe accessibility to these houses for a number of families 

all throughout Saskatchewan for the past four years and that 

we’ve been speaking about and we have identified as a caucus. 

 

Now certainly we want to show this particular Bill as much 

interest as we can. And how are we going to show this interest, 

Mr. Speaker, is how much money that they’re affording this 

process. It’s nice to declare that. It’s nice to declare that they’re 

going to do some of these things. We want to see what kind of 

money that they are affording this process. And once they come 

forward with that particular money of setting up the standards 

Act, the accessibility standards Act, we want to see where they 

got that money from, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And not only do we 

want to see where they got that money from, we want to see 

whether they made any progress on other fronts, the fronts that I 

spoke about: First Nations homes, northern homes, small 

villages homes, whether it’s right across the board. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we want to see what they’re doing as well. 

 

So while the minister can certainly talk about accessibility 

standards and uniform building codes and so on and so forth for 

the farm families, we support that. We support safe homes and 

structurally sound homes for every person in Saskatchewan. 

That’s what this is about, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I think it’s 

important for the minister to know where we stand and that’s 

why it’s important that we’re going to show extra attention, 

extra careful attention to what the minister is going to do to 

resolve this problem. Because right now, based on some of the 

activity that he’s had under his portfolio, which I assume — 

public safety, structurally sound homes, safe homes free of 

mould — I would assume that he would have some overarching 

or some overlapping responsibility to his colleague, the 

Minister of Sask Housing. 

 

Because I can tell you right now, there are severe problems in 

the First Nations communities, in the northern communities, in 

the small villages and towns around our community, around our 

cities, and in the inner cities where we see these problems are 

very persistent. And that’s the point I’m trying to make, Mr. 

Speaker, is that when you have Bills of this sort that want to 

identify a problem and resolve that problem, we say, great. It’s 

a great opportunity, and we hope every farm family has access 

to safe homes and certainly from the accessibility perspective, 

from the safety perspective, from the structural perspective, we 

would support that 100 per cent. 

 

But you have a lot of other problems in other areas that you 

have not taken care of. And what we hope this doesn’t happen 

as a result of this minister’s Bill here today in recognizing this 

problem and trying to bring these uniform standards right across 

the board, that he doesn’t do what we think he’s going to do and 

start taking money from other programs and forgetting some of 

the other groups that have been struggling with this issue, to try 

and resolve one issue that is politically motivated. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I hope that’s not the case. Because if that’s the case, if 

that’s how this government’s going to act and this minister is 

going to respond, then we’ve got some serious problems, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, some very serious problems. And that’s why 

we want to pay extra close attention to this particular Bill. 

 

Now I’ve been travelling throughout Saskatchewan for many, 

many years and, as I mentioned earlier in some of the 

comments I made, I think I have a great view from my vehicle 

window. Sometimes I’ll use the van. Sometimes I’ll use the car. 

But as I leave the city, you know, I drive through rural 

Saskatchewan and I go to the forestry fringe. Then I go to the 

North — the forest area. And I’ll tell you, it is a very, very 

beautiful part of the province, every section. And every place I 

go there is challenges in many areas, and we have to make sure 

that we respond to them all in a fair and consistent manner. 

 

And I can remember the words of our former premier, Lorne 

Calvert, when we had a challenge over highway allocation. And 

it is very clear when Mr. Calvert told all his cabinet ministers 

that we will govern for all of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, 

at the time there was a commitment made for Highway No. 1. 

When I was the minister of Highways, I think we spent more 

money on highways in that member’s constituency than in that 

member’s constituency, Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Cumberland. Why? Because it was about safety. It was about 

priority. It was about making sure that we responded to a 

challenge that we had with No. 1, the Trans-Canada Highway. 

 

And there’s challenge and problems in the Cumberland 

constituency as well. We worked to address some of those as 

well, but there was pressing priorities that we had to make 

decisions on. And that’s why we sit here and we smile and we 

smirk when that member begins to be critical of the former 

government. Unbeknownst to him, the former government put a 

lot more resources in highway construction in his area than me 

and the member from Cumberland’s area because it was the 

right thing to do based on the volume of traffic and the horrific 

accidents in that area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The reason why I’m making that point, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is 

my message to him. You govern for all of Saskatchewan, and if 

you start politicizing how you’re going to enact this particular, 

the intent of this Bill where you talk about uniform 

accessibility, you talk about safe homes — you better start 

dealing with some of the issues. If you’re going to take on one 

battle, you should have the other battles resolved and 

committed to as well. And you should not begin to try and take 

from one to fix another problem because if you do that, then I’ll 



December 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 175 

tell you, there’s going to be a lot of groups and organizations 

that are going to be looking for that particular Minister of 

Public Safety, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it doesn’t matter what is being proposed in Bill 15. The main 

thing is the actions of the government to respond to that, and 

that those actions are not contrary to other people’s interest and 

other groups’ services because if that’s the case, then what’s 

happening is you’re politicizing the whole theme behind public 

safety. That is to ensure that families everywhere — farm 

families, northern families, First Nations families, small rural 

community families — have the same kind of attention, same 

kind of focus, and that they’re not fighting over dollars that I 

would suggest that he may try and take from one source to meet 

the needs of this source, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because I’ll tell you if I was a reeve of an RM, I would declare 

this tomorrow morning that we should have these national 

uniform standards. And the reason being is that I was hoping 

that many of the farm families that may have unstructurally 

sound buildings or a building that may be of threat to their 

family, well I want that fixed too pretty fast. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the concept is great. We support safe farm 

families and safe buildings on farms. And as I mentioned at the 

outset, if I was a reeve, I’d declare this in a heartbeat because it 

is hoped that these guys, the current government, would come 

along and help resolve that problem. Because what’s the use of 

saying we’re going to have these standards and nothing 

happens? I’m assuming that the minister has a plan to resolve 

the shortcomings that a reeve would say, well, Mr. Minister, 

you declared it national standards and so what are you going to 

do about it? We need you to put your money where your mouth 

is. 

 

So we need that support. So if you want to have these standards 

set up, and you want to have the ability for reeves to or RMs to 

address this matter and to work with the government on that, 

I’m assuming that you want to be part of the solution. You can’t 

just declare some of these standards and then walk away from 

it. 

 

So I would say to the people that may be listening on this — the 

SARM people or the reeves or the people in the inner cities or 

the people in small towns and villages around the cities or the 

First Nations communities or northern communities — this 

minister’s proposing a uniform building and accessibility 

standards Act that would really deal with some of the unsafe 

farm buildings and farm homes. And we’re saying we applaud 

that effort. 

 

But always remember that every single family in Saskatchewan 

ought to deserve the same kind of treatment and focus, and they 

need to resolve those issues as they resolve this one. And they 

had better not be taken from one group to pay for another 

because we’ll be watching what this member does with this 

particular Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So on that notion, there is not a lot of, not a lot of trust that we 

have in what the minister is proposing, primarily based on some 

of his comments across the floor and some of his actions and 

some of the things that he’s proposed. And that’s why I tell the 

people of Saskatchewan that you have to be careful what Bills 

are coming forward and how we respond to this and to take the 

time to understand these Bills and to take the time to talk with 

the stakeholders. Say, what does this mean for your RM? What 

does it mean? Have you been given any guarantees? Is there 

going to be an end date? Like the Minister of Health likes to 

talk about targets. Is there going to be a targeted date that this is 

going to be resolved? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that what’s important is that we ask 

those questions, we take the time to understand the Bill, and 

more so, we watch very carefully the intentions of certain 

ministers, with this minister being a very special focus on some 

of the things that he is trying to propose because, Mr. Speaker, 

we always have some dubious discussions about some of the 

intent of this particular minister and other ministers as well. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would want to point out that he could, as a 

minister, he could identify the problem, which is what ministers 

should do, and as a first step, that’s great. But you’ve got to 

watch the consequential actions of this minister and this 

government because you want to make sure that there’s fairness 

and certainly vision and uniform application of what he’s trying 

to do with this government, with this Bill. And that’s kind of 

where we’re quite worried as to what this minister may do. 

 

[16:15] 

 

And as I mentioned at the outset, as the Deputy Speaker and as 

MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] here, we know 

where the problems are. We know what the problems are out 

there when it comes to housing and standards of housing, safe, 

structurally sound homes or buildings in all of our communities. 

And the farm families suffer it as others do. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re going to pay very close 

attention to this Bill. We’re going to pay very close attention to 

what this minister does with this Bill and again to point out to 

the people that he governs for all of Saskatchewan. As I was 

reminded time and time again by our former premier, we shall 

govern for all of Saskatchewan, not certain sectors, not certain 

groups. And that’s why it’s important that we pay close 

attention to what is being done. And that philosophy, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, of governing for all of Saskatchewan, that 

member, that minister from Wood River, benefited from the 

vision and the planning and the direction of our former premier, 

Lorne Calvert. And that’s why I would hope that he’d hold the 

same standards of the one individual that benefited his riding 

when it comes to governing for all of Saskatchewan and apply 

the same concepts as he’s proposed in his Bill to all of our 

province, and that includes the North, rural, cities, and the list 

goes on. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 

Bill No. 15. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 15, The Uniform Building 

and Accessibility Standards Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 



176 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2011 

Bill No. 16 — The Correctional Services Act, 2011 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

At the end of my remarks, I will move the second reading of 

Bill No. 16, The Correctional Services Act, 2011. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Bill 16 proposes repeal of The 

Correctional Services Act, 1993 and introduction of the 2011 

legislation. Beyond amendments to the Act, most recently the 

one that enabled the ministry to implement its inmate telephone 

monitoring system last year, it has not been the subject of a 

thorough review since it came into force in 1994. The 1994 Act 

was in need of modernization to be consistent with language 

used in other provincial and federal legislation and to provide a 

clear and explicit legislative base for how Corrections does its 

business. 

 

The specific intent of this legislation is to ensure the safety of 

the public, staff, and inmates, to ensure the security of 

correctional facilities, to make inmates and staff more 

accountable for their actions, and to create operational 

efficiencies. The new Act is consistent with one of my 

mandates from the Premier as Minister of Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing: to continue to advance The Road Ahead 

report to improve safety and security, staff performance, 

correctional practices, and infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you recall, The Road Ahead: Towards a 

Safer Correctional System was the government’s action plan to 

improve the security and safety of Saskatchewan’s correctional 

system. It was developed in response to the external 

investigation team’s 23 recommendations arising out of the 

investigation into the escape of six inmates from the Regina 

Provincial Correctional Centre in August of 2008. These 

recommendations centred on operational improvements and 

systemic changes, including a call for a review of our 

legislation to ensure alignment with the ministry’s mandate. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will provide an overview of the key 

ways this proposed legislation meets the commitment for safer 

and more secure correctional facilities. Then I’ll spend some 

time going over the details of its content. 

 

The Correctional Services Act, 2011 aims to improve security 

in provincial correctional centres in a variety of different ways, 

strengthen search and inmate disciplinary provisions, 

recognizes two different forms of segregation — administrative 

and disciplinary — recognizes the legitimacy of involuntary 

inmate transfers as a means for managing emergencies, and 

authorizes inmate security and risk assessments. 

 

I should point out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that a section on 

principles was included in the proposed Act. The key features 

of these guiding principles are: protection of the public is 

paramount; offenders are required to comply with correctional 

facility rules and community supervision conditions; offenders 

are entitled to fair treatment; and staff members adhere to a 

code of professional conduct. We believe these principles 

reflect ideas and values that are widely held, accepted, and 

respected. They will improve accountability and assist with the 

interpretation and administration of the Act and regulations. 

Other jurisdictions such as federal corrections and the 

correctional systems in Manitoba, Quebec, and the Yukon have 

included similar sections on principles in their own legislation. 

 

In my opening remarks I talked about clear and explicit 

authority being enshrined in the legislation. Some examples of 

where that is evident is in the language around remote 

monitoring of inmates including video surveillance; 

establishing non-contact visits as the visiting standard, thus 

reducing the opportunity for smuggling contraband; language 

authorizing setting minimum standards for the frequency and 

type of searches; language specific to the legal authority for 

searches of inmates, inmate areas, visitors, staff, or vehicles on 

correctional centre property, including the use of canines under 

certain circumstances; and expanding drug testing provisions to 

include sampling of bodily substances. 

 

Other proposed provisions include the ability of an inmate to 

have an adjudicator hear an appeal of a decision resulting in the 

inmate staying in the facility past their regular release date. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, a new provision of the legislation speaks 

to a code of professional conduct that all corrections staff is 

required to follow. A code of professional conduct has been 

developed and rolled out province-wide. It is intended to help 

deal with some of the cultural shifts required to improve 

security in our correctional facilities. Enshrined in the code are 

professional and ethical standards that all staff working in 

corrections are expected to abide by. 

 

The language for this new provision is adapted from 

Newfoundland’s legislation which was assented to in May 2011 

but is not yet in force. A professional code of conduct using 

language similar to Newfoundland is also referenced in the 

Yukon’s legislation, newly revised in 2009, and in Nova 

Scotia’s correctional legislation proclaimed in 2005. In other 

words, the most up-to-date correctional legislation includes this 

important concept. Recognizing the code of professional 

conduct in legislation will assist the ministry in meeting its 

mandate. 

 

Substantial changes were proposed to the section on inmate 

discipline. The intent here is for corrections officials to 

establish a more efficient and flexible inmate disciplinary 

system that gives staff the authority to resolve minor rule 

violations using an informal resolution process. With this 

process in place, situations can be defused faster and the 

potential for escalation into aggressive exchanges is also 

reduced. Where such an informal resolution process is 

inappropriate or unsuccessful, major or minor offences will 

continue to be heard by a discipline panel. At the same time, the 

new Act now specifies the sanctions for inmate disciplinary 

infractions. Currently those sanctions are found in regulation. 

 

In the Act, there will be higher maximum penalties for 

violations of major sanctions than for minor violations. A new 

provision of the legislation includes the ability for a correctional 

centre director to require an inmate to undergo a medical 

examination by a health care professional. Inmates are in the 

high-risk category for potential exposure to contagious diseases, 

diseases that can endanger staff, other inmates, and the public. 

This is why this clause has been included. Also new is the 



December 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 177 

ability of the facility director to be able to transfer an inmate to 

a health care facility under specific circumstances. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in relation to inmate transfers, new 

provisions recognize that emergency involuntary transfers of 

inmates can occur without prior notification to the inmate. This 

is important because administrative law imposes a duty to act 

fairly on the ministry with respect to involuntary transfers. The 

duty to act fairly normally includes providing the inmate with 

prior notice of the transfer and allowing the inmate to provide 

reasons to the decision maker as to why the transfer should not 

occur. This can take days. But we also have a duty to protect the 

safety of inmates, staff, and the public, as well as the security of 

the correctional facility. The new section allows officials under 

prescribed circumstances to effect the transfer immediately and 

to respond to the inmate after the fact. 

 

Over the years, some questions of interpretation arose with 

respect to the electronic monitoring provisions of the Act. With 

the new provision, there’s a clear and explicit authority for the 

use of electronic monitoring systems as a condition of any 

offender’s participation in any correctional services program. 

 

New provisions in the legislative proposal create the ability for 

an inmate to appeal a disciplinary decision resulting in the loss 

of remission to an appeal adjudicator. Losing remission means 

the inmate will spend more time in prison, therefore it is 

particularly important that we provide an opportunity for 

independent review of those decisions. All other inmate appeals 

related to a discipline sanction will be reviewed by the director 

of the correctional facility. 

 

I should point out that inmates also have the right to ask an 

investigator from a number of independent offices created by 

legislation to review the facility director’s decision. This 

includes the Provincial Ombudsman, the Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Commission, and the Privacy Commissioner. The 

legislation recognizes the value of keeping appeal hearings an 

internal process so that accountability and ability to manage are 

maintained. Thus the only appeals to be heard by an adjudicator 

will be those where an inmate’s regular release date is changed 

as part of the sanction for a major discipline offence. 

 

This new legislation will augment the existing authority already 

found in the Criminal Code and will ensure that corrections 

staff not only have the authority to use force and restraints, but 

they also have a legal protection when they are authorized to do 

so. Seven other jurisdictions have similar language in their 

legislation authorizing the use of force. This section is modelled 

after language used in the British Columbia’s correctional 

legislation. 

 

All inmates who enter a correctional facility are assessed for 

their security risk. This security assessment determines an 

inmate’s security threat within the facility. A security 

assessment assists the correctional centre with assigning an 

appropriate security level for each inmate. However, because a 

security assessment may result in significant restrictions on an 

inmate, the Ministry requires specific legislative authority to 

establish the program. Once this Bill is passed, the 

accompanying regulations will prescribe the security 

assessment process. 

 

A new section related to an inmate risk assessment program has 

been added to the legislative proposal. Here again the ministry 

requires specific legislative authority to establish and assess 

inmates’ risks and needs for rehabilitation or treatment. Risk 

assessments differ from security assessments in that a risk 

assessment means the inmate’s risk of reoffending on his or her 

release to the community. Determining the risk level allows for 

targeting of appropriate programs to address each identified 

criminogenic need. Once identified needs are addressed through 

evidence-based programming, the risk of reoffending will 

decrease, resulting in the increased probability of safe 

integration into the community. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I should point out this addition to the 

legislation is in response to a recommendation out of The Road 

Ahead report. The government has committed to developing 

standard assessment processes to allow for increased treatment 

capacity for all sentenced and remanded inmates. 

 

Existing provisions in the legislation have been revised and 

updated to provide clear and explicit authority for a wide range 

of different types of searches. For an example, revisions 

propose that a designated staff member can conduct a 

non-intrusive search, or a frisk, of an inmate without 

individualized suspicion in certain situations. Let me give you 

an example of what I’m talking about. I’ll cite the situation 

occurring each time an inmate leaves a workshop. If there are 

15 inmates working in a carpentry shop, then every single day 

and each time they leave that shop, they must be searched. In 

this case, reasonable grounds or individualized suspicions are 

not required. 

 

There are other situations where a more intrusive type of search 

may be conducted, for an example, a strip search without 

individualized suspicion. The most common would be each 

time an inmate is admitted into a correctional centre or similarly 

any time an inmate is returning from a temporary absence. 

 

Clear authority to conduct these and other types of searches — 

for example, testing bodily substances, which is considered a 

form of searching; or the use of a canine to assist with a search, 

with or without individualized suspicion — is now in our 

proposed Act. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the authority for searching does exist in 

the current legislation and similar provisions exist in all other 

provincial and federal correctional legislation. But times have 

changed, and it was important for the ministry to carefully 

scrutinize these provisions to ensure they support our 

operational needs while at the same time support the fair and 

humane treatment of inmates, visitors, and staff. Provisions 

authorizing the searching of visitors and vehicles as a means for 

reducing contraband carrying into the facility have been 

clarified. To ensure the visiting public is duly informed, each 

facility will have warning signs stating that all vehicles and 

visitors are subject to search. 

 

On the topic of searches, the existing Act includes authority to 

conduct searches of employees as well as inmates. Additional 

wording clarifies what already exists, but we’ve also proposed 

new language that allows for routine searching of staff members 



178 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2011 

as they come and go from the facility, as well as other types of 

staff searches including searches of staff lockers when 

authorized for security or safety purposes. 

 

The definition of contraband has been revised and is now 

incorporated into a new section on trespassing. This provision 

grants legal authority to lay charges against anyone who 

possesses contraband, who delivers contraband from an inmate, 

or who delivers contraband to an inmate. Additionally, because 

someone throwing contraband over a fence may not be caught 

with the evidence, the proposal allows action by staff who 

observe only the trespass onto the property and not the actual 

attempted drug smuggling. 

 

The new section is a revision to language in the existing Act 

that complements the revisions of the definition of contraband 

by clearly establishing the legal authority to seize contraband 

and establishing a process for disposing of it. It places 

responsibility on staff members who have seized property to 

follow a process that will maintain continuity of the evidence as 

well as assist in the avoidance of legal claims or, because the 

contraband may be illegal substances, allegations of 

impropriety. The language is modelled after correctional 

legislation from British Columbia and the Yukon. 

 

The ministry requires the authority to develop and implement a 

confinement and segregation policy to meet one of the 

recommendations in The Road Ahead. The current Act provides 

legal authority for the confinement and segregation of inmates. 

But as segregation is recognized as a significant limitation of 

inmate association, we have made the language clear and 

explicit. The section on segregation is modelled after the 

Corrections and Conditional Release Act, the federal legislation 

that governs the Correctional Service of Canada. Quebec also 

uses the term administrative segregation; Manitoba uses 

protective and preventative segregation. Because the federal 

government has faced and addressed the most court challenges 

on this topic, our ministry has chosen their model. 

 

The proposal adopts administrative segregation as the method 

to be used proactively to prevent an incident from occurring or 

reactively to facilitate an investigation into an incident. 

Administrative segregation is a separate level of confinement 

with the specified purpose of keeping an inmate from 

associating with other inmates. Segregation review panels are 

proposed to determine whether an inmate should continue to be 

confined or detained in segregation. The proposal also adds the 

authority for the director of a correctional facility to hear 

appeals from an inmate related to the segregation panel 

decision. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the topic of inmates’ ability to appeal 

decisions, a new section of the legislation takes into account 

inmate complaints. This section provides inmates with the 

ability to direct their concerns to a person in authority and 

outlines the basic requirements for responding to an inmate. 

Accompanying regulations will specify that the complaint 

resolution process is separate from other legislative appeal 

processes and will list the responsibilities of those responding to 

complaints about facility administration. Most other 

correctional jurisdictions have similar language in their 

legislation. Three provinces refer to this as inmate grievances. 

Our section is similar to the language used in Nova Scotia, and 

it has been adjusted to meet our needs. 

 

The use of remote monitoring systems — at present, primarily 

video and audio surveillance — has grown considerably over 

the years. Development of advanced technologies has enhanced 

the capability of existing devises, and other methods of remote 

monitoring are on the horizon. Here I’m thinking of the use of 

GPS [Global Positioning System], the same kind of device now 

used in vehicles to pinpoint their location and to provide 

accurate travel directions. Right now the language that allows 

remote monitoring is not as clear as it could be. Due to the 

nature of this type of activity and its direct implication on 

privacy issues — suicide observation, for an example — clear 

statutory authority for its use in correctional facilities will 

improve our ability to protect the public, our staff, and inmates. 

Manitoba, Quebec, Nova Scotia, PEI [Prince Edward Island], 

and the federal government have sections authorizing the use of 

surveillance and remote monitoring equipment or video 

recording in their correctional legislation. 

 

The current Act does not specifically address collection of 

offender personal information for management, operational, or 

program purposes. This issue is handled in the legislation 

generally applicable to the government: The Freedom of 

Information and Protection of Privacy Act and The Health 

Information Protection Act. The new management of 

information section deals with the information in a way that is 

more specific to a correctional setting. The language in this 

section is modelled after Manitoba’s legislation. An example 

here is the information collected on the adult corrections 

computer system which is based on interviews, warrants, 

incident reports, or program application and participation. 

 

The revisions to the confidentiality section maintain the 

required confidentiality clauses of the original Act but expand 

on the language allowing disclosure. The revisions will assist 

with sharing information with the police and other correctional 

authorities. Details will be prescribed in regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are the substantive parts of the proposed 

provisions of Bill 16. Others constitute housekeeping changes, 

largely updating and revising language to reflect contemporary 

requirements. 

 

I would also advise that a number of groups were consulted 

with their views on the proposed legislation. These are all 

stakeholders of Saskatchewan’s correctional systems whose 

input was valuable to the drafting of the Bill. Consultations took 

place with the following individuals and organizations: 

Correctional Services Canada, the Elizabeth Fry Society of 

Saskatchewan, FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations], the John Howard Society of Saskatchewan, the Métis 

Nation of Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan’s Provincial 

Ombudsman, the Saskatchewan Association of Chiefs of Police, 

Saskatchewan government employees’ union, the Office of the 

Information and Privacy Commissioner of Saskatchewan, and 

the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should point out that the introduction of the new 

Act is timely given the environment in which Saskatchewan’s 

correctional system is currently operating. We’re seeing our 

inmate count at its highest level in many years. Remand 

pressures continue to have an impact on the safe operation of 



December 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 179 

our facilities. And just under study now are the implications to 

our system of the federal government’s tough on crime 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, passage of Bill 16 will strengthen the legal 

framework under which Saskatchewan’s correctional system is 

administered by helping reduce the risk of inmates escaping, 

enabling officials to employ a security assessment program and 

a risk needs assessment program, and including measures 

designed to improve inmates’ successful reintegration into the 

community through the provision of appropriate programs. 

 

I believe that through the provisions contained in this legislative 

proposal we have achieved a workable balance between 

necessary supervision and control of inmates and effective 

programs to help offenders return to their community as 

productive citizens. This is our ultimate goal: to reduce crime in 

neighbourhoods and communities across our province by 

providing corrections officials with a strong legal framework 

that speaks to contemporary needs in a very complex and very 

crucial system. Our government is keeping its promise of safety 

for Saskatchewan citizens. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move that 

The Correctional Services Act, 2011 be read a second time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing has moved second reading of Bill 

No. 16, corrections services amendment Act, 2011. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member for 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased to stand today and to speak on behalf of the official 

opposition and to certainly give our comments, our initial 

comments on Bill No. 16. And I thank the minister for his fairly 

lengthy explanation of what is being proposed here, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I want to also add, Mr. Speaker, that there’s no question in our 

society today in Saskatchewan that a lot of people that have 

been offended by people that should be certainly in prison, they 

really have had a difficult time over the years looking at the 

whole notion of justice and saying, is it fair? Is it consistent? 

And they’re really, quite frankly, not happy with some of the 

actions and activity of the justice system per se. 

 

So over time, Mr. Speaker, as politicians begin to speak about 

this particular challenge, it’s important that right across the 

board there was a consistent theme that those violent offenders, 

those that have serious . . . and habitual offenders, that we need 

to be fairly strict and fairly straightforward with them. I think 

that that’s a constant message that people are giving us, and 

certainly that we’re, as the opposition, we’re hearing that from a 

number of sources, not only from victims but different groups 

and different leaders as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s no question that the latter part of the minister’s 

comment where he spoke about rehabilitating some of the 

offenders that have the option of looking at that, there’s no 

question that there are some offenders that you can try and help 

as much as you can — and some of them are, as I mentioned, 

very serious criminals — and try as you might, there’s been 

very few people that have been successful, although there has 

been some success. 

There’s a lot of work that needs to be done to rehab some of the 

people that have been in prison most of their life. And we 

certainly encourage those people like the Elizabeth Fry Society, 

the John Howard Society to continue working with those 

individuals. Because as you know, people change over time and 

they should be afforded the opportunity to certainly rebuild 

their lives even though they may have shattered other lives. In 

the scheme of things, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that people be 

given that opportunity, the organizations that want to help these 

people. So I think from that perspective, Mr. Speaker, I really 

want to see what the minister may have offered in the 

rehabilitative services of some of the people we’re speaking 

about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:45] 

 

As you know, there are some criminals or some people that go 

into our correctional centres that may be first-time offenders. 

They may be property offenders. They may be criminal or . . . 

They may be impaired driver offenders. Like some of the 

people that are there as an initial problem in terms of breaking 

the law, there are varying degrees of criminal activity. Some are 

minor, some are major. There’s just a myriad of prisoners. And 

you have to make sure that you afford as much opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker, for some of these young people to look at rebuilding 

their lives. And that’s one of the things I think is really, really, 

really important when you look at the whole notion of criminal 

activity. 

 

Now I know, Mr. Speaker, that there is some folks that have 

offended our communities a great amount. There are some of 

the people that are in jail that, you know, deserve to be there 

and should be kept there because of sometimes the horrendous 

actions that they have undertaken, and there’s no question from 

our perspective that we would support that notion. However, as 

I mentioned at the outset, there are others, first-timers. They 

may be there for a couple of months for impaired driving. They 

may be there for other minor offences that you can’t lump them 

all together, that there must be ways and means in which you 

respond to these people that have less offences against the 

public. And that’s something that’s really important for folks 

out there. 

 

And there’s a number of reasons why. Obviously you want to 

recognize those associations and organizations that are helping 

those people that are struggling with the law. You have to also 

understand that the families and the offender himself may have 

seen the error of their ways, as long as the crime is not too 

serious. You need to look at those options, you know, just to 

reduce the amount of people that we have locked up because the 

fact of the matter is that there are some that should be there and 

should be there long-term, and there’s others that should be 

there for a short-term basis, but we can’t encourage them to 

become part of the long-term problem that some of our jails will 

find themselves in if we don’t look at the notion of 

rehabilitative efforts for some of the people that have lesser 

offences and none of the violent crimes that are attached to 

some of the long-term people in the jails. 

 

So I think that the important point I want to raise is that as you 

increase the rules and the penalties and the processes, many 

people out there that are listening understand that we have to 

have these kind of processes in place. But you’ve got to be also 



180 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2011 

careful because if you want to start filling up the jails with 

people that have lesser crimes with those that have horrendous 

crimes, you’re going to start seeing better criminals that are 

being trained, more habitual criminals being trained. That’s 

what happens when you put some of these folks long-term in 

jail that may have minor offences. You’ve got to try and 

separate the two so you’re able to rehab the ones that have 

lesser or non-violent criminal activity in general. 

 

I also want to point out, Mr. Speaker, is that when you talk to 

the jail guards, what are some of their points? Because what’s 

going to happen is as you get more and more people in jail, 

there’s going to be more and more stress on the system itself, so 

there’s going to be more cost attached to that. And that’s why, 

from our perspective as an NDP caucus, we say yes to people 

that are dangerous and violent, and they repeat, offend our 

communities, and they do crimes that are very hard to forgive. 

They certainly need to see the attention focused on them to keep 

them where they’re at because that’s obviously what the public 

wants. 

 

However we also advocate the whole notion of rebuilding some 

of the people that have lesser charges and lesser problems to the 

justice system so that we can keep them out of jail and keep 

them productive people. There is a separation of those type of 

criminals. And that’s what we have to make sure people 

understand as to where we’re standing because of two things: 

one, the premise of rebuilding lives is really important; and two 

is the cost factor for some of these prisons and some of these 

jails. As we see those cost factors rise and some of the rules and 

regulations incorporated to look at all of the population in jail, it 

creates a lot of strain and stress, not only financially but on the 

people that work within the system as well. 

 

So we’re going to take our time looking at this Bill to see what 

avenues of rehabilitation, what avenues that we have to separate 

the hardened criminals versus the first-timers that may be in 

there for impaired driving or minor charges or 

non-life-threatening charges. These kind of folks out there that 

are caught up in the system, we need to make sure that we have 

avenues of support so we can rehab their lives and get them out 

of this rut so that they can become productive, disciplined 

people. That’s what the important message is. 

 

So we’re going to look at the Bills themselves. We’re going to 

have consultation. And on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that 

we adjourn the debate on this Bill. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of Bill No. 16, corrections services amendment 

Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 18 — The Degree Authorization Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to move second reading of The Degree Authorization Act. 

This proposed legislation aims to enhance post-secondary 

education in Saskatchewan by offering the opportunity to 

potentially expand degree-granting authority to post-secondary 

institutions other than the two universities, provided that these 

other institutions meet the standards required by a robust quality 

assurance review process. 

 

This legislation holds three key tenets. One, it is meant to 

bolster accessibility for students in our province. As both our 

population and economy continue to grow, so too do the needs 

of the province to meet an increasingly vibrant labour market 

demand. It remains vitally important to stay receptive to the 

needs of students and to their aspirations and the opportunities 

that await them in the new Saskatchewan. This legislation 

provides a framework for our post-secondary system to 

acknowledge these needs and to deliver a response that is at 

once attentive to the changing needs of communities and 

responsible in its scope regarding quality assurance. 

 

Essentially the Act is meant to help ensure that we are 

addressing a public policy void that this government inherited, 

and that other Canadian jurisdictions have worked to address 

over the course of the last several years. 

 

Second, it ensures a robust quality assurance process. 

Increasingly outside jurisdictions, both nationally and 

internationally, are moving toward establishing quality 

assurance bodies within the realm of post-secondary education. 

These bodies provide the necessary expertise to help assess and 

evaluate new degree proposals. The quality assurance process 

gives learners here at home and those coming to Saskatchewan 

confidence in their decisions to attain their post-secondary 

education right here in Saskatchewan where we know that the 

degrees that have been on offer are recognized for their 

excellence, an excellence that has been a century in the making 

and a tradition that we seek to continue and enhance. 

 

Third, this legislation protects the long-standing reputations of 

the University of Regina and the University of Saskatchewan. 

Recently we encountered out-of-province organizations 

presenting themselves as Saskatchewan-based universities 

offering degrees for Saskatchewan residents. These degree mills 

offer bogus degrees that serve no use to any learner and threaten 

to taint the strong reputation of our post-secondary system. This 

legislation provides a framework to prohibit these organizations 

from operating within Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as other provinces have moved to expand 

degree-granting authority beyond traditional universities, we 

want to remain responsive, but we wanted to also make sure 

that we were consulting the public and key stakeholders to 

determine if such a move was right for Saskatchewan. 

 

To this end, last spring, Mr. Speaker, we invited Alex Usher of 

Higher Education Strategy Associates to conduct public 

consultations on this very issue. He hosted a learning event to 

inform stakeholders of the concept as well as potential impacts 

of expanding degree-granting authority and to discuss the 

significance of quality assurance. This event was followed by 

written submissions and face-to-face meetings with 

stakeholders from across the province. The final report 

submitted by Mr. Usher in August of this year indicated that 



December 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 181 

there is acceptance for other post-secondary institutions to be 

allowed to offer degree programs as long as proper quality 

assurance reviews are undertaken and in place. 

 

Yesterday I was pleased to introduce this legislation within the 

Assembly as part of my official response to Mr. Usher’s report. 

Two of his six recommendations are directly addressed by the 

introduction of this legislation: that degree-granting authority be 

expanded and that a quality assurance body be established 

within Saskatchewan. The other four recommendations are 

addressed outside of the legislative process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this proposed legislation not only provides new 

opportunities for Saskatchewan students and for post-secondary 

institutions as well as the broader community; it also ensures 

that Saskatchewan post-secondary education remains and 

maintains world renown for its quality and its excellence. 

 

The quality assurance initiative is vitally important regarding 

this initiative for it will demonstrate to learners in 

Saskatchewan as well as nationally and internationally that we 

place a high priority on this rock-solid tradition of excellence in 

Saskatchewan’s post-secondary education — a tradition, as I’ve 

said, that has been a century in the making, a tradition that 

under our Premier and for this government has been bolstered 

by an investment of more than $2.8 billion in post-secondary 

education since we had the opportunity to come to office in 

2007. 

 

Our universities are doing solid work, and we don’t want to 

affect what they’re doing, especially their operations and their 

successes. As a result, the University of Saskatchewan and the 

University of Regina are exempt from this new legislation. But 

in our growing labour market, enhancing accessibility in the 

post-secondary education sector is important just as the quality 

assurance process protecting our reputation is equally 

important. Mr. Speaker, there’s an opportunity for other 

institutions to potentially provide specific and focused degree 

programs within the realm of their experience and expertise. 

The proposed legislation gives students and institutions more 

options and potentially increases accessibility to high-quality 

degree programs right here in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the exception of the University of Regina and 

University of Saskatchewan, as noted earlier, the Act will apply 

to Saskatchewan post-secondary educational institutions 

involved in offering part or all of a degree program in 

Saskatchewan and to any degree program that is specifically 

targeted to Saskatchewan students through advertising. 

 

The physical presence provision of the legislation casts a wide 

net on what could be considered granting a degree or offering a 

program of study leading to a degree in Saskatchewan. Even 

institutions that only appear to be based in the province are still 

captured by this Act. Something as small as a postal address or 

a telephone number in the province could constitute a physical 

presence, which will allow us to regulate any institution 

offering a degree program in connection with Saskatchewan. So 

students and their parents are not — inadvertently or 

sometimes, sadly, purposefully — that they’re not misled into 

thinking that a degree is authorized in Saskatchewan when in 

fact it hasn’t been. 

 

Another way physical presence could come into play is if an 

out-of-province institution partners with a Saskatchewan 

institution in offering a joint degree program. In that case, at 

least one of the institutions must gain authorization and the 

program must be thoroughly reviewed. Once again the 

University of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina are 

exempted by this legislation. 

 

Establishing such a wide scope is necessary to set a clear 

boundary and to protect students and the integrity of 

Saskatchewan’s post-secondary educational system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed legislation will allow post-secondary 

educational institutions other than the universities to apply for 

authorization to offer a degree program. Each specific degree 

proposal must be authorized under and through this legislation. 

To be authorized, an institution must undergo a rigorous quality 

assurance review process. We developed this process by 

building on the work of other Canadian jurisdictions, in 

particular British Columbia. The process will assess an 

institution and its proposed degree program using nationally 

accepted quality standards published by the Council of 

Ministers of Education in Canada and by being mindful of other 

best practices in Canada including those associated with the 

Association of Universities and Colleges in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after putting out a call across the province for case 

studies, we heard from two specific institutions — SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] 

and Briercrest College. Using the case study approach, we are 

working with both SIAST and Briercrest College and Seminary 

to test and refine processes that will be ready by the time this 

legislation is proclaimed. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It now being after the hour of 5 

o’clock, this House stands recessed till 7 p.m. later this evening. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Eagles ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 149 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 149 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 149 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 149 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 149 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Fundraiser Celebrates Broadway Theatre 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 149 

 Christmas Concert in Marysburg 

  Kirsch ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 150 

 Children’s Hospital Fundraiser in La Ronge 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 150 

 Dream Brokers Program 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................... 150 

 Cultural Fair Raises Multicultural Awareness 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 150 

 Saskatchewan Company Achieves Milestone Revenues 

  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 151 

 New Affordable Rental Housing 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................... 151 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Protection of Information 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 151 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................... 151 

 Wetland Conservation and Drainage Management 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 153 

  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 153 

 Combatting HIV 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 154 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 154 

 Housing 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 155 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 155 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 New Online Campsite Reservation System 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 156 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 156 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 19 — The Assessment Appraisers Amendment Act, 2011 

  Hickie ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 157 

 Bill No. 20 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2011 

  Hickie ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 157 

 Bill No. 21 — The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 157 

 Bill No. 22 — The Commissioners for Oaths Consequential Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 157 

 Bill No. 23 — The Occupational Health and Safety Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 157 

 Bill No. 24 — The Advocate for Children and Youth Act 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 158 

 Bill No. 25 — The Ombudsman Act, 2011 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 158 

 Bill No. 26 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 158 

 Bill No. 27 — The Education Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l'éducation 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 158 

 Bill No. 28 — The Education Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 158 

 



 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 158 

MOTIONS 

 Committee Membership 

  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 159 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 6 — The Miscellaneous Business Statutes Amendment Act, 2011 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................... 159 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 160 

 Bill No. 7 — The Co-operatives Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1996 sur les coopératives 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................... 162 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 163 

 Bill No. 8 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2011 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................... 165 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 165 

 Bill No. 11 — The Court Officials Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 sur les fonctionnaires de justice 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 167 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 167 

 Bill No. 17 — The Child Care Amendment Act, 2011 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 169 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 170 

 Bill No. 12 — The Court Officials Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 171 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 172 

 Bill No. 15 — The Uniform Building and Accessibility Standards Amendment Act, 2011 

  Huyghebaert .............................................................................................................................................................................. 172 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 173 

 Bill No. 16 — The Correctional Services Act, 2011 

  Huyghebaert .............................................................................................................................................................................. 176 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 179 

 Bill No. 18 — The Degree Authorization Act 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 180 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


