




















































Hansard: March 15, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 31B  TUESDAY, MARCH 15, 2011, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6721 

 March 15, 2011 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 157 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 157 — The Oil and 

Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It now being 7 p.m. the Assembly will 

come to order. I recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will continue my 

discussion of Bill No. 157, An Act to amend The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Act. Mr. Speaker, a number of my colleagues 

have spoken about this piece of legislation already and dealt 

with some of the specific aspects of it, but I have one area that I 

want to raise because I think it has some potential for being 

problematic in the years to come. 

 

In the speech of the minister on November 22nd, he stated that 

this Bill was a major component of the modernization process 

which he called a complete redevelopment of oil and gas 

business processes and computer systems. And then he went on 

further to say that it was, PRIME was the acronym for this, 

process renewal and infrastructure management enhancement 

projects. So the whole discussion was around this term PRIME. 

And then he goes on further to state that the first PRIME 

project announced in November of last year — so that would be 

in 2009 — was Saskatchewan becoming a full partner in the 

petroleum registry of Alberta. Then he later goes on to state, 

“Becoming a registry partner was one of the government‟s early 

deliverables out of the New West Partnership.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this New West Partnership has some 

positive aspects, but it also has some negative aspects. And I 

was curious to ask the Deputy Premier after he came back from 

his meeting with the Manitoba Premier whether our Premier 

had been requested not to attend a joint meeting with the 

Manitoba cabinet. Because it was quite clear that after our 

Premier signed the New West Partnership with the Premier of 

British Columbia and then the Premier of Alberta, both of those 

premiers got into substantial trouble. And within not that many 

months later the premier of BC [British Columbia] has resigned 

and we now have a new Premier of BC, and the Premier of 

Alberta has announced that he will be leaving as well. And so, 

Mr. Speaker, it may be that entering into some kind of an 

agreement with our Premier is not necessarily a wise political 

thing to do. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the reason that I raise this tonight is that in 

the most recent issue of the Saskatchewan Law Review, cited as 

volume 73(2) of 2010, a couple of professors who, at the 

University of Saskatchewan law school, Professor Robin 

Hansen and Professor Heather Heavin have written an article 

called, “What‟s „New‟ in the New West Partnership Trade 

Agreement? The New West Partnership Trade Agreement and 

the Agreement on Internal Trade Compared.” But, Mr. Speaker, 

I raise this particular topic because I‟m starting new this 

evening, and this will actually give me some chance to talk at 

length about the problems between the Agreement on Internal 

Trade and the New West Partnership Trade Agreement. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, my specific concern arises out of this 

legislation tonight which is indicated to be as part of an 

initiative that comes under the New West Partnership Trade 

Agreement. 

 

Now in the legislation that is in the New West Partnership 

Trade Agreement, it comes out and it‟s quite clearly stated in 

this article that it does not have the legislative basis that it 

should have. And this is especially true if you look at page 234 

and following in this particular text. And one of the facets or 

one of the parts of the agreement is that it creates substantial 

penalties for people who are in Saskatchewan. And so persons 

whether they‟re corporate or individuals can be awarded, in 

addition to dispute settlement costs, up to $5 million per matter, 

a term which isn‟t defined in the trade agreement but it 

presumably corresponds to a maximum of $5 million per 

government measure examined. 

 

And then there‟s a dispute panel which settles some of these 

damage issues and basically follows through on the agreement. 

So it‟s got some parallels there with the Agreement on Internal 

Trade. And basically the reason for these damages is to make 

sure that the partners or the parties to the agreement follow 

through and follow what are the various aspects of that. And I 

will save all of us a substantial amount of time by not going 

through all of those aspects, although I could if anybody has 

any questions. 

 

But one of the challenges with this particular legislation is that 

this executive agreement — so the agreement between premiers 

— doesn‟t appear to be implemented into law in the provinces‟ 

legislatures. So that in Saskatchewan this agreement is the 

subject of an order of council on April 20, 2010 which orders as 

follows, and I‟ll quote: 

 

. . . that the President of the Executive Council is approved 

to enter into an agreement, on behalf of the Government 

of Saskatchewan, with the Government of Alberta and the 

Government of British Columbia, to be known as the New 

West Partnership . . . for the purpose of forming an 

economic partnership to collaborate on innovative ways to 

strengthen the economy of Western Canada. 

 

And then, in that particular order in council, the legislation 

which is cited to support this particular order in council is The 

Government Organization Act, which is an Act of this 

legislature. 

 

And in that Act it says this: 

 

. . . a minister may enter into agreements on behalf of the 

Government of Saskatchewan for any purpose related to 

the exercise of any powers or the carrying out of any of 



6722 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2011 

the responsibilities or functions assigned or transferred to 

the minister by or pursuant to this Act or any other Act or 

law. 

 

End of that quotation. Now the issue here, Mr. Speaker, is that 

there is no other Act, there is no other law which authorizes the 

Premier to sign that particular agreement on our behalf and 

effectively commit those people, I mean the people of our 

province. And I‟ll read the quotation from Professors Heavin 

and Hansen on page 235: 

 

It remains to be determined whether an agreement such as 

the New West Partnership Trade Agreement fits the 

legislative description above. Is the imposition of potential 

damages for the acts of all provincial government entities, 

including the legislature, within the scope of the 

executive‟s powers? In other words, the inclusion of New 

West Partnership Trade Agreement damages constitutes 

the executive branch of government‟s binding of all 

provincial government entities, including the legislature, 

to tort-like liability for all actions which contravene the 

terms of an executive agreement. Legislative actions are 

not normally subject to tort liability, but rather to review 

for constitutionality, suggesting that the New West 

Partnership Trade Agreement imposition of damages for 

legislative measures is a novel addition to Canadian legal 

process. 

 

And basically it then goes on to talk about how the Agreement 

on Internal Trade is characterized as not a law itself. And so 

effectively what this says is that the northwest partnership trade 

agreement is something which may be beyond the terms of the 

law of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, to further supplement this concern that I 

have, which I think needs to be remedied before it becomes 

tested at some point and maybe also will have an effect on this 

particular legislation that we‟re dealing with this evening, is a 

decision by Mr. Justice Barclay who is presently an officer of 

this legislature as the Conflict Commissioner. And on August 

28th, 1991, he made a decision in a case called Sentes and 

Huber et al. which is reported at 95 Saskatchewan Reports at 

page 141. And in that particular case, which was dealing with 

The Mortgage Interest Reduction Act of 1982-83, he declared 

that a regulation changing the subsidized interest rates was ultra 

vires of the Lieutenant Governor in Council, in other words the 

same thing as what we have authorizing the northwest 

partnership trade agreement . And this was ultra vires, as the 

regulation was not authorized by the legislation and attempted 

to override a provision in The Mortgage Protection Act. The 

court in that particular situation postponed the effective date of 

the judgement for four months to give the legislature an 

opportunity to reintroduce legislation if it wanted to try to fix 

this. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I raise this tonight because I think there are 

problems with the whole northwest partnership trade agreement 

as it relates to how it‟s been implemented by the Premier and 

by the cabinet, and that any other kinds of activities which seem 

to be buttressing or assisting that, like this particular prime or 

this oil and gas industry process regulation needs to be carefully 

looked at to make sure that it‟s not beyond the power of the 

cabinet to do this. And, Mr. Speaker, the last thing that we need 

in this province is a situation where the government, the 

executive branch, is being sued because they‟ve done 

something inappropriately, in a way that costs the people of 

Saskatchewan extra money. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think there are some fundamental problems 

with the northwest partnership trade agreement as identified by 

these professors of law in Saskatoon, but it also raises some 

bigger questions about this particular Bill and some of the 

things which are being done here. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I 

will adjourn debate on this motion. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 157, The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 149 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 149 — The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just have a few 

comments to make on the amendment, the Bill 149 which is An 

Act to amend The Income Tax Act, 2000. The new section that‟s 

being created — and I‟m going to be clear about what this is 

because I want to come back to one of the points I‟m going to 

make at the end of my remarks — the new section is being 

created to provide for a five-year corporate income tax holiday 

for companies. And then there are criteria listed that it must be 

in the business of mineral processing, make a minimum capital 

investment of 125 million in Saskatchewan, employ a minimum 

of 75 people, and allocate 90 per cent of its taxable income to 

Saskatchewan for income tax purposes. 

 

Now I know my colleagues have spoken, quite a few of them 

have spoken on this Act, and many of the comments, the 

observations, and the questions already have been raised. But 

there are three that stand out for me that I would like to see in 

my remarks, I‟d like to have recorded. 

 

The significant issue that I see is first of all, the question of loss 

of revenue. I don‟t see anywhere in the minister‟s remarks in 

the second reading speech that he addresses what impact this 

will have on Saskatchewan‟s treasury. So what loss of revenue 

do we anticipate by giving this five-year holiday to companies 

that meet this criteria? 

 

The second point I want to make, in several of the places I see, 

including the minister‟s remarks, it talks about an agreement 

with the federal government and putting this Act . . . giving the 

federal government the power to collect the taxes and then have 

a process where the company applies for a rebate and it comes 

directly to the person. 



March 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6723 

[19:15] 

 

So my second question is, how much would be the cost of 

administration to the province? How much will the province 

have to pay the federal government for the federal government 

to collect this money and then rebate it to the qualifying 

companies? 

 

And the third one I want to talk about is the increase in power 

that section 124 gives in regulation-making powers under the 

Act. It‟s pretty open as it says the amendments will permit new 

regulations to be made to prescribe additional eligibility criteria 

for the new tax holiday. So then I‟m assuming that by 

regulation, criteria can be changed so that other companies, not 

listed here or not contemplated here, could then also be eligible 

for this tax holiday. I‟d be interested to know what the 

government and the minister, in particular, anticipate changing 

in this by regulation to open up the criteria and then, I would 

assume, open up the ability for other companies to have this 

holiday. 

 

So then of course it is important to know what impact this new 

Act, new amendment, new tax holiday, will have on the 

provincial treasury. And I‟m quite interested in finding out 

what it will cost to administer because the new section 68 

permits the province to enter into a tax collection agreement 

with the federal government. The entire Act will be 

administered by the federal government. 

 

Well they don‟t usually do anything for free, Mr. Speaker, so 

I‟m assuming that we will be paying some cost to the federal 

government to do this. And then the rest of the amendment 

allows the province to self-administer a different section, so I‟m 

wondering again what will this cost the province in 

administration. So what is the lost revenue to the provincial 

treasury? What is the cost to administer the new Act and the 

new criteria? 

 

And then the third one, what has the government anticipated or 

contemplated as new criteria to allow other companies or new 

companies to come in and access this holiday, this tax holiday? 

 

So with those comments, Mr. Speaker, I think those three 

things pretty much clearly state my concerns and the questions I 

would like to see answered. And I know, like I said, I went 

through the comments with my colleagues, so I think that we‟ve 

covered a lot of the questions that are being raised with this. 

And I look forward to having those questions answered, and 

hopefully in committee. And I know there‟s still more of my 

colleagues who will want to address some of their concerns 

with the Bill. So with those remarks I would like to adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Eastview has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 149, The Income Tax 

Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? Is it the pleasure of . . . Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour that the motion be carried 

forward . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I need a clarification 

here. Did you understand the question? I was waiting for 

someone to move that the motion for the adjournment be 

carried, but I didn‟t hear that and I called for question . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Okay then. I would ask members 

then to, when we get to this point, to actually pay attention and 

call out and let us, let me know if you are agreed that we move 

forward with the adjournment. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adjourn the debate? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 150 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 150 — The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure as always to enter into the debate. These are important 

issues that we raise. While this Act is relatively short, it‟s just 

one page, Bill No. 150, An Act to amend The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act, it carries some pretty major 

changes in it. And so I‟m glad to go on record and it won‟t take 

long to do this.  

 

But I understand that essentially the Act has two main 

provisions, and the first is to clarify how spousal survivor 

benefits are to be calculated in the case of a person who may 

have been married more than once and who may have both 

current and former spouses who could claim to be qualified to 

receive some type of survivor benefit. And we think this 

clarification is appropriate and timely and quite often it‟s the 

kind of thing that happens when you are putting forward 

legislation, is unforeseen circumstance. And it‟s good to clean it 

up, and it‟s important to do that. 

 

But the second one, and I want to be clear, is it‟s something I 

cannot support, is continuing the pattern of hiding important 

information from the public view. And it‟s the new section 50, 

and I‟d like to read that. It‟s section 5 of the new Bill but it 

replaces section 50. It‟s repealed and the following is 

substituted. And the title, I‟ll read it because the folks at home 

may not be clear what Bill 150 is, but this is the part that we 

have problems with, and I‟ll quote: 

 

“Annual report not to disclose personal information 

50 The report transmitted by a board to the president of 

the Executive Council must not show the names of 

individuals who retired or died during the period to which 

the report applies, the amounts of superannuation or other 

allowances or benefits granted in individual cases or any 

other personal information respecting any of those 

individuals”. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is breaking a tradition that we have had in 

this province that any amount over $50,000 annually must be 

disclosed when it is paid to individuals or organizations. It has 



6724 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2011 

to be publicly disclosed and it doesn‟t matter if you are working 

for a minister of the Crown or Executive Council, $50,000 is 

the benchmark. And we have had that. And I find it passing 

strange that this government that has come to power on a 

position of being transparent and accountable and wanting to 

improve that has actually gone backwards here by taking this, 

by breaking this tradition. 

 

And so why is this? We have some serious questions. We just 

don‟t like the way this looks, and we can foresee kind of 

circumstances potentially with this government pension for 

having a contracting out. And maybe somebody might 

superannuate and then you get the contracting out, and you 

have issues. And we know for example that this could be a real, 

real problem because people want to know. They want to have 

a sense of accountability and transparency in their government. 

 

It‟s right across the board, you know, and we can see that at the 

federal level, whether it‟s being straightforward about how 

much these new F-35s are costing and being out by, gee, I 

understand it‟s by billions of dollars. People are just not 

accepting that, and we are seeing circumstances where people 

are just not accepting anything less than a government that 

holds true to a sense of transparency and accountability. 

 

You know, today I received an answer to a written question, 

and it was a very interesting one. It was about how much 

money is being spent or was spent on the Pringle report on the 

children at risk, the report. And it was a very important report, 

and we are looking forward to big things being done with it. 

But this report cost 650,000 — 652,000 almost — an awful lot 

of money. And some of the money was pretty well 

straightforward but when I got the answer, 430,000 was listed 

under other. Other: 430,000 of the 650,000 was other. What 

does that mean? What does it mean when you can say 

somebody‟s wage, Mr. Pringle‟s cost was about 120,000. And 

that was fair and reasonable. That was about a year‟s work and 

I think that‟s in the ballpark, and different expenses. 

 

But having a category called other and 430,000 — two-thirds of 

the amount of money — is something under other? How 

transparent and accountable is that? So I have to say that, 

without any hesitancy, that this is not right. This is absolutely 

wrong. And so this is something I will be very interested to 

hear some of the answers and how they can justify this, but I 

clearly cannot stand for this. This is something that I think is 

wrong. It‟s going backwards in the whole sense of transparency 

and accountability. 

 

Maybe they have a different meaning for what transparency 

means over there. Maybe that‟s what it is, because over the last 

three and a half years this idea of transparency is looking pretty 

cloudy, looking pretty cloudy. It‟s not a clear view of what is 

actually happening in the government‟s world, and we‟re seeing 

it blocked. And we‟ve talked a lot, my colleagues have talked a 

lot about different circumstances where we‟ve had real, real 

issues with how accountable this government is. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t have much to say because it‟s 

relatively straightforward. It‟s a short Bill. I can see one part, I 

think the part dealing with survivors is fair enough, good 

enough, and that‟s good to clean up. But the part about not 

reporting some of the information around how much people are 

getting in a year, the dollar things, I cannot stand for. 

 

So with that, I know many members on this side will want to 

get on the record of having said that, so I do move adjournment 

on Bill No. 150. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 150, The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 147 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Draude that Bill No. 147 — The 

Public Interest Disclosure Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my 

pleasure to weigh in on debate as it relates to Bill 147, The 

Public Interest Disclosure Act here tonight, Mr. Speaker, 

specifically as it relates to concerns around the disconnect 

between the stated purpose and the actual effect of this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now we support the stated purpose of this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

The problem lies in that the actual effect, actual impact, actual 

consequence disconnects from that. The reality of that doesn‟t 

provide for what the stated purpose is, Mr. Speaker, as it relates 

to protection and transparency — protection of civil servants, of 

government workers, of workers, Mr. Speaker — we support 

that entirely. We support the principle of transparency and the 

resolution of a matter raised, a concern that‟s raised. 

 

This Bill does the exact opposite, Mr. Speaker. It keeps it 

internal, prevents it from becoming public. And that‟s our 

concern with this Bill, Mr. Speaker. It fails to deliver what it 

promised to Saskatchewan people. 

 

We understand that we‟re seeing this Bill for a simple reason. 

It‟s shrewd politics, Mr. Speaker. This was a stated promise of 

the Sask Party, but they failed to deliver on this promise, Mr. 

Speaker, even though they can put a phony check mark by their 

promise, Mr. Speaker. If their goal is to provide protection to 

whistle-blowers, if their goal is to provide transparency and a 

process of disclosure, then they have failed, Mr. Speaker. So 

while this government may feel that they can go and put a 

check mark by that promise, Mr. Speaker, they have failed on 

that front. They have failed to protect Saskatchewan workers on 

this front, Mr. Speaker. And the fact that this has been driven 

underground or is being dealt with internally and not going to 

be raised externally and available for the public to engage with, 

Mr. Speaker, concerns us. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, it‟s consistent with other aspects 

that we‟ve seen with this government, something that we‟re 

going to be weighing in, in hot debate, for many more weeks, 



March 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6725 

Mr. Speaker. And that‟s specifically Bill 160, Mr. Speaker, an 

Act that is egregious as it relates to human rights, Mr. Speaker, 

something that was put forward first in Saskatchewan with a 

bill of rights, Mr. Speaker. Now, we see the elimination of 

those tribunals, the elimination, Mr. Speaker, of the voice of 

those individuals that may have been harassed and hurt, Mr. 

Speaker. And by way of this legislation, those voices will never 

come into the public domain, or very rarely, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this government continues to try to drive those sorts of 

voices, Mr. Speaker, by individuals who may have been 

harassed, by individuals — in this case as it relates to Bill 147 

— individuals who are trying to act in the best interest of public 

safety, Mr. Speaker, who are whistle-blowing. That‟s 

information that should have full disclosure and transparency. 

 

This government‟s desire to drive these processes and these 

voices internally, Mr. Speaker, not to be heard, is of huge 

concern to Saskatchewan people. And it‟s a step backwards. It‟s 

very similar, Mr. Speaker, to the handling of the Welfare Rights 

Centre here in Regina, Mr. Speaker, where you have a service 

that was vital to so many, Mr. Speaker, so many that are 

marginalized, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And 

the minister, the minister can heckle from her seat if she wants, 

the minister of Social Services. But what she needs to 

understand is it‟s entirely inadequate to take a voice that is 

required to be independent and external of government to be 

there as an accountability and a voice for those individuals that 

are often so marginalized, Mr. Speaker, that we wouldn‟t hear 

those voices otherwise, and to sweep those back into the 

internal processes of government. 

 

[19:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s not the kind of Saskatchewan we stand for. 

It‟s important in our province to be able to raise and have full 

disclosure of whether it‟s concerns as it relates to individuals 

who are marginalized and who are suffering from challenges of 

making ends meet. And the minister of Social Services can 

heckle some more from her seat, Mr. Speaker. What I would 

urge her to do, what I urge her to do is to get a service in place 

that‟s independent and external of government to make sure 

that individuals can have their voices heard, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because what this government is effectively doing is shutting 

down the voice of many. Whether it‟s Bill 160 that‟s 

eliminating human rights tribunals and taking away the voice of 

individuals who have had their human rights compromised, 

who may have been victims of harassment, Mr. Speaker, or in 

the circumstances of a welfare rights centre and the purpose of 

that service that‟s now being driven internal to government, not 

to be raised, Mr. Speaker. We have key voices that need to be 

heard. 

 

So as it relates to Bill 147, that‟s the crux of our concern as 

well, Mr. Speaker. We support the stated purpose as put 

forward by this government, Mr. Speaker. What we don‟t 

support is the impact that will occur, the effect of this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, that in the end does not provide transparency, does not 

provide disclosure, and does not provide the opportunity for the 

public to be aware of circumstances that have occurred as they 

relate to public safety. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we‟re talking about whistle-blowing 

legislation, when we‟re talking about protection of civil 

servants, we‟re talking protection of the public. We‟re talking 

about those individuals that work in health care, Mr. Speaker, 

across this province that provide vital services to each and 

every one of us and our families and certainly our communities, 

Mr. Speaker, through every stage of our lives, Mr. Speaker, and 

the lives of our families. We speak of those individuals that 

keep those roads clean, Mr. Speaker. We speak of those 

individuals who keep our correctional facilities well-ordered 

and in good shape, Mr. Speaker. We speak of educators, Mr. 

Speaker, across this province who strive to move this province 

forward economically and socially. And these are the kinds of 

individuals that legislators are required to draw upon for advice 

at times, Mr. Speaker, and certainly they‟re the kind of 

individuals that should be allowed to put forward their concern 

as it relates to a policy not being followed, Mr. Speaker, or a 

law being broken. And they deserve protection in doing so, Mr. 

Speaker. They deserve protection. And the Minister of Health, 

Mr. Speaker, should recognize this.  

 

And I‟m sure that in part this legislation is because of the many 

civil servants, Mr. Speaker, that have been disrespected by this 

government whether in the Ministry of Health, Mr. Speaker, or 

the Ministry of Education or the Ministry of Corrections, Mr. 

Speaker, who have brought forward concerns, Mr. Speaker, and 

voices that this government would rather stay quiet. 

 

This is a government that spent $10 million, Mr. Speaker, of 

taxpayers‟ money, $10 million, Mr. Speaker, of taxpayers‟ 

money to sever, to fire, Mr. Speaker, and sever non-partisan 

civil servants, Mr. Speaker — individuals who won their jobs 

fairly through competitions, Mr. Speaker, and served the people 

of this province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what the failure in this Bill is, is that without 

the protection that these workers require and that they deserve, 

Mr. Speaker, is that they fear reprisal and retribution. And with 

this government, Mr. Speaker, and its attack on workers, civil 

servants and otherwise, Mr. Speaker, that fear of reprisal and 

retribution is fair, Mr. Speaker. And we understand those 

concerns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the concerns go further. We look specifically that 

this only protects whistle-blowers who say the law has been 

broken, Mr. Speaker, and it does nothing for those who allege 

that a policy has been broken, Mr. Speaker. And we‟ve seen of 

course the charade opposite, Mr. Speaker, when we‟ve had 

important, sensitive public safety information shared in this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, information such as a dangerous 

inmate that was on the loose within our communities, Mr. 

Speaker. And we had a government that wanted to sit on their 

hands and not share with the public these circumstances, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And of course we had that information come from a civil 

servant, Mr. Speaker, and instead of bringing community safety 

to my constituents and to each of our constituents, Mr. Speaker, 

something that Saskatchewan people deserve, we saw a 

minister go on a fickle witch hunt, Mr. Speaker, and in the end 

sever somebody or fire somebody who he incorrectly believed 

was responsible, Mr. Speaker. 

 



6726 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2011 

So that‟s just one example of why this legislation is important. 

It‟s about the protection of the public across Saskatchewan. It‟s 

about the protection of workers, Mr. Speaker, who care, care 

deeply about the importance of their job, the role of their job, 

and how that impacts communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in this Bill we see a continuation of something we see 

under the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, and that‟s a consistent drive 

to take voices that need to be heard and to drive those internal 

to government to never be heard, Mr. Speaker. And we see that 

with Bill 160, with the elimination of human rights tribunals, 

the elimination of the voice of individuals whose human rights 

have been compromised, the elimination of individuals who 

have been harassed, Mr. Speaker, and all sorts of ugly 

circumstances, Mr. Speaker, information that should be in the 

public domain, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when we look at something in our own home community, 

Mr. Speaker, at a time where there‟s more pressure on 

individuals to make ends meet than ever before, Mr. Speaker, 

individuals who are being displaced from their homes and not 

able to in many cases provide for their family and feeling 

strained on so many fronts, Mr. Speaker, we see the elimination 

of the Welfare Rights Centre and the service that that centre 

was providing, Mr. Speaker, and driving that internal to 

government again, removing those voices, Mr. Speaker, from 

the public debate. 

 

And I understand it‟s a shrewd, dirty, and unfair political move 

by this Premier and the Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker, 

on each of these fronts. It doesn‟t assist our province to 

understand the matters of the day. It‟s a matter of them simply 

hoping that the public is sort of of the belief that, no problem 

here, just keep on moving along, Mr. Speaker. But in certain 

circumstances, Mr. Speaker, it‟s important that voices are heard 

by Saskatchewan people, that problems are raised, and that 

solutions are found for Saskatchewan people. It‟s about 

community safety. It‟s about protection of workers, and it‟s 

about the well-being of Saskatchewan people and communities 

now and well into the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have many more questions on this piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, just as we do on Bill 160 as well, which is going to be 

in hot debate in this legislature in the coming weeks, Mr. 

Speaker. At this point in time, with no further comments at this 

point in time and recognizing that many other speakers want to 

speak to Bill 147 and that are looking forward to questions with 

stakeholders and time at committee, Mr. Speaker, I will adjourn 

this debate at this point in time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 147, The Public 

Interest Disclosure Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 153 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 153 — The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased to enter into the debate on Bill 153 which primarily 

deals with The Provincial Court Amendment Act. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to point out to some of the folks 

that may be watching, the purpose of this committee process is 

to look through a couple of Bills that are being proposed by the 

government. And in this particular Bill 153, we‟re dealing with 

the Minister of Justice and some of the amendments that he 

wants to make to The Provincial Court Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of changes being proposed 

with this Bill, and while some appear to be worthy of support, 

this Bill repeals the civil division of the Provincial Court and 

appears to transfer significant responsibilities currently handled 

by the Provincial Court judges to justices of the peace. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, at the outset people would say, well that 

seems kind of awkward because one would assume that a 

Provincial Court judge certainly has a much more authority, 

much more stature, and I think much more legal background 

than a Justice of the Peace. Now, Mr. Speaker, that‟s not to 

devalue the justice of the peace folks because they certainly do 

a lot of great work. But any time you have a significant shift, 

Mr. Speaker, in a sense of transferring responsibilities and legal 

matters from a Provincial Court judge to a Justice of the Peace, 

there‟s a lot of questions being asked. Why this is being done? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are some very serious implications. 

And as you look at some of the other actions being undertaken 

by this particular minister and that particular government, one 

begins to wonder what exactly is their hidden agenda. What is 

being planned here, Mr. Speaker? Obviously if you look at 

everything from the Human Rights Commission — that‟s one 

example that I spoke on yesterday — at the outset people seem 

to think that there is needed change there and that there was 

some positive things and positive developments. And we 

always want to make sure that we have opinions expressed by 

different groups be heard by the opposition and hopefully be 

heard by the government. Now, Mr. Speaker, we‟re hearing a 

number of concerns coming forth as a result of the Human 

Rights Commission. A lot of people do not like what is being 

proposed in the Human Rights Code by that particular minister. 

 

And now we‟re seeing another example in Bill 153, of which 

I‟m speaking about, is that again it repeals the civil division of 

the Provincial Court and appears to transfer significant 

responsibilities from the Provincial Court judges to a Justice of 

the Peace. Now, Mr. Speaker, who is this going to impact in 

terms of the service? What is going to be the legal impact in 

terms of the authority when you transfer from a judge to a 

Justice of the Peace? And what hearings will the Justice of the 

Peace actually have in relation to this Bill? What powers will 

they have? What powers will he or she as a Justice of the Peace 

have in relation to some of the services being transferred from 

the Provincial Court system certainly to a Justice of the Peace 

hearing process? 

 



March 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6727 

So, Mr. Speaker, these are some of the things that we obviously 

really want you to pay a lot of attention to. From this particular 

minister we‟re seeing some meddling in the Human Rights 

Commission, which a lot of people do not want to see. We see 

some transfers under The Provincial Court Amendment Act as it 

directed under Bill 153. That takes a lot of responsibility from 

the Provincial Court system down to the Justice of the Peace 

system. And you begin to wonder, what‟s going on over there? 

What plan have they got to devalue our justice system? What 

plan have they got to devalue the people that are currently using 

some of the systems under the old systems that were in place 

versus some of the new changes that they have proposed here? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am not a lawyer and I don‟t have any legal 

background, but when I see meddling in certain processes by 

that party, it always begins to raise concern by a number of 

groups and certainly by the official opposition. And I go back 

to everything from the Human Rights Commission, the change 

they made there. 

 

I go back to the whole notion of photo ID [identification] for 

voting, which I think is a wrong thing to do. And I do not know 

where that particular minister got that idea or who pushed him 

to put that idea into place because it is wrong. It devalues the 

participation of many groups in our province from participating 

in the voting of this province. And yet they stand there and say, 

oh it‟s good for the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every time this minister brings a Bill forward, 

there is a lot of concern raised by a lot of groups saying, what 

are they doing? What is their hidden agenda? Why are they 

trying to devalue some of the processes that are out there by 

meddling in some of the smaller points? And I think, as I made 

out earlier, that there is a hidden agenda out there. And there‟s 

always room as an opposition for us to expose that government 

and certainly challenge that minister on many of these fronts. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the question that I asked the minister on 

numerous occasions and I ask him again is, who are asking, 

which group of people are specifically asking for this change? 

Who is asking for this change, Mr. Speaker? Is it some 

particular interest group that‟s come to the minister and saying, 

the whole world is falling apart, we need to do this to make it 

better? Or is it just something that they want to do on their own 

to devalue our system that we have in place that values people‟s 

participation, the fair hearing process, the true justice that is 

required? Is that their effort, to devalue that system that we 

want to protect and certainly want to see enhanced in modern 

day Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And these are some of the things that I often tell people to 

worry about. Any time you see the Saskatchewan Party 

meddling in the Human Rights Commission, it is not good 

news. Anytime you see the Saskatchewan Party talk about 

Provincial Court amendments and devaluing some of the 

processes, it‟s not good news. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is something over there. There is something 

rotten in the state of Denmark. And I would suggest, Mr. 

Speaker, that Bill 153 adds to that argument that something is 

going on over there that is meant to break the backs of those 

people that use the Human Rights Commission to hear some of 

their concerns. I think this whole notion of having the civil 

division of the Provincial Court being repealed and hearings 

now being heard by a Justice of the Peace when they used to be 

heard by sitting Provincial Court judges, Mr. Speaker, I think 

that there‟s something devious going on and there is a hidden 

agenda. This is not good, I think, overall for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

[19:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I continue going on looking at whose rights 

will be impacted. Which groups are going to be impacted by 

this move? And secondly is, who requested the changes, Mr. 

Speaker? Who requested the changes? And often what we see 

from that minister and from that government is they‟ll get 

somebody with good stature in a certain field. They will ask 

him or her to do a certain amount of work, and they‟ll put . . . 

[inaudible] . . . in front of them. But behind that individual 

they‟ll put a bunch of their hidden agenda items and hide 

behind the value of that individual, the goodness of that 

individual and say, okay, we like you for what you‟re going to 

do here, but we‟ve got these 10 or 12 different items that we 

want to throw in and throw behind there so people don‟t even 

see this coming. They‟ll be so busy looking at the stature and 

the status of that individual that they won‟t see the implications 

behind some of their other plans when it comes to things like 

the Human Rights Commission, things like The Provincial 

Court Amendment Act that these guys are proposing. 

 

There is something fundamentally wrong, Mr. Speaker, when 

you look at Bill 153, and people are saying and the government 

is proposing to do a transfer of significant responsibilities that 

are currently handled by the Provincial Court judges to justices 

of the peace. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know what authority and powers that 

justices of the peace have. And these are the questions we need 

to ask. What rights are you transferring over to the Justice of 

the Peace to do some of these hearings? Again, who will be 

impacted? Who will be impacted? Which groups asked for this? 

Which groups oppose this particular move? And none of that 

information has been forthcoming, Mr. Speaker. And I think 

it‟s a shame when you see governments begin to debase a court 

system that I think has some fundamental beliefs entrenched in 

it. And those fundamental beliefs talk about fair hearings and 

having the proper resources and not having political 

interference determine the outcome in many cases, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Again I look at the notion of the Bill itself. And there‟s a few 

other items that I think certainly deserve some merit, there‟s no 

question about that. And being transparent, looking at the 

benefits that some of the judges get in terms of disability, these 

are some of the things that are proper and probably in due time 

they can be addressed. 

 

But I go back to my earlier point, Mr. Speaker. If you have 

somebody of status, somebody that‟s going to be moving some 

of these things forward, helping this government move things 

forward, and they certainly have a good solid public record and 

people have a lot of good impressions of this individual, but in 

the meantime, in the back of that individual and behind those 

individuals‟ back, they have a hidden agenda to devalue some 

of our systems that we have had in Saskatchewan for many, 



6728 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2011 

many years that promotes fairness, that promotes the integrity 

of the law and certainly promotes, above all else, no political 

interference. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there‟s a lot of information that we need to 

find out from this government as it relates to any Bill. And Bill 

153 again raises the alarm that this minister somehow and 

somewhere has a plan in place as per their political beliefs to 

devalue every system out there that talks about fairness, that 

talks about the integrity of the law, and again making sure 

there‟s no political interference. 

 

And we‟ve seen evidence time and time again, and I go back to 

my earlier comments on the photo ID, which has got to be the 

most ludicrous idea I‟ve ever heard, ever presented in this 

Assembly. It goes to the commission, the Human Rights 

Commission, the devalue of that commission that lends 

credence to the point I have today. 

 

And Bill 153 again transferring responsibilities from a 

provincial court judge system to a Justice of the Peace, there‟s 

something seriously wrong with how that government‟s looking 

at the justice system and how they‟ve interfered with it for their 

own political beliefs. And, Mr. Speaker, they will pay a price 

for that. And based on that notion, Mr. Speaker, I move that we 

adjourn debate on Bill 153. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill 153, The Provincial Court 

Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you. Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 154 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 154 — The 

Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, 2010/Loi de 

2010 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 

I‟m pleased to rise and speak on Bill 154, which is The 

Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, which again 

goes earlier to the Bill I spoke about a few seconds ago, and 

that‟s Bill 153. 

 

Again I reiterate to the people of Saskatchewan, there is 

something wrong with this government when they have done 

everything that they can, whether it‟s photo ID or whether it‟s 

the Human Rights Commission. And now Bill 154 attached to 

Bill 153, which devalues the process in terms of a fair hearing, 

an impartial hearing, by making the small claims court or Small 

Claims Act . . . it repeals the civil division and therefore 

transferring effective, significant responsibilities from 

provincial court judges to justices of the peace. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of questions on this. We 

have a lot of people we‟re going seek advice from. And we‟re 

going to continue hammering this government to find out 

answers as to who this impacts, what the powers of the Justice 

of the Peace are, and who asked for these particular measures, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 154. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill 154, The Provincial Court 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Deputy Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Government House Leader has 

moved that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 

until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 19:52.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 157 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6721 

 Bill No. 149 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6722 

 Bill No. 150 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2010 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6723 

 Bill No. 147 — The Public Interest Disclosure Act 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6724 

 Bill No. 153 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6726 

 Bill No. 154 — The Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, 2010 

 Loi de 2010 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6728 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


