




















































Hansard: May 05, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 57A  THURSDAY, MAY 5, 2011, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7523 

 May 5, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With us 

today we have a large contingency of teachers joining their 

Assembly. I can’t of course introduce them all by their names 

nor do I know all of their names. But we know we have a large 

number of teachers joining us today. We want to welcome them 

to their Assembly and thank them for the great work that they 

do in the classrooms with our future of our province, which is 

the students. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

extend a special welcome to the thousands of teachers who I 

met on the steps of the legislature this morning to express their 

concerns and to add a special welcome to the many teachers 

who have filled the galleries here in the Assembly. We want to 

thank them for the important work they do around the year in 

every community throughout Saskatchewan, and we want to 

thank them for putting the interests of students first. 

 

I would like to make a special welcome to Steve Allen, 

president of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, as well as 

Shelly Tootoosis, incoming assistant general secretary. If 

they’re not in the Speaker’s gallery, I’m sure they’re filing in 

with others as we speak. So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all 

members to join me in welcoming all these teachers to the 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster, 

the minister responsible for Crown corps. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure today to introduce a couple of people from my area of 

the province. It’s rare we get people from the Northwest 

travelling this long distance. But today we have two people — 

if you could give us a wave — Whitney and Carlito. They are 

representatives of Newcap, the television station in 

Lloydminster. And in fact they have a program called Around 

the Region, which ties in newsmakers, places, and people and 

exciting things that are going on in our region, and is a great 

attribute in our community. And I appreciate their interest in the 

Saskatchewan legislature. So please help me welcome them to 

their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today too to welcome all the teachers to the Chamber here 

today in support of their action in terms of getting a fair 

collective bargaining process. I’d also like to, Mr. Speaker, 

thank the many, many students that were outside today, some of 

which have joined us in the Chamber today. I’ll single a few of 

them out. My daughter, Morgan Morin, is here as well as 

Brieanna Rotelick, who were here to support their teachers in 

getting a fair and respectful bargaining process as well as a fair 

and respectful collective agreement. So I want to thank all the 

students that came and joined their teachers today in the 

legislature and welcome them to the Chamber. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

want to welcome all of the teachers that are in the gallery today 

and say that I listened very carefully to what teacher leaders had 

to say on the steps of the legislature. And I just want all of the 

teachers to know that I am extremely proud of my profession 

that is intelligent, articulate, and organized. I’ll be leaving this 

Chamber in a couple of weeks, but I intend to return to my 

profession that made me very proud today. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

very proud today to present a petition for the teachers. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to call 

on the government to immediately stop disrespecting 

Saskatchewan teachers and to return to the bargaining 

table with the willingness to bargain in good faith, thereby 

demonstrating that teachers are valued, respected, and 

central to the success of Saskatchewan’s future. 

 

And as in duty bound [Mr. Speaker] your petitioners will 

ever pray. 

 

And the people that have signed the petition are from the city 

here. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I would ask our 

teachers to respect the rules and the procedures in the 

Legislative Chamber, and all those in the gallery. You’re 

welcome to be here, but you’re not to participate in any way, 

whether vocally or hand clapping. I’d ask your respect for those 

rules. 

 

I recognize the member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in support 

of many of the people of the province who request that the 

government maintains quality health care services: 

 

The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth that the Government of 

Saskatchewan ought to recognize the need for timely 

access to comprehensive and quality health care services 

for all communities within the province, including Wakaw 

and surrounding areas, and that the disruption of 



7524 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2011 

emergency services and in-patient services at Wakaw 

Hospital will not serve the needs of the residents in this 

community and surrounding area; and 

 

That the cuts in access to timely and accurate diagnostic 

and laboratory tests within the community of Wakaw and 

surrounding areas will also not serve the residents. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintain quality health care 

services through the commitment of necessary funding to 

address critical retention and recruitment issues. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners shall ever pray. 

 

The petitions today are signed by many people from Regina, 

Young, Cudworth, Prince Albert, Muenster, Saskatoon, 

Wakaw, and Tisdale. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. We know that freedom from poverty is an 

enshrined human right by the United Nations and that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security. And we 

know in Saskatchewan the income gap between the rich and the 

poor continues to grow, and now one in five children in 

Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. And I’d like to read 

the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Regina, Saskatoon, Unity, Martensville, North Battleford, 

Moose Jaw, and Nipawin. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition from concerned constituents who live in the 

neighbourhood of Hampton Village, and it’s about the need for 

a new elementary school: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes, including education property tax; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to neighbouring 

communities to attend schools that are typically already 

reaching capacity. 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

residents of Hampton Village. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise yet 

again to present a petition to restore funding equity to Regina 

Catholic schools. Mr. Speaker, Regina Catholic schools 

received less than $275 per pupil less than Regina public 

schools, amounting to a funding inequity of $2.7 million in total 

in the last fiscal year. And of course that total is growing, 

because there’s been added inequity over the last year as well, 

Mr. Speaker. And this inequity, Mr. Speaker, affects Catholic 

schools all across the province. This funding inequity is placing 

program delivery and staffing levels at risk, and we’re already 

seeing program cuts for the fall of 2011. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan has denied Catholic school 

boards in the province representation on the 

government-appointed committee mandated to develop a 

long-term funding formula for Saskatchewan school boards. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to address the funding inequity between 

Regina Catholic schools and Regina public schools that 

provides $275 less per pupil funding for Regina Catholic 

school students, totalling $2.7 million, and make known 

that the continuation for another school year of funding 

inequity places program delivery and staffing levels at risk 

in Regina Catholic schools; and in so doing, immediately 

restore funding equity to ensure that every student in 

Saskatchewan, whether enrolled in a Catholic or a public 

school, receives equitable resources to ensure every 

student in Saskatchewan has access to a quality education. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the residents of 

Regina, Saskatoon, Muenster, Cut Knife, Battleford, 

Lloydminster, Maple Creek, Prince Albert, and Moose Jaw. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again today, as I have 

every day, to once again present a petition on behalf of 

residents of Saskatchewan concerned about the detrimental 

effects that Bill 160 will have on human rights law if enacted. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

withdraw Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative 



May 5, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7525 

Assembly of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public 

consultations informed by a public policy paper before 

any amendments to the Human Rights Code, the law that 

supersedes all others in our province, are even considered. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Regina, Prince 

Albert, Big River, Estevan, Shellbrook, Holbein, LeRoy, 

Humboldt, Saskatoon, Warman, Davidson, Christopher Lake, 

Zealandia, Moosomin, and Wynyard. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise once again to present 

petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of our 

finances by the Sask Party. They allude to the record that 

includes the running of deficits and increasing of debt at times 

of record highs in revenues, in fact increasing debt by well over 

$1.3 billion over the past three years, and the fact that we have 

these all-time highs in prosperity and revenues, and now 

claiming no money for teachers’ contracts and other matters, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask 

Party government for its damaging financial 

mismanagement since taking office, a reckless fiscal 

record that is denying Saskatchewan people, 

organizations, municipalities, institutions, taxpayers, and 

businesses the responsible and trustworthy fiscal 

management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned citizens of 

Melville, Glenavon, Lemberg, Cupar, Montmartre, Meadow 

Lake, Turtleford, North Battleford, and Regina. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Teachers Hold Job Action 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, thousands of teachers have come 

to the legislature today to express to the Sask Party government 

their frustration and unhappiness with the failed bargaining 

process for a new contract. 

 

The job action we are seeing today across Saskatchewan is not 

something teachers pursue lightly and without very serious 

deliberation. Mr. Speaker, it was not necessary for the situation 

to get to this level, if only the Sask Party government had been 

listening to the concerns being raised by teachers across the 

province over the past months. 

 

In earlier question periods during this session, I have read many 

excerpts from letters written to MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] by concerned teachers. While each letter 

is unique, some common themes have certainly been evident. 

We have heard how teachers love what they do and how they 

truly care about their students’ futures. We have heard how 

teachers have been asked to do more and more for their students 

with less and less. We have heard how young teachers find it 

increasingly difficult to get established as they begin their 

careers. We have heard that teachers do not feel respected and 

valued for the important work they do in every school 

throughout Saskatchewan. We have heard that teachers feel 

taken for granted. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if the Sask Party government failed to hear 

the message in the letters they received, surely they heard the 

message at today’s rally on the steps of the legislature. 

 

It’s time for the Sask Party government to take teachers’ 

concerns seriously and return to the table prepared to bargain in 

good faith. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan teachers and our 

children deserve it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 

 

Skills Canada Saskatchewan Competition 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, Skills Canada Saskatchewan is a not-for-profit 

organization whose mission is to, and I quote, “promote skilled 

trades and technologies as a first choice career option for 

Saskatchewan’s youth.” 

 

This year’s provincial competition was held in Moose Jaw on 

April the 15th and hosted 400 competitors from all 

Saskatchewan school divisions and post-secondary and 

apprentice colleges. Participants competed in over 30 skilled 

trades and technologies, ranging from computer animation to 

workplace safety. Provincial gold medal winners will advance 

to the Skills Canada National Competition hosted by Quebec 

City on June the 1st to the 4th of 2011. 

 

Of the 400 competitors, 39 students from the Good Spirit 

School Division competed in the competition. It is my pleasure 

to advise you that three of these students won gold and will 

now advance to the national competition being held in Quebec 

City in June. These students are: Julian Fidek of Invermay 

School in outdoor power and recreational equipment category; 

Brandon Beutel of Melville Composite School in welding; 

Gage Bush of Yorkton Regional High School in 3-D animation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the next world’s competition that these students 

are eligible for is in two years time. So I want to wish these 

three students and all of our Saskatchewan competitors success 

at the nationals this fall, and good luck to achieving a gold 

status for world’s competition in two years. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Multiple Sclerosis Awareness Month 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May is Multiple 

Sclerosis Awareness Month. The Canadian MS Society 



7526 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2011 

estimates that somewhere between 55 and 75,000 Canadians 

live with MS. As well, every day three more Canadians are 

diagnosed with the disease. It is a disease that affects many 

young adults and includes life altering symptoms such as loss 

of balance, impaired speech, extreme fatigue, double vision, 

and paralysis. 

 

Canadians have one of the highest rates of MS in the world, and 

it is crucial that we raise awareness about the condition and 

invest in resources in finding a cure. The MS Society of Canada 

aims through MS Awareness Month and World MS Day on 

May 25th to increase awareness about MS, inform the public 

about the MS Society’s services and mission, and to engage 

new and existing supporters in their efforts to end MS. 

 

There are many ways for people to support the MS Society of 

Canada: by making donations, participating in an MS walk, or 

through supporting the MS carnation campaign, also taking 

place this May. 

 

Right now we do not know the cause of MS, but researchers are 

getting closer and making many breakthroughs. It is important 

that people and the government of this province support MS 

research so that we can find an answer and end MS. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Poster Contest Winners Announced 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Shand power 

station greenhouse is pleased to announce the winners of the 

10th annual Energy & Our Environment poster contest. The 

contest helps Saskatchewan students in grades 5 and 6 focus on 

the impacts of energy usage and the environment. Mr. Speaker, 

this poster contest is used as part of the educational curriculum 

and it is very encouraging to see our province’s students 

thinking of creative ways to protect our environment and 

increase conservation. 

 

SaskPower received 656 submissions from students at 40 

Saskatchewan schools for this year’s contest. A winning poster 

was selected from each of the schools, and four grand prize 

winners were chosen. The four grand prize winners receive a 

mountain bike and a bicycle helmet. And in addition, each of 

the four, top four winners’ schools will receive educational 

material on climate change for the school library and a cheque 

to purchase trees from its local nursery, to be planted on school 

grounds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year’s grand prize winning posters were 

created by Sarah Hicks of Outlook High School; Eunice 

Domingo, St. Joan of Arc School; Reid Armstrong from 

Churchbridge Public School; and Bentleigh Wichorek, 

Riverside Community School. 

 

The Shand greenhouse is one of the ways SaskPower is 

reducing the environmental impact of generating electricity. 

And I invite this Assembly to join me in recognizing the 

participants in the 10th annual Energy & Our Environment 

poster contest. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

International Day of Midwives 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 

around the world, people are recognizing the valuable 

contribution of midwives on this International Day of 

Midwives. Midwives play an important role in providing a 

positive environment for women who are expecting and 

delivering babies. 

 

Midwives are health professionals who provide primary care to 

women and their babies during pregnancy, labour, birth, and the 

postpartum period. The midwifery model of care provides 

normal birth, enables women to make informed choices, and 

provides continuity of care and support throughout the 

childbearing experience. 

 

In 2008, Saskatchewan proclaimed the final sections of The 

Midwifery Act based on the hard work done by the previous 

NDP [New Democratic Party] government. The NDP took the 

first necessary step of establishing the Saskatchewan College of 

Midwives in legislation and committing to fund it once 

implemented. 

 

But today, more than two years after the Sask Party 

government’s proclamation of The Midwifery Act, access to 

midwives is limited. Health regions are not adequately funded 

and health care for mothers and families is being neglected. 

Today we call on the Sask Party government to immediately 

deliver on its commitment to roll out a midwifery program that 

offers Saskatchewan women appropriate options for midwifery 

care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in 

acknowledging the Midwives Association of Saskatchewan and 

the Saskatchewan College of Midwives for educating the 

community, creating awareness, and ensuring that women with 

low-risk pregnancies receive the maternity care they want and 

need. 

 

And given that this weekend is Mother’s Day, I’d also like to 

say happy Mother’s Day to all the mothers in Saskatchewan. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Mother’s Day 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This weekend will be 

a very special one for women across our province as we 

celebrate Mother’s Day. It is a time to thank those who brought 

us into this world and for all of their work and sacrifice. A 

mother’s work is never done, and every day these women fill 

the most important job in the world. 

 

Mother’s Day traditionally falls on the second Sunday in May, 

the time of year when we see new life emerging all around us in 

this season of birth and renewal. As our province continues to 

grow, it’s important for people to remember where they came 

from, and days like these to remind us to pause and give thanks 

to the people who are responsible for where we are today. 

There is an old saying that goes, nobody would be where they 

are today if it were not for their mother. 



May 5, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7527 

Mr. Speaker, I would like this Assembly to join me in 

recognizing the hard work and loving support that mothers have 

been and continue to provide to all of us in our daily lives. We 

will always appreciate your years of dedication to making us 

the best children we could be. Miss you, Mom. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Appreciation for Teachers 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we are joined by 

thousands of teachers here today that care deeply for their 

students and that value their work, teachers that are vital to 

ensure that we, as a province, progress socially and 

economically. This cannot be understated nor dismissed. This 

government has broken its promise to fund education 

adequately, resulting to cuts to programs, a massive reduction 

in educational assistants, increased class size and demands. The 

list goes on and is known all too well to teachers across this 

province. 

 

Teachers prepare, enable, and empower the young people for 

the future. Teachers put in many hours of unpaid time to enrich 

and support the education of students. They are asked to do 

ever more and deliver the goods for the betterment of all. Their 

dedication deserves the government’s respect, not long delays 

in contract negotiations nor organized attacks on a right wing 

radio talk show that’s tied to the hip with this Premier and 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the very teachers that are here with us today and 

the thousands across this fine province are standing up for 

education. They care for and develop our students, and they are 

both working for and critical to determining a better tomorrow, 

a bright future for this province, making certain that our best 

days as a province lie ahead of us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has record highs in revenues, 

more money than ever before. It’s past time that our teachers 

are invested in. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Contract Negotiations with Teachers 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

light of the fact that several thousand teachers have come to the 

legislature today, to their legislature to lobby the government to 

get a fair and equitable contract, I wanted to ask questions to 

the minister or to the Premier. 

 

In light of the fact that the government has had and seen its way 

to give huge contract increases to CEOs [chief executive 

officer] of health regions — in fact the Prince Albert CEO of 

the health region there, I think, got a 60 per cent increase; 

political staff in the Premier’s office got as much as a 70 per 

cent increase — why is it that this government has chosen to 

treat the teachers of this province with a lack of respect and to 

not put forward a contract that would give them even the cost of 

living increase that they so much deserve and more? Why have 

we taken that approach as a society that we do not treat teachers 

with respect and give them a proper contract so they can get 

back to school and teach our children? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I should want to clear up some of the information in 

the hon. member’s preamble and then answer directly his 

question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we dealt in estimates the other night with the fact 

that health care managers in the province, even after the 

increases they’re going to receive, will be paid at 65 per cent of 

the average of health care managers in Western Canada. And 

moreover, Mr. Speaker, with respect to political staff, this 

government’s spending 20 per cent less on political staff than 

the previous administration did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of our kids in our family are in the school 

system still, and they have benefited mightily from great 

teachers. We value the teachers of this province on this side of 

the House, not just as a government but as parents as well, and 

grandparents in some cases. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s been an 

offer presented early on from both sides. Clearly the teachers 

aren’t satisfied with the offer from the government trustee 

bargaining committee, neither is that government trustee 

bargaining committee comfortable with a one year, 12 per cent 

increase, Mr. Speaker. So there is a gap. The collective 

bargaining process can work, and we would ask teachers, we’d 

ask both parties to return to the bargaining table where we will 

find answers to this challenge, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — The only thing accurate in that answer is 

that the teachers aren’t satisfied with less than 2 per cent, and I 

don’t blame them. I don’t blame them. Because in light of the 

fact that employees in this province who do the heavy lifting, 

whether teachers or health care workers, are required to take 

less than 2 per cent while political staff in the Premier’s office 

received as much as 70 per cent, the Premier knows that’s not 

fair, that it’s not moral when you carry on in that manner to set 

these double standards for the teachers in the province and the 

political staff in that building. And I’m not critical of the 

political staff. It’s just not fair, and you know that. 

 

Can the Premier tell me why he continues on in this vein of 

treating the teachers with disrespect and not giving them a 

contract that they deserve? They don’t take their job lightly or 

the work action lightly that they’ve taken. Ninety-five per cent 

of the teachers voted for work action. They’re here today. Can 

the Premier tell me again why less than 2 per cent is an 

appropriate number for an increase for our teachers in this 

province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, once again in terms of the 

hon. member’s preamble, I want to inform this House that 

under the NDP, their government spent 20 per cent more on 

political staff than this government has spent, Mr. Speaker. 

There are fewer staff on this side of the House. Well, Mr. 



7528 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2011 

Speaker, this is a comparison the hon. member is using, and we 

need to get the facts on the table. Mr. Speaker, we know that 

teachers are currently demanding through their union, through 

the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation], they’re 

demanding 12 per cent over one year. Mr. Speaker, we know 

the government . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we know that the government 

trustee bargaining committee, with the offer that it has on the 

table currently, is presenting the highest offer in the country. In 

BC [British Columbia] and in Manitoba, there are zeros in the 

offer, Mr. Speaker. If teachers were to accept the current offer, 

and obviously they’re not interested in doing that and we 

respect that, but if they were to do that they would be the 

second highest paid teachers in Western Canada, second to the 

province of Alberta, where because of the contract they have, 

teachers are facing massive layoffs in that province, in the 

province of Alberta. There are also, in a number of school 

districts in that province as a result of the contract that’s been 

struck in Alberta, there are teachers working 20 per cent more 

hours in terms of teaching time or assignable time as a result of 

that contract. 

 

So we’ve got to be comparing apples to apples and, Mr. 

Speaker, we want a fair contract for our teachers. We want to 

make sure that they are valued here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. We urge them to return to the bargaining table. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that we 

have a Premier, when we talk about potash royalties, is worried 

about the continued revenue stream to the potash shareholders, 

most of whom are foreign and not worried about the owners of 

the potash here in the province. 

 

Now with teachers, he’s worried about teachers being laid off in 

Alberta. That’s not the debate. The debate is whether or not 

teachers here in Saskatchewan are being paid properly, not 

whether teachers are being laid off in Alberta. Now I’m not 

saying that I’m not concerned about the teachers being laid off 

in Alberta, but that’s not his concern. That’s not his worry. His 

worry is about the teachers who are in the gallery earning less 

than their comparables in other parts of Canada, and the fact 

that they are coming here today in large numbers because they 

feel they’re not respected and they’re not getting a fair contract. 

 

In light of the fact that cost of living in this province is going up 

faster and faster with 20 cent a litre on gasoline, rent going up, 

cost of food expected to go up 10 per cent, why is it that less 

than 2 per cent is right for our teachers? Why is that a good 

position? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Alberta situation is 

instructive and important for us here because we want to avoid 

a settlement where our school boards would have to, because of 

budgetary constraints caused by a settlement, potentially look at 

layoffs, Mr. Speaker. That’s what happened in Alberta. There 

was a large contract settlement in Alberta that has them now 

higher than the province, even though we’re the second highest 

in Western Canada. And a result of that . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the opposition who 

asked the question to allow the Premier the same respect to 

answer the question. I recognize the Premier. 

 

[10:30] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, now as a result of that, 

certainly we see massive layoffs of teachers in that province, 

and moreover we see teacher/student ratios that are too high. 

They are high also in centres in this province. We want to see 

that problem relieved, not exacerbated. And so, Mr. Speaker, 

we do want to find a fair contract for teachers. 

 

We understand they don’t accept the government trustee 

bargaining committee position. The government also, that same 

committee, has difficulty with 12 per cent in one year. The best 

place to resolve this in the interests of all the parties is the 

bargaining table, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the teachers are 

going to feel very disappointed that rather than being listened 

to, they’re being threatened by the Premier that if they don’t 

take the contract, they’re going to have layoffs. That’s what 

he’s saying here today, and that’s shameful because there is 

nowhere else in Canada where there’s more money than in 

Saskatchewan. If you look at the revenue to the province, it’s 

higher than ever before. And if there isn’t enough, go to the 

potash corporations and take a little bit more and pay our 

teachers properly. That’s the thing. 

 

I want to ask the Premier again. I want to ask the Premier again: 

in light of the fact that several thousand teachers have come 

here, and reasonable, they’ve been absolutely reasonable, 

writing letters, doing all the things that teachers or workers 

should do to get a contract, will he now sit down with them in a 

reasonable way and sort this out and get the job done? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that’s how I have concluded I 

think every answer that I’ve given, that the appropriate solution 

here is the bargaining table. We understand the teachers’ 

position with respect to the offer that has been tendered by the 

government trustee committee. Mr. Speaker, I think they also 

understand that committee’s position that 12 per cent in one 

year is also not acceptable. And so the solution is at the 

bargaining table. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the evidence of this government’s 

commitment to education can be found in each and every one of 

its budgets, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well, 

well the hon. members are heckling again. The truth of the 

matter is in terms of operating increases for school districts 

since we took office is in and around 20 per cent. The fact of 



May 5, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7529 

the matter is that after paltry investments in education capital 

and almost nil in terms of block funding, we’ve seen over $400 

million invested in education infrastructure in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have a commitment to education, a commitment to the 

teachers and, Mr. Speaker, we also have a commitment to the 

students and their parents. The answer in this regard, in this 

debate, it will be found at the bargaining table. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Funding for Education 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan teachers do a 

tremendous job of educating the youth of our province, but the 

actions of the Sask Party government have resulted in making 

the work that teachers do more and more difficult. For example, 

the Sask Party’s plan of reducing the number of educational 

assistants throughout the province means teachers are picking 

up more and more of the slack and the classroom environment 

is becoming more and more challenging. 

 

To the minister: she wasn’t prepared to come out onto the steps 

of the legislature, nor were any of her colleagues, so I’ll ask the 

question to the minister here in the Assembly. Will she admit 

that her actions have increased the workload for Saskatchewan 

teachers, and why won’t she recognize this reality when 

bargaining with teachers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, time and time again the 

Premier has invited the teachers to return to the bargaining 

table, which is where negotiations should take place. In the 

member opposite’s premise that we have cut education 

assistants, that is not true, Mr. Speaker. We have increased 

funding to school divisions year over year over year since we 

have been government, and it is the school divisions who make 

the decisions on their staff complements, Mr. Speaker. They 

have added certain other professionals to their complement. It is 

generally been asked for by parents. It’s been asked for by the 

disability community to have, along with educational assistants, 

they would like to see other professionals work with their 

students. 

 

School divisions have worked very diligently to be able to 

provide that complement. They have made some very good 

progress in providing better services for our students, and I 

commend them for that. But ultimately it is their decision on 

how they are going to hire their staff, and they’ve received 

increases in funding to make those decisions. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the teachers in this gallery know 

the reality when it comes to educational assistants here in the 

province. They know the process that that minister began, and 

they know the process that that minister is continuing. 

 

Not only has the Sask Party made life more difficult for 

teachers through a reduction of educational assistants, but the 

Sask Party’s broken promise on the long-awaited permanent 

funding formula for school divisions have left boards in limbo. 

By breaking their promise to provide a funding formula, the 

hands of school boards have been unfairly tied when it comes to 

issues like hiring new, young, talented teachers. And sadly we 

know the Sask Party’s broken promise on the funding formula 

was motivated by political expediency and not by the best 

interest of Saskatchewan students. 

 

To the minister: will she finally admit that she has placed her 

party’s political fortunes over the interest of the province’s 

education system? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, again I want to say to the 

member I’m not entirely sure, when we were in estimates, that 

he understands how the funding formula works. What we’re 

using is the NDP funding formula that they had in place, and 

each and every year we add to that budget, making adjustments 

for student enrolment. For the LINC [local implementation and 

negotiation committee] agreements, which is money for 

teachers, we have adjusted the LINC agreements and ensured 

that they are fully funded. 

 

And I want to just read an insert from the Saskatchewan 

Bulletin, on April 11th of 2011, by Steve Allen, the president of 

the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. And it says this, and I 

quote: 

 

Allen noted that while he empathizes with school boards 

having to deal with the uncertainty, he maintained it was 

best to make sure to get the formula right before it is 

eventually launched. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the minister for 

the lecture. I always do appreciate being informed by her. Mr. 

Speaker, the minister can hide behind the SSBA [Saskatchewan 

School Boards Association], just like she hid under her desk 

today during the reality. But everyone knows that the 

government has a majority at the bargaining table, and they can 

makes things happen if they want to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every person in this Chamber can think of a 

teacher who made a huge difference in our life. Teachers are 

good at what they do because for them teaching isn’t simply a 

job, it’s a calling. Teachers don’t choose their profession in the 

hope of becoming millionaires. They choose teaching because 

they know it’s a way to make a true difference in the lives of 

many. 

 

Mr. Speaker, simply because teachers have such a calling is no 

reason to take them for granted. However the pattern of 

behaviour from this government suggests that they are taking 

advantage of the goodwill shown by teachers every day in 

every school. To the minister: why does she insist on showing 

such disrespect to teachers? And when is this government 

prepared to sit down and bargain in good faith? 

 



7530 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2011 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the 

member opposite that the government trustee bargaining 

committee has not left the table. And we are here, inviting the 

teachers to return to the table to discuss a fair deal. Obviously 

there is a significant gap between the two sides. If the teachers 

were to accept the government trustee offer, they would be the 

second highest paid among the Western Canadian provinces. 

They’re higher paid than the Canadian average, Mr. Speaker. 

However if there’s other issues they would like to discuss, I 

think that needs to be done at the bargaining table, and I think 

that is where those discussions need to take place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no one here more than I who appreciates 

teachers and the great work they do. I myself have talked many 

times in this Assembly of my three daughters and the teachers 

that they have had going from, you know, extremes in their 

academic abilities. And it’s commendable the work that 

teachers have done with my daughters, who are all great 

successes now as young adults. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Care of Children 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, yesterday I raised concerns brought forward in the 

latest Children’s Advocate office report. Specifically I asked 

about the number of critically injured children reported to the 

CAO [Children’s Advocate office] last year. It’s jumped by 

more than 300 per cent from 13 to 43 between the years 2008 

and 2010. The sudden and dramatic change is unsettling to say 

the least, and I received no answer in question period yesterday. 

To the minister I ask yet again: what steps are being taken to 

address this disturbing upswing in the number of Saskatchewan 

children who are being injured? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

I agree with the member opposite: when there is an increase in 

injuries or, worse yet, in child deaths in our province, it’s 

something that all of us take seriously.  

 

When we had a coroner’s inquest this spring and we looked at 

some of the work that was being undertaken in places like our 

foster homes, and we looked at some of the work we could be 

doing immediately and in the long term as well. Immediately 

we have a foster home safety checklist. We have a new protocol 

agreement. We have new child history forms. We have new, a 

more rigorous annual review when we do have incidents come 

forward. Mr. Speaker, we have 308 new home spaces in our 

province to make sure our children have the care they need. 

Whenever there is an injury, we take it seriously. I assure you 

it’s something that we’ll continue to look into. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the Children’s Advocate office 

reported a 300 per cent increase in the critical injuries between 

2008 and ’10. Critical injuries include major medical 

treatments, hospitalization, and attempted suicides. We know, 

especially in the northern part of our province, these are 

alarming numbers for communities dealing with high rates of 

youth suicides. To the minister, she is the minister responsible 

to deal with this alarming level of youth suicides and attempted 

suicides in her care. After three and a half years in government, 

where are the programs needed to help these children? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, for far too many years, we 

had governments looking at children’s issues in silos in each 

ministry. We had an opportunity this year to have seven 

ministers who are dealing with children bring forward a budget, 

a budget of $34 million to make sure that we can talk about the 

needs of children and see them as a whole — not a child who is 

taken care of in social services or in health care or in education, 

but a child who matters to each one of us as a whole person. 

That’s one of the steps that we’ve done. We also have a number 

of front-line care workers in place. We have a new computer 

system where we can look after our children and track them, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s more work to be done, but I’m really pleased that the 

front-line workers that care so much about our children and the 

work we’re doing with the First Nations and Métis individuals 

and leadership across the province are making differences. 

They are successes. And we know that as we go forward there’s 

more work to be done, but I’m very pleased with the work that 

we are doing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — So after three and a half years, there are no 

programs. In 2008 the Children’s Advocate office reported 31 

child deaths and 61 open investigations into child deaths. In 

2009 another 31 children died and 66 cases were left 

uninvestigated. This past year another 34 children died, and by 

the end of 2010, 70 investigations into child deaths were still 

pending. Every one of those investigations not completed risks 

the lives and health of every child receiving care. To the 

minister: we know the Children’s Advocate’s office is doing 

their very best, but when will this government take 

responsibility for the children of Saskatchewan that are in their 

care and provide adequate funding and resources to the 

Children’s Advocate office so the lives and health of our 

children can be protected? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, not only do the elected 

members in this room at this time care very deeply about the 

children, but so does everybody in the gallery. Every one of 

these teachers know that the importance of having children 

come to the school system that are healthy and ready to learn is 

what we need to do to take advantage of the potential we have 

in this province. 

 

One of the things that we have to do is make sure that we have 



May 5, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7531 

more children in care of their own families or in extended care, 

and that’s why I’m very happy that the number of children in 

care is decreasing. In March of this year we had 3,217 children 

in care, and that was down from 3,348 children last year, Mr. 

Speaker. And more importantly, we have more children that are 

in care of extended families. And when it’s not possible for the 

child to remain at their own home, it’s the best thing to do to 

keep them in care of their families. 

 

We know that the teachers that are in this room today deal often 

with children that have been in care or have needs, and that’s 

one of the issues that they talk about. I assure you that it’s not 

just teachers, it’s the social workers in this province who don’t 

get paid the dollars that they should because their heart is with 

the children. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Proposals for Multiple Sclerosis Clinical Trials 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, that’s going to make interesting 

Hansard reading. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 3,500 Saskatchewan people are living with MS. In 

fact Saskatchewan has the highest rate of MS in the country. In 

October 2010 the Sask Party sent out a call for research 

proposals. They said the outcome of the competition would be 

announced in April of 2011. Mr. Speaker, it’s May. To the 

minister: what is the status of the competition, and who is the 

successful applicant? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as we heard in an earlier member’s statement, MS is 

very, very prevalent in Canada and nowhere higher than here in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a devastating disease. 

 

I’ve had the opportunity to meet with many people that have 

suffered with this disease. I’ve met with people that have gone 

out of country, Mr. Speaker, that have had the liberation 

treatment. Some have seen great success. Some have seen 

limited success. And I’ve talked to one or two that really didn’t 

notice much symptom relief whatsoever. 

 

That’s why our government has moved forward, first in 

Canada, first in North America, Mr. Speaker, as a government 

to put $5 million into clinical trials through the Saskatchewan 

Health Research Foundation. Mr. Speaker, they’re the 

professionals that understand the proper protocol around 

selecting research proposals, Mr. Speaker. The RFP [request for 

proposal] has been out. Research proposals have come into the 

Saskatchewan Research Foundation. They’re in the process of 

evaluating and making the decision as to when those . . . which 

research group will further the clinical trial process here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Well back to my question, Mr. Speaker. The 

Research Foundation’s website says April of 2011 and they will 

have their selection done. So I asked the minister, has it been 

done, and who has been selected? I ask that again. 

 

I also asked, Mr. Speaker, before I asked a few weeks ago — 

and it was in April actually — I asked the minister if he had a 

database to track people who have MS. He’s talked to some. 

He’s visited with some; he’s responded to letters with some. 

And it would track, this tracking system would track how many 

years the person has been diagnosed with MS, if the person had 

received the liberation treatment, the results of the treatment, 

and the follow-up care the person was receiving because that 

was a problem also, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The minister said, no because there’s no guarantee everyone 

with MS will register. You know, another odd answer. Mr. 

Speaker, we can be assured that without a database, nobody is 

registered. To the minister: why not set up a database to use as 

the basis for the trials that are going to be announced, I would 

assume, fairly shortly that he wants to conduct and be proactive 

in getting the process moving? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 

Health Research Foundation will be making an announcement 

as far as the successful deliverer of our clinical trials within the 

next few weeks, Mr. Speaker. We’re very proud of that. In fact 

we not only are the leader, we’re finding provinces and now a 

territory following in behind. Under the NDP government in 

Manitoba, after deliberations and seeing what we’re doing here 

in Saskatchewan, they have finally put $5 million in, as well as 

the Yukon that saw what we’re doing here in Saskatchewan, 

that put $250,000 in, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is very, very great research, important research 

that needs to be conducted. More importantly though, I believe 

the people of Saskatchewan wonder where that party is on the 

liberation treatment because the Leader of the Opposition has 

been all over the map. I realize the Health critic may be in 

complete favour of it, but the Leader of the Opposition has been 

all over the map. I’d like him to stand and clarify his position 

on liberation treatment. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

responsible for Crown corporation investments. 

 

Launch of Business Registrations Saskatchewan Website 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to 

take this opportunity to announce a new initiative to support 

hard-working entrepreneurs. Today in Saskatchewan, people 

across the province are rolling up their sleeves, making the 

most of opportunities, and opening new businesses. Mr. 

Speaker, these hard-working entrepreneurs are delivering new 

goods and services in our communities. These new businesses 

are creating new jobs across Saskatchewan. This province’s 

entrepreneurs deserve tremendous credit for the fact that today 

Saskatchewan is a national leader in job creation.  

 



7532 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2011 

Saskatchewan entrepreneurs are a do-it-yourself people. And 

they don’t ask for much, but they need a government that keeps 

paperwork and regulation to a minimum. They need to focus on 

serving customers and creating jobs instead of bureaucratic 

forms. That’s why I’m proud to announce that today we’re 

making it easier than ever to register new businesses in this 

province. 

 

Information Services is launching a Business Registrations 

Saskatchewan website to provide a one-stop shop. This website 

will register businesses with a corporate registry, register as an 

employer with workmen’s compensation board, and register 

with the province’s Minister of Finance for provincial sales tax. 

Business Registrations Saskatchewan means new entrepreneurs 

won’t have to send the same information three different places 

to three different government agencies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is another example of Saskatchewan’s 

commitment to give new businesses room to grow in today’s 

Saskatchewan. Today’s announcement builds on good news the 

Minister of Finance delivered in his budget. 

 

On Canada Day, the small-business tax rate in Saskatchewan 

will drop from four and a half per cent to 2 per cent. Mr. 

Speaker, that means entrepreneurs in Saskatchewan will be able 

to reinvest about $8 million of their hard-earned dollars back 

into their businesses. This government knows that investing in 

small business pays dividends by creating jobs in our 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we’re proud to work with entrepreneurs to 

move Saskatchewan forward, and that is the Saskatchewan 

advantage. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I want to respond briefly to the 

minister’s ministerial statement. ISC [Information Services 

Corporation of Saskatchewan] is making another small advance 

in its important work of making government accessible and 

information accessible electronically as opposed to by paper. 

This initiative started under the previous NDP government with 

the electronic transfer from paper to digital in respect to 

property and property records in the province of Saskatchewan, 

the land titles office project. And ISC has built on the success 

of that again and again and again. 

 

It is clearly the case that Saskatchewan businesses are 

conducting their businesses in the 21st century and entirely 

appropriate that they deal with their government in the 21st 

century. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Further ministerial statements? 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Health Care Delivery 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at the 

end of my remarks, I will be moving this motion: 

 

That this Assembly recognize the positive steps taken by 

the Ministry of Health in regards to moving forward with 

innovative initiatives such as surgical wait times, the 

Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society, STARS, a non-profit, 

life-saving organization, and other third party health care 

delivery options within the public system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will begin by thanking all the health care 

professionals in our province. They provide services that are 

just the tops and they are truly dedicated and professional, and 

again for that I thank them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you will know that our province has signed a 

10-year agreement with the Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society, 

or STARS. And STARS was founded in Alberta in 1985, and it 

has flown over 20,000 missions. So it has a long and reputable 

history of providing emergency care. STARS is a non-profit 

organization that provides rotary wing, or helicopter, medical 

transportation. And Mr. Speaker, STARS will be coordinated 

with existing ground and fixed-wing air ambulance services. 

 

STARS operates 24 hours a day and it has a paramedic and a 

flight nurse, both with critical care skills, and two pilots on 

every mission. There is also an emergency physician on call 

who accompanies them on approximately 20 per cent of their 

missions. And, Mr. Speaker, again we have very dedicated 

medical staff in our hospitals, and they work tirelessly to 

provide the best health care. But unfortunately sometimes it’s 

time — something they have no control over — it’s time that 

isn’t on their side. And this is so important, especially when 

they have to transport a patient to a local hospital to be 

stabilized before they in turn travel on to a specialized facility. 

And sometimes a specially equipped ambulance has to be 

dispatched from Regina or Saskatoon, furthering the wait time 

for the person needing the care. 

 

And STARS helicopters are like a hospital emergency room, 

Mr. Speaker. And again, I’ve said it before: I had the pleasure 

to visit the STARS facility in Calgary and also to tour and, you 

know, just have a peek inside the helicopters that provide this 

service, and it is truly a trauma centre that can go out to 

wherever it is needed. 

 

So this is just another way that, when time is of the essence, we 

have a way to improve on our already high-quality emergency 

medical service. And, Mr. Speaker, we do have a great ground 

ambulance system and one of the oldest, most experienced, 

fixed-wing systems in Canada. And STARS again will add to 

these great systems, and we will be able to have more 

successful outcomes in emergency situations. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as you and all members of this honourable 

Assembly know, my constituency and the constituency of 

Cannington . . . And I’m just going to use those two 

constituencies as an example. They are very diverse. Down in 

the southeast corner of the province there’s the oil and gas 

industry, coal mining, agriculture, Boundary dam power station, 

the Shand power station. But these two constituencies, Estevan 



May 5, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7533 

and Cannington — and there’s a reason I am including 

Cannington, for the member from that constituency — they are 

a distance from Regina. 

 

My constituency, the largest centre is Estevan of course and it’s 

just roughly two hours out of this city. But the constituency of 

Cannington extends right to the Manitoba border, so it takes 

three-plus hours to get there from this city. So if there’s an 

industrial accident — and God forbid, Mr. Speaker — but if 

there is an industrial accident out there, STARS helicopter 

could fly right out to the site and transport the patient and treat 

the patient there. And, you know, it really alleviates the time 

factor when time is of the essence. 

 

And you know, I guess we just have to take into consideration 

the amount of time that will be saved by not having to transport 

the patient to a hospital in Estevan — if, you know, the 

situation is that serious — to be stabilized and then on again to 

Regina. And I know again, from personal experience, that lots 

of times you have to wait for a specialized unit to come out of 

Regina which adds to the time factor. 

 

So you know, I think that when lots of times it’s time that 

you’re up against and that can make the difference between life 

and death . . . And not only accidents, Mr. Speaker. When you 

think of other situations like heart attacks, and again time is 

critical. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, following the budget this year, I delivered a 

speech in this Chamber and I told you a very, very personal 

story. And I, to be frank with you, I find it a little painful to go 

into the details again but I will say that losing my precious, 

beautiful granddaughter Brooke, who would have been 15 years 

old last Sunday, has made me very passionate about the STARS 

program. And I hope, I hope to God I never see a STARS 

helicopter in my constituency, but it is very comforting to know 

that that service would be available. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you know, I know the members opposite, 

they don’t think much of the STARS program. They, you 

know, heckled and ridiculed it. But they’re from urban areas, 

and I mean we know what they think of the rural areas 

regarding health care because look what they did when they 

were government. I mean they closed 52 hospitals and stuff. 

But I think that every person in this province, regardless of 

where they live, deserve quality medical care. And with the 

STARS, that would certainly . . . And I must also add that the 

member from, the members from Athabasca and Cumberland, 

I’d certainly like to hear what they think of the STARS program 

because it would be very crucial to their constituencies. 

 

[11:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the funding model is a partnership between 

government, corporations, and communities. And I have to say 

that Crescent Point Energy that is headquartered in Weyburn 

and headed by Scott Saxberg took the lead on this and provided 

$5 million for this program. And the services that I went into 

above, they are expected to be available in the spring of 2012 

for the southern region of Saskatchewan, and that’s based out of 

Regina. And they will be available in the northern, pardon me, 

for the northern part of the province based out of Saskatoon in 

the autumn of 2012. 

But back to Crescent Point Energy, I think it’s also important 

that they have more, to know that they have more than 200 staff 

and contractors working and living in the province, and they are 

committed to supporting these organizations to ensure that their 

employees and their families are taken care of. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that is just the tip of the iceberg as far as 

donations from corporations. And the Sask Potash Corporation 

announced a few weeks ago that they would donate $27 million 

to the STARS program, the largest corporate donation in the 

history of this province. And Mosaic has also announced that 

they would donate $5 million to the STARS program, and for 

that I thank them. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I did not thank the 

member from Melfort for spearheading this program and I 

know he worked tirelessly on it and has for many years, from 

the time when we were in opposition, and it’s just great to see it 

moving to fruition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am going to move on to the wait times and I’m 

going to refer to an article that’s in The Estevan Mercury. It’s in 

section A, the April 27th edition of The Estevan Mercury. And, 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite might want to take note 

because in section A of The Estevan Mercury, April 27th — 

they may want to write that down — there is also . . . They 

might want to thumb through this section because there’s a 

letter to the editor in there, and I know this is just a little bit off 

topic, but I know they’ll be interested in this. And it’s a letter 

that reminds the people of how the present Leader of the 

Opposition did everything in his power to stop the construction 

of Rafferty dam, and how wonderful that project is, especially 

this year. 

 

In fact what people are saying down there, they say, you know 

what, Grant Devine should’ve made it bigger. And that was the 

Leader of the Opposition who said it would be nothing more 

than a dust bowl and he could walk across it. Well you know, 

I’ve challenged him before and the offer’s still open. Try it. Try 

it today. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in this . . . I’ll get back to this article I’m 

talking about. And it’s about how the Sun Country Health 

Region announced last Thursday that it received $643,000 in 

funding from the Ministry of Health to expand surgical capacity 

in the region and that money will allow the Sun Country Health 

Authority to conduct an additional 125 surgeries between St. 

Joseph’s Hospital in Estevan and the Weyburn General 

Hospital. 

 

And this is, the ultimate goal of this is to cut wait-list times in 

our province. And this is all because of the information 

gathered by the Patient First Review, and this is what happened 

because of it. And I had the pleasure of touring that operating 

room and I went . . . Tara Daoust, the nurse manager at St. 

Joseph’s, took me on this tour and she said, “If we can add 

more surgeries, the operating room girls are ecstatic. They love 

their jobs and they are passionate about it and you can see it.” 

 

And then she went on to say that, you know, how she “noted 

that patients are also happy about the chance to have their 

surgery done locally.” And “It’s closer to home. They don’t 

have to travel.” 



7534 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2011 

And, Mr. Speaker, during our discussions, Tara and I talked. 

And you know, we talked about having to go to Regina or 

Saskatoon. And that’s great to have that in place. But if you can 

have it done closer to home, it’s just wonderful because you can 

be closer to your family and, you know, you can . . . It’s just 

inconvenient and sometimes it can be costly for the patients and 

their families. So I want to congratulate the Ministry of Health. 

 

And Marga Cugnet, the interim CEO, has also said that they are 

so pleased to work with their own surgeons as well as those 

from other regions who travel there, and how it’s nice to have 

those services so close to home. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we also, you know, have a third party 

delivery option and that’s with the Surgicentre located in 

Saskatoon, and they provide outpatient health in the 

arthroscopies and ACL [anterior cruciate ligament] repair, and 

the Omni Surgery Centre in Regina. 

 

And gosh, Mr. Speaker, time is really going fast here, so I’m 

just going to give you a couple of quotes that I have here, and 

what some people have said regarding the third party delivery. 

And I will quote Colin Craig, Canadian Taxpayers Federation, 

October 7th, 2010, and he says, I quote: 

 

At the end of the day, Saskatchewan patients are 

receiving health services sooner than they ever did before 

the reform. As time passes, it will become clearer that this 

type of reform is also better for taxpayers’ pocketbook, 

despite what the dark side would have you believe. 

 

And Murray Mandryk, June 4th Leader-Post: 

 

It was an NDP government that allowed private blood 

testing, ultrasounds [and it goes on to say] and X-rays in 

this province. 

 

And it was also an NDP government that eagerly sent 

SGI no-fault insurance claims and workers’ compensation 

claimants for the private CT scans in Calgary because it 

was faster. 

 

Yet the NDP is now trying to convince us private 

ownership of one more diagnostic imaging tool will 

destroy medicare? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I am quoting, and he says, “How in the hell 

does that make sense?” 

 

And he also goes on to say: “But the Saskatchewan Party’s 

greatest victory may be in trying innovative ideas that the NDP 

wouldn’t even touch.” And that’s from the Carlyle Observer, 

January 28th, 2011, and again that’s from Murray Mandryk. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move this motion: 

 

That this Assembly recognize the positive steps taken by 

the Ministry of Health in regard to moving forward with 

innovative initiatives such as surgical wait times, the 

Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society, STARS, a non-profit, 

life-saving organization, and other third party health care 

delivery options within the public health care system. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the member from Estevan, and will the 

members take the question as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Just a quick reminder to members, that 

members are not to do indirectly what they can’t do directly. I 

recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise this afternoon to talk about the long history in 

Saskatchewan of innovation and good work as we move 

forward with our health care system. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

appreciated when motions like this are brought forward to the 

legislature because then all of us can be reminded of the long 

history in this province of health care innovation. 

 

And it goes right back 100 years when we look at the 

construction of some of our mental health facilities, both in 

Weyburn and in North Battleford. It goes back to the Cancer 

Agency being established in the ’30s with the registry and a 

number of very innovative ideas. It goes back to the ’40s when 

Premier Douglas kept the job as minister of Health and premier 

so that he could get the best advice from around the world to 

make sure Saskatchewan’s health care system was built in a 

positive way. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in 2011, the Canadian Institute of Health 

Information, which I’m pleased to say is now being led by one 

of our best civil servants from this province, Mr. John Wright, 

this institution provided a report which is talking about the 

evolution of wait time measurement and reporting. And it’s 

quite clear, Mr. Speaker, that the report that they’ve done, 

which was done at the request of the first ministers and the 

Health ministers in 2004, this report is another step along the 

way, shows that this is a long-term project where a number of 

steps that we took in Saskatchewan in 2001 with the health plan 

and then in 2002-2003 in setting up the registry of surgical 

times for our patients here in Saskatchewan, that all these things 

have started to continue the work of improving the situation for 

Saskatchewan patients. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s of little use and no purpose when the 

Minister of Health, our present Minister of Health gets on his 

rant about 16 years of nothing prior to 2007 because the people 

of Saskatchewan know that that’s not true. When you go and 

look at these national reports from places like the Canadian 

Institute of Health Information, it’s very clear that there’s a 

strong base that’s built and that the work is improving in 

Saskatchewan, but we’ve still got a long ways to go. 

 

As it relates to health care, I think people are concerned that 

sufficient resources aren’t being allocated to various parts of the 

system. Right now we have a major problem obviously with the 

priorities around the health services people who in many ways 

are the most crucial factor, other than the surgeons, in the work 

that’s being done for people who are on wait-lists. So, Mr. 

Speaker, that whole area, we need to make sure that when we 

talk about this, we talk about what it is that we’re going to 

provide for our fellow citizens in Saskatchewan now but more 



May 5, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7535 

importantly in the future. 

 

Now another area that relates to this, and it relates to how our 

system has been set up in Saskatchewan, relates to the physical 

facilities that we have to complete the job. Mr. Speaker, I want 

to do just a very brief review of the capital budget for the 

province in the 2007-08 budget. This was the last budget that 

we as a New Democrat government had the opportunity to 

present. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we look at that capital budget and the 

plan that was there, it included the dollars to complete the 

provincial laboratory, which is out in the Innovation Place area 

at the University of Regina. It included the money to continue 

in the development of the Saskatchewan Hospital at North 

Battleford on a very planned basis. Mr. Speaker, it included the 

completion of the Cypress Regional Hospital in the Premier’s 

riding. It included the completion of the Outlook integrated 

facility in the riding of the Minister of Highways. It included 

the completion of the Ile-a-la-Crosse integrated facility, both 

Education and Health, in Ile-a-la-Crosse. It included money to 

go ahead and complete the maternal and newborn care centre in 

Regina, which we were all pleased to be at the opening just 

recently. It included the money for the completion of the 

Moosomin integrated facility. It included the Maidstone 

integrated facility. It included the Preeceville integrated facility. 

It included the Humboldt integrated facility. It included the 

Saskatoon mental health facility. It included the Oliver Lodge 

facility, long-term care in Saskatoon. It included the six-bed 

addition to the Hudson Bay long-term care facility. 

 

It included relocation of the MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] 

in Saskatoon to accommodate the work toward the Academic 

Health Sciences building. The money was there, not in Health 

but out of the university’s portfolio, for the start on the 

Academic Health Sciences building. And it included the 

planning money and the commitment of money for the 

children’s hospital, the child hospital within a hospital. And 

also, Mr. Speaker, it includes some money for free-standing 

surgical centres, starting in Regina and then in Saskatoon. 

These were ones that were going to be integrated right in within 

the system that we have in our province. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we knew from the experience in Manitoba 

that their, sort of, working with a private fee-for-service 

surgical centre didn’t turn out that well for the people in the 

Winnipeg area and that eventually the government had to take 

that facility over and then integrate it into the system. Mr. 

Speaker, our goal was to have the same kind of situation here in 

Regina. We were working closely with the surgeons in Regina. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when the new government came in place, 

not only did they have the money to complete many of these 

projects — and I’m pleased to say that I was acknowledged at 

many of these projects, and I know that my other colleagues 

were acknowledged at some of these projects — that they were 

long term. They were 10-year projects, sometimes longer than 

that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the importance is that many of the things 

which this Minister of Health crows about have been in the 

works for a long time, and they’ve been developed through the 

careful planning of local communities, of regional health 

authorities, of the provincial government, and in some cases, 

working closely with the federal government and First Nations 

as well. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the importance of this is that when a motion 

is brought forward into this legislature about the new and 

innovative things that are happening here, that’s a good thing. 

But I think it’s also good to recognize that we have in this 

province a long history and a long legacy of making sure that 

we do things well. 

 

Now what’s really different in the year 2011 is that this 

province has the resources to do things for the people, with the 

people of the province that we’ve never had before, and that 

includes the workers — the nurses, the doctors, the people 

involved with physio, the people involved with all of the other 

very important professional aspects, the cleaning people, 

everybody. We all need to have them working together and 

being properly resourced to do that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when there are imbalances that take place in 

some of that work, it affects the results for all of us. But more 

importantly, it affects the result for your grandma, your son, 

your daughter, your spouse, or yourself. And, Mr. Speaker, that 

is not acceptable. Unfortunately for all of us, the number one 

issue, when people raise issues about government expenditure, 

is still the health care system. And, Mr. Speaker, we need to use 

all of the innovation of the past governments and the present 

government and, more importantly, the future governments to 

make sure we get this right. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure and an honour to stand in the Assembly today and take 

part in this debate. I will be supporting this motion. And this 

morning I would like to discuss the improvements our 

government has made in health care, and feature some of the 

health advancements and innovations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has introduced a very ambitious 

plan to improve surgical care in Saskatchewan, and one of the 

plan’s innovative strategies is the use of a third party outpatient 

surgery and specialized diagnostic, such as CT [computerized 

tomography] scans. Third party surgical and CT services will 

be performed through the publicly funded and administrated 

system. Patients will pay no fee. They will be referred through 

the health region. And I repeat that: patients will pay no fee. 

 

Third party delivery within a publicly funded and administrated 

system is not new to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We have had 

private ambulance services, laboratories, X-rays, and long-term 

facilities for many years. We are expanding both public and 

private capacity in order to reduce surgical wait times. Third 

party cases will represent a very small percentage of the total 

surgeries and diagnostic tests performed in the province of 

Saskatchewan each year, Mr. Speaker. And I do believe that 

this is one more way to put patients first. It supports our efforts 

to reduce surgical wait times and improve patient care. 

 



7536 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2011 

Mr. Speaker, many members of my immediate family are 

employed in the health service area, and we have a very close 

connection in the front-line trenches. One of my daughters, who 

has a dual degree in nursing and social work, works in the 

hospital. And she does come and tell me that we are making 

vast improvements in patient care. And my other daughter, who 

prior to working towards her master’s in speech pathology 

worked with children, but is now considering working with 

injured soldiers who have returned home from battle. And my 

son-in-law is a physician, and he does travel to various 

communities when he’s not at his private practice. So, Mr. 

Speaker, my family does keep me abreast of what is happening 

with various medical experiences, and I’m very proud of them 

and their ability to help others in Saskatchewan. And I would 

like to thank them as well as all the other health service 

professionals to their dedication to the people of this province. 

 

I understand the challenges that health professionals face, but I 

also understand the challenges that patients face. And I believe 

our government is addressing these issues. The government is 

expanding both public and privately delivered surgical and 

diagnostic capacity in order to reduce patient wait times. Mr. 

Speaker, the vast majority of surgical and diagnostic procedures 

will continue to be provided through the publicly delivered 

system. Now approximately 78,000 surgeries will be performed 

in Saskatchewan in the 2010-11 fiscal year. Of those, 

approximately 700 will be delivered by the Omni and 

surgicentre facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were approximately 146,000 CT scans 

performed in Saskatchewan in 2009-10. And when we were 

looking at the 15,000 scans per year through the Regina CT 

contract and adding more publicly delivered CT capacity in 

Melfort, the third party share of CT services will represent less 

than 10 per cent of the total capacity. Consideration is also be 

given to expand the types of services to include during the 

extension period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, most of our loved ones in this Assembly have 

experienced or been touched by an illness or tragedy, and we do 

appreciate those that heal or help us. Many people have 

weighed in on our government’s approach to enhancing 

Saskatchewan’s health care system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now in an editorial in the Moose Jaw Times talking about 

private versus public health care in the Omni Centre 

announcement, September 2nd, 2011, the following was said: 

 

Venturing outside the conventional health care apparatus 

in this province was a risky move, and the provincial 

government should be commended for its willingness to 

try something to remedy a long-standing issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on October 7th, Colin Craig of the Canadian 

Taxpayers Federation said: 

 

At the end of the day, Saskatchewan patients are 

receiving health services sooner than they did before the 

reform. As time passes, it will become clearer that this 

type of reform is also better for taxpayers’ pocket book; 

despite what the “dark side” would have you believe. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another bold strategy of ours is the introduction of 

the Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society, also known as STARS. 

And I had the pleasure of personally meeting some of the 

STARS personnel who provide the care and transport of 

patients, and my many thanks, as well as the patients’, to their 

dedication and care. 

 

In the past 25 years, STARS have flown over 19,000 missions, 

and STARS will be providing care and transport for patients in 

rural areas of Saskatchewan who are critically ill or injured — 

mine employees, farmers, tourists, trappers, fisherman — and 

they will stabilize these patients and bring them to the hospitals. 

They will transfer from a rural hospital to a larger hospital. And 

I believe this is very much needed. 

 

And in talking with some of the outfitters, they were quite 

happy to hear that the STARS program will be implemented. I 

remember in the ’70s when we were snowmobiling in a remote 

area up North, an accident occurred to a 12-year-old boy. And 

we had to bounce him out on this sled many miles to get to a 

road with this severely injured youth, and we almost lost him 

many times. And I believe we could have saved his leg if we 

had STARS program. This gentleman is alive today but is 

partially disabled because of this accident. 

 

So I know there are a lot of people out there who agree with me 

that our STARS project is very valuable. And these dedicated 

medical helicopters will be flying intensive care units used for 

patients whose outcome depend on rapid care and when time is 

very crucial. 

 

There’s going to be two helicopter EM [emergency medicine] 

bases planned for Saskatchewan, one in Regina and one in 

Saskatoon, with fuel areas will be established for these missions 

outside of the response radius. So their capacity to respond to 

rural areas, First Nations, Métis communities, tourism, and 

remote industry work sites is a very, very valuable thing. And 

this helicopter will be an emergency room to the patient while 

providing ongoing, pre-hospital care required. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see my time is almost up, but I would like to tell 

you a few stories about people that had their lives saved by 

STARS. 

 

This is Joe’s story. When Joe returned to his home after a 

motorcycle ride, he was involved in a collision with a car just 

outside of Brooks. The impact threw Joe into the air onto a 

barbed wire fence with his motorcycle landing on top of him. 

Witnesses quickly called 911, and paramedics arrived and 

called for STARS. They transported Joe by ground ambulance 

to Brooks hospital where the helicopter picked him up. He 

reached Foothills Medical Centre in critical condition from the 

loss of blood and had to be resuscitated twice. Over the coming 

days, Joe had three surgeries, but today he is back at work. And 

this is a great story because of STARS. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I do see my time is up, and I do support the 

motion. I think we are making great headways with our medical 

personnel, STARS, and third party delivery of surgical and 

diagnostic services, so I thank you very much for your time, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 



May 5, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7537 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

real honour to be able to enter into this debate that has been put 

forward by the member from Estevan where she speaks about 

surgical wait times, the Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society, or 

STARS, and other third party health care delivery options 

within the health system. 

 

I just want to remind all members of the legislature that it was 

the province of Saskatchewan that successfully introduced 

publicly funded and publicly administer universal health care 

into this province in 1962 and that, as a result of the work that 

had been done in the province, the federal government then 

chose, as a result of a Supreme Court justice’s report — 

Emmett Hall, who was a proud Saskatchewan son — that the 

federal government would implement universal medicare into 

our country. And now across the land, that governments at their 

peril would try to dramatically alter publicly funded health care 

is now a given, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I listened to the member from Sask Rivers talk 

about STARS. And I want to report to the public that every 

Health minister in an NDP government, including myself, 

looked at helicopter ambulances for the province of 

Saskatchewan. Every minister — whether it was the member 

from Lakeview, the member from The Battlefords, myself, 

former Premier Calvert, Louise Simard — all ministers had the 

Ministry of Health, we called it the department in those days, 

look at the notion of a helicopter service in the province. And 

every time we did that, the Department of Health came back 

and recommended that we not implement this kind of service 

because it was far, far too expensive and difficult to administer. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh they say, 

well the Potash Corporation is there. I think most people in the 

province, including the teachers that were here today, would 

say maybe what we need to do is increase the royalties just a 

little bit because this donation from the Potash Corporation 

doesn’t take away from the massive profits that they are 

presently experiencing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I listened to the member talk about a lad that was injured in a 

remote part of Saskatchewan many, many years ago. And she 

said that if this ambulance service, STARS, was in 

Saskatchewan, perhaps this man would not have a disability 

today. 

 

It will be very interesting to watch how many citizens, once the 

program is up and running, how many citizens expect STARS 

to come and get them. And STARS won’t be able to come and 

get them because there are other traumas in the province, and 

they’re going to have to pick and choose. 

 

One of the questions that I think citizens will be interested in, if 

a citizen who hasn’t made a corporate donation to the STARS 

program is injured at the same time as a worker whose 

company has given a donation to STARS, how will STARS 

pick and choose where to go, Mr. Speaker? And I think this will 

be an important question to watch as we watch STARS be 

implemented in the province of Saskatchewan and administered 

in the province of Saskatchewan. Will there be picking and 

choosing? Because in a publicly funded system where the 

public pays for these kinds of services, decisions are made on a 

triage kind of basis, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I know the members opposite don’t like the point that I’m 

making, but I think that there will be some difficulties with the 

STARS program as we gain more experience from that 

program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also note that STARS was in the province of 

Nova Scotia and they made a decision, because of the expense, 

that they were going to get out of STARS. And I think we’ll 

have to wait and see how much public money will need to go 

into the STARS system in order to make this STARS system 

work. 

 

At the same time as the government is introducing STARS, we 

know that there are road ambulance operators in the province 

whose employees are sitting on standby at a very small amount 

of money — I think it’s a little over $4 an hour; they’re not 

full-time positions — and they’re having a very difficult time 

making ends meet. We know that, for instance, the ambulance 

personnel in the city of Saskatoon don’t yet have, as far as I 

know, an agreement in place to deal with the escalating costs of 

living that they’re presently experiencing. So, Mr. Speaker, 

while the members opposite can be pleased with STARS, the 

devil will be in the detail and the devil will be in how this 

system actually operates. 

 

I do note that the government opposite are quite pleased with 

what’s happened with wait times. Now there was release, a 

recent CIHI [Canadian Institute of Health Information] report 

that was released in March that talks about wait times in 

Canada. 

 

Now here’s what the public needs to know, and this is a group 

of men and women that have been in office for close to four 

years. Well the reality is that for knee replacements in the 

province of Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan ranks third last in the 

country with 60 per cent of procedures being done within 

acceptable waiting times. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that whenever the government wants 

to brag about their place, our place, in the country, ministers are 

busy issuing press releases. But when you’re third worst in the 

country, I’m afraid you have to find the report and release it to 

the public because that’s not a press release the government 

likes to give to the media. 

 

When it comes to hip fracture repair surgeries, Saskatchewan 

was last in the country with only 72 per cent of procedures 

being done within the acceptable time period. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, my brother was in a very, very serious farm 

accident last Thanksgiving. And, Mr. Speaker, I saw people in 

the emergency room waiting for surgeries. Because it was the 

long weekend, many of those folks didn’t get their surgeries 

until after the long weekend, Mr. Speaker. And I do know that 

when someone goes to the hospital with a hip fracture, they can 

be waiting there for some time. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, for cataract surgeries . . . Many of us are 

members of the sandwich generation. Our parents are requiring 

cataract surgeries and Saskatchewan ranked second last in the 



7538 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2011 

country with 62 per cent of procedures being done within the 

acceptable time period. Only Alberta was worse, which is a 

province that the men and women referred to in question period 

today when they were talking about teacher bargaining. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say that there are issues around 

with the STARS ambulance service. We know that they were 

invited to leave the province. While we know that STARS 

received a donation from the Potash Corporation, it will still 

require significant public funding from the province. And we 

know, when we look at Alberta, about 25 per cent of the 

funding for STARS comes from the province of Alberta. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the government can spin, and 

they spin regularly, about how wonderful everything is in the 

province of Saskatchewan. They issue press releases telling us 

how wonderful it is, and we’re making progress. But when you 

dig down into the data, when you do the research, it’s quite 

clear that this is spin. It is not factual. 

 

And the facts of the matter are that Saskatchewan has a very 

difficult record at the moment when it comes to certain types of 

surgeries, according to the data. And while the minister can talk 

about the massive improvements, it’s quite clear from the data 

that Saskatchewan is lagging behind in terms of wait times for 

surgeries. I note the member opposite said there would be about 

78,000 surgeries performed in the province of Saskatchewan. 

Well Mr. Speaker, when I was the Minister of Health and other 

people were the ministers of Health, we were doing about 

93,000 . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 

pleasure that I rise to speak in this debate. Mr. Speaker, when 

the Saskatchewan Party became the government of this 

province, we received a health care system that was in 

shambles. 

 

The record of the previous government, which is now the 

opposition NDP, reads as follows: April ’99 — and they find 

this laughable; they find this laughable — the NDP threatened 

to throw striking nurses in jail. In jail. April 2000 the NDP 

raised fees on seniors’ long term. The most vulnerable, the 

older people that are on fixed incomes and they raised theirs. 

September 2002 the average surgical wait time in 

Saskatchewan was 32.6 weeks. Mr. Speaker, that was the 

absolute worst in Canada, and this is their record. 

 

In May of 2004, the NDP fired 92 nurses with 160 more 

health-related job firings expected. August 2004, Mr. Speaker, 

93 physicians left Saskatchewan while every other province 

saw increases. Ninety-three physicians, boy, if we had them 

back now. October 2005, Saskatchewan suffers the longest 

waiting list in Canada, almost double the national average, 

almost double the national average. July 2006, Saskatchewan 

wait times too unreliable to publish. Then in November, 2006 

Saskatchewan has a shortage of over 700 nurses. All of a 

sudden, whoa, we’re short 700. Didn’t see that coming. Here 

we go. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite habitually accuse the 

government of being at war with labour, but under the NDP 

government the Health Sciences Association of Saskatchewan 

was on strike for 28 days and bargained for 18 months before 

reaching an agreement . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. 

Speaker, I sure like listening to the other side, but it would be 

nice if they’d listen to my side. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the SEIU [Service Employees International 

Union] and the SGEU [Saskatchewan Government and General 

Employees’ Union] had to bargain for 22 months with the 

members opposite in 2004-05 before finally reaching an 

agreement — a terrible, long time. And they’re the friends of 

labour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it shameful that those members opposite are 

questioning this government’s health care record while it’s on 

their record, while it’s on their record that they treated 

Saskatchewan patients and medical staff. 

 

Then in late 2002, the cruellest cut of all: the University of 

Saskatchewan College of Medicine had been put on 24-month 

probation. If no remedy had been found for problems in 12 

areas, the college would have lost its accreditation. 

Unbelievable. Dr. Roger Pierson, a professor in the department 

of obstetrics, gynecology, and reproductive sciences said, and I 

quote, “The news itself is depressing . . . It’s depressing 

because this has never happened to a medical college in all of 

Canada . . .” Never in all of Canada. 

 

Dr. William Albritton who became dean of the College of 

Medicine said, and I quote, “It would seem that we need 

somewhere between 20 and 30 faculty positions in order to 

achieve what the report suggests is our faculty deficiency.” 

They had chipped away at them until they were short by 20 to 

30 staff and had no money for them. This is the NDP record, 

and that is what the NDP did to health care in 16 years. 

 

Now I will proudly share the Saskatchewan Party’s record in 

just three and a half short years. First we set ambitious goals to 

reduce surgical times, wait times to no more than three months 

by 2014. More to do? Yes, always more to do. But our 

government’s bold action to increase surgeries and to drive 

down wait times has shown results for patients. From 2007 to 

February of 2011, we have significant improvements for 

patients: patients waiting more than 3 months, down 23 per 

cent; patients waiting more than 18 months, down a whopping 

70 per cent. Saskatchewan’s surgical initiatives launched last 

April until February this year results are patients waiting over 

12 months, dropped by 30 per cent; waits over 18 months, 

dropped by 47 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are wonderful statistics. It’s showing what’s 

really happening. Today’s record shows 2,733 fewer patients 

waiting for surgery than previous year. That’s wonderful news. 

Eighty-four per cent of all patients that had surgery received 

their procedures within six months, within six months. Patients 

waiting for hip and knee replacement in the last year alone 

dropped by 2,466. That’s amazing. That’s wonderful. That’s 

showing progress. Eighty-nine per cent of invasive cancer 

surgeries performed in 42 days. Sixty-six per cent of slower 

growing cancer surgeries performed in 42 days. 

 

[11:45] 



May 5, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7539 

And a big one for my area, not in my constituency but used 

extensively by my constituency, is the new Humboldt Hospital. 

That was another one of those round TUITs, and two members 

on the other side mentioned it. They didn’t get around to it. It 

was on their list, but they didn’t get around to it. So it was 

promised for three elections, but we finally built it, and it’s 

there. It was a wonderful day, and it was great to be there at the 

grand opening of the new Humboldt Hospital. 

 

One of the brightest stars in the changes we made to health care 

is the STARS program. And the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana said they looked at it — a round TUIT again — but they 

said they could not afford it. So we looked at it, yes, and we 

looked at it broader than they did. We went to Crescent Point 

Energy, and they’re taking the lead and $5 million to the 

program. Mosaic committed $5.5 million. Potash Corporation 

has committed to building a hangar and buying an AW149 

helicopter to service the base in Saskatoon — approximately 

$27 million, the largest donation in Saskatchewan history. So 

that’s how we can afford it, yes. 

 

Our government believes that teaming with non-profit 

organizations like STARS who has 25 years of experience — 

that proves it works, that shows it’s a viable system — will 

allow us deliver the best in emergency care possible to all 

people within our province. STARS Alberta has a long and 

storied history of providing emergency care. They came into 

existence in 1985 and have flown over 20,000 missions. Mr. 

Speaker, that shows the depth and the breadth of all that 

STARS program has done for us, and it’s going to continue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve given both sides of the story but what the 

NDP did to health care and how Saskatchewan Party has started 

the rebuilding process, but the true judge is in what the people 

of Saskatchewan say. And I would like to quote Lewis Draper, 

former NDP MLA and semi-retired rural physician. In the 

Leader-Post in December of 2009 said, and I quote: 

 

It is sheer hypocrisy for Judy Junor to carp about health 

care. She and the present leader of the NDP were both 

part of the . . . [cabal] that spent 15 years shredding rural 

Saskatchewan service centres, SaskTel, SaskPower, and 

rural highways depots along with 52 rural hospitals, firing 

660 nurses, and leaving 52 rural doctors no place to work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s by a former MLA. 

 

An Hon. Member: — NDP? 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Yes, NDP MLA. 

 

And one last quote: “In the 1999 election campaign, the 

Saskatchewan . . .” And this is, sorry, from the National Post, 

2006. “In the 1999 election campaign, the Saskatchewan NDP 

was re-elected on a promise to cut wait . . .” 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. The 

member’s time has elapsed. I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to rise today to enter into this debate, which is a 

75-minute debate on a motion brought forward by the 

Saskatchewan Party, a motion that essentially is designed to 

simply compliment the government on work that it has done to 

involve third party primarily private sector deliverers of health 

care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And just to begin, I want to indicate that I would not be 

supporting the motion, Mr. Speaker, because there’s much more 

to this debate than simply cheerleading for the philosophy 

behind some of the things that are being done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the argument that I want to make in the 10 

minutes that are provided to me, Mr. Speaker, the argument that 

I want to make is that government is all about choices. When 

delivering programs and services to people, there are always 

options and choices that the public has. Sometimes those 

choices are driven by philosophy, sometimes those choices are 

driven by a practical review of all the options that are available. 

What we see the Saskatchewan Party doing with health care in 

Saskatchewan today and what we see the Sask Party trying to 

celebrate in the motion before the Legislative Assembly today 

is simply philosophy, Mr. Speaker. The argument is based on 

philosophy. 

 

Unfortunately, regardless of the cheerleading that’s going on 

here and elsewhere, the choices are made on the basis of 

philosophy and not on the basis of a practical review of the 

options available and therefore, Mr. Speaker, the results will 

not serve Saskatchewan residents well and will ultimately result 

in higher costs for Saskatchewan taxpayers down the road. 

 

Let’s take a minute to talk about this waiting list circumstance 

that we find ourselves in, Mr. Speaker. Let’s take a look at 

waiting lists for surgeries. Governments, here in Saskatchewan 

and across Canada, have different options with the way in 

which reducing waiting lists for surgeries can be dealt with. The 

Saskatchewan Party has never talked about what those options 

are, Mr. Speaker. We need to be talking about the options so 

that Saskatchewan people can fully understand what course of 

action governments could be taking to further reduce, even 

further reduce the waiting times and waiting lists for surgery, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Waiting lists for surgery have certainly been a challenge for 

governments for quite a number of years, and not just here in 

Saskatchewan, but right across Canada, Mr. Speaker. In fact the 

federal government, about six years ago, made it a focal point 

of an election campaign and then Health minister at the national 

level, Tony Clement, started a program, Mr. Speaker, that 

provided some federal funding to provincial governments to 

assist in the reduction of waiting lists across Canada. It was a 

targeted program, Mr. Speaker, and ministers of Health across 

the country addressed the needs that existed within their 

jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Saskatchewan actually made some very reasonable progress 

during this time, working with physicians and health 

professionals and health regions, examining all of the options 

that were available, Mr. Speaker, looking at activities that were 

taking place elsewhere in the country, Mr. Speaker. And as a 

result of initiatives that were taken, funded by the province with 

assistance from some federal funding, wait times for surgeries 

started coming down in Saskatchewan. And actually 

Saskatchewan was seen as a leader in this regard, Mr. Speaker, 



7540 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2011 

as we took advantage of new technologies and communications 

processes to deal with this matter in the public eye. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just for example, in 2004-2005, as a result of the 

activities that took place within government, there was a 31 per 

cent decrease in the number of individuals waiting more than 

18 months for surgery. In ’05-06 there was a further decrease of 

24 per cent. In ’06-07, Mr. Speaker, just before the provincial 

election, the results showed not a percentage but a decrease by 

2,100 cases. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there was progress being made, considerable 

progress actually being made. The start was being made 

because within the publicly administered, publicly financed, 

publicly delivered health care system that we all support, Mr. 

Speaker, we were able to work with the best options available 

to help to reduce wait-lists. And then on top of that, Mr. 

Speaker, we also developed the Saskatchewan Surgical Care 

Network and a website that increased transparency of the 

surgical care system for patients, the public, and all of the 

partners that were working in the health care field, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So a lot of things were taking place back prior to the election in 

2007, Mr. Speaker. Choices were being made. Options were 

being considered. And now, Mr. Speaker, here we are three and 

a half years later, and what is the Canadian Institute of Health 

Information saying about the circumstances in Saskatchewan? 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty clear. The message is things 

haven’t improved very much, Mr. Speaker, as this government 

moves not on options available within the publicly administered 

managed part of health care, Mr. Speaker, but as the 

government moves on its philosophical bent to more private 

sector, third party providers. 

 

Canadian Institute of Health Information says, when it comes to 

hip replacement surgeries, Saskatchewan ranks second last in 

the country with only 69 per cent of procedures being done 

within the acceptable time period. The national average, Mr. 

Speaker, 84 per cent. 

 

For knee replacement surgeries, Saskatchewan ranked third last 

in the country with 60 per cent of procedures being done within 

the acceptable time frame. The national average, 79 per cent. 

 

For hip fracture repair surgeries, Saskatchewan was last in the 

country with 72 per cent of procedures being done within the 

acceptable time frame. The national average, 78 per cent. 

 

And for cataract surgeries, Saskatchewan ranked second last in 

the country with 62 per cent of procedures done within the 

acceptable time frame. The national average, 83 per cent. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, progress was being made. Progress was going 

forward within the administered system, Mr. Speaker, publicly 

administered system. Things have not improved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what are some of the other options to move 

forward, Mr. Speaker? The government has put forward a 

private clinic, Omni surgeries, for helping to reduce surgery 

wait times, Mr. Speaker. But on the table, the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region had, prior to the 2007 election, Mr. 

Speaker, begun work to developing a plan for a stand-alone 

surgery centre here in the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker, a centre 

that would do day surgeries — primarily cataracts, biopsies, 

perhaps gall bladder procedures, Mr. Speaker — that would 

remove these surgeries from the hospitals, allowing for greater 

amount of hospital operating room time, Mr. Speaker, to be 

devoted to more intrusive surgeries like hips and knees and 

other things like that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bottom line, the argument that I’m trying to make here today in 

the 10 minutes allocated to me, Mr. Speaker, very simple. 

There’s a choice that governments can make. You can either do 

a philosophic choice or you can do a choice based on options, 

based on practical analysis, Mr. Speaker. The government has 

chosen the wrong option. This will prove to be more costly and 

service the Saskatchewan people less well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I thank the House for its time this afternoon. 

 

The Speaker: — The 65-minute debate period has concluded. 

It’s time for the 10-minute question period. I recognize the 

member from Martensville. 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we all know, 

private delivery in a publicly funded system is part of the reality 

of health care in Saskatchewan, as it was under the NDP 

previously. If we look at private deliverers in Saskatchewan, 

doctors are private deliverers as are many laboratory functions 

and ambulance services. 

 

And my question is to the member for The Battlefords. If the 

NDP was completely okay with private delivery within a 

publicly funded system when they were government, why are 

they so completely opposed to private surgical delivery within a 

publicly funded system now? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This is 

part of a significant debate across Canada. Everyone, I think, 

understands the value of publicly delivered, publicly financed 

delivery of health care to the public. 

 

Health care began, Mr. Speaker, as doctors and hospitals. And 

over the years, as financing became available, additional 

services were provided to people under the health care banner, 

Mr. Speaker. And during that period of time, other services 

became available, not specifically related to hospitals and 

doctors, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The bottom line is, as funds are available and the public sector 

can support those funds, Mr. Speaker, we add it to the mix and 

provide better and increasing services. The bottom line, Mr. 

Speaker, this is a province that has been very successful in 

being a leader in publicly delivered health care, Mr. Speaker. 

We want to remain that way. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 

question is to the member from Sask Rivers. I want to know 

whether the Ministry of Health — so I’m talking about the 

officials — recommended to the Sask Party government that 

STARS be implemented. 



May 5, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7541 

[12:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank you for 

the member for the valuable question. Changing the health care 

system is a challenging task that takes time and unwavering 

effort. It requires strong and collaborative partnerships among 

multiple stakeholders, including all levels of government. 

STARS is partly funded by private donations, business, and 

general public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is more work to do, but I believe our efforts 

are showing results for patients, and I believe our government is 

moving forward. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 

heard a number of things through the debate. And one of things 

that we heard, Mr. Speaker, is one of the members opposite 

talking about the opposition talking about the Sask Party 

government wanting to go to war with labour. 

 

Now what was interesting, Mr. Speaker, is that the member 

didn’t quote as to where this comment came from. And this 

comment came from none other than the Premier of 

Saskatchewan himself who talked about this on the Gormley 

show that he would be more than willing to go to war with 

labour, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I just want to make sure that the member is informed as to 

why we talk about this; that it was actually the Premier of the 

province himself who talked about going to war with labour. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at a time where we’re seeing contract 

bargaining coming to all sorts of problems in the province, Mr. 

Speaker, as we’ve seen today, and we know that the health care 

workers of the province still don’t have a contract, how does he 

feel, the member from the Batoche . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s question period time has 

elapsed. I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very proud of the 

record we have of working, not with labour always. That’s what 

we have to achieve, not working for them, but with them, to 

achieve goals. And I think we’re setting a high standard. We’ve 

settled many a dispute already and there’s many more that we 

will soon be settling. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, third 

party delivery within a publicly funded administrative system 

happened under the New Democrats. We have a long . . . We 

have a private ambulance service, laboratories, X-rays, and 

long-term care facilities for many years. The NDP pursued third 

party delivery to improve Saskatchewan health care. Now our 

government has introduced an ambitious plan to improve 

surgical care in Saskatchewan. One of the plan’s innovative 

strategies is to use third party outpatient surgery and specialized 

diagnostics such as CT scans. 

 

To the member from Regina Lakeview: what health services 

should be delivered through the public . . . through the third 

party deliverers, and why? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are very proud of 

the fact that we worked with all of the people who provide 

services within the health care system when we were 

government. But we were very careful to analyze the cost of 

how these services were provided, and that’s why we 

recommended and we had plans to go ahead with a surgical 

centre within the city of Regina, and then subsequently in the 

city of Saskatoon, that would work with all of the surgeons, the 

private providers that are here in the province. And the reason 

we did it was we knew the experience in Manitoba, in other 

provinces, was that the costs were not able to be contained in a 

way that was appropriate. And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s 

absolutely crucial that we look at all of the providers, that we 

work with them, but that we’re very careful in how we analyze 

the costs. The problem we have here is that the Minister of 

Health, but more importantly the Premier, is making 

philosophical choices that are inappropriate. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the member from 

Batoche, who in his own constituency has a hospital in Wakaw 

where the emergency services have basically been shut down 

. . . The community is told to take the ambulance to Rosthern. 

The roads to Rosthern have basically been shut down because 

of floods. People can’t move well, Mr. Speaker. Can the 

member from Batoche give us some indication of what advice 

he’s giving to the residents of Wakaw with regards to their 

emergency circumstances? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The situation that 

we’re dealing with, including the highways, is what we 

inherited. They were only graduating 55 medical students a 

year for years and years and years — 55 medical students. And 

then all of a sudden they say there’s a doctor shortage. Well of 

course there’s a doctor shortage. You weren’t educating them. 

 

So now we’ve moved it up to 100 and 120 residency seats. 

We’re fulfilling this. We’re growing this province. And it’s 

going to take time to get these students graduated, but at least 

we’re doing something, not just standing there and watching the 

numbers go down and down like the previous government did. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the member of Saskatoon Nutana. We know that your party has 

always been afraid of setting goals because they would not be 

met. These words are spoken many times in the legislature but, 



7542 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2011 

just so everyone is clear, they were spoken firstly by the current 

member from The Battlefords when he was Health minister and 

referring to nurse recruitment. 

 

Setting goals is one of the many differences between the Sask 

Party and the New Democrats. The member from Saskatoon 

Nutana mentioned it, that previous NDP members, ministers, 

Health ministers considered the use of helicopter ambulances. It 

was a good idea then; it’s a good idea now, but they wouldn’t 

bother setting a goal to implement it. We think it’s a good goal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the member of Saskatoon Nutana: why didn’t 

their party take the time to initiate this target specifically to 

reduce wait times? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the member for 

the question. Here’s what’s interesting about the member’s 

question. But the member and the members have not answered 

this question: did the Ministry of Health, which has all of the 

experts, did they recommend to the government that they 

implement this STARS program? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I know that the member from North 

Battleford, the Premier Calvert, Nilson — or the member from 

Lakeview — myself, we all had the ministry look at this. And 

in fact I was the minister that undertook an ambulance review. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there was no recommendation that 

supported implementing helicopters in the province. In fact the 

ministry said that we have a long ways to go to have a decent 

road ambulance system in the province of Saskatchewan that 

could get the patients from where they need to be or to where 

they need to be. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, they haven’t answered that question, and you 

know what? They won’t because they never got a 

recommendation from the ministry. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the member 

from Batoche. He and I have a lot of our heritage in common. 

And I’m wondering if as it comes up to Mother’s Day, is he’s 

been listening to his mother about putting the best construction 

on everything. And I would ask him specifically about his 

speech as he says that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. Time 

has elapsed. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 2 — Housing 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Forbes.] 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

very pleased and honoured to be up today to speak a bit on what 

people have been speaking about in this Assembly for a great 

number of days, and that of course includes the challenge of the 

high cost of rent, the current situation with housing in the 

province, and of course the affordability issue that many, many 

families throughout northern and certainly southern 

Saskatchewan have suffered through. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that this private 

member’s Bill, moved by the member from Saskatoon Centre, 

and I’m quoting from this document, Mr. Speaker: 

 

On the proposed Motion No. 2 moved by Mr. Forbes: 

 

That this Assembly calls on the government to recognize 

the urgent nature of the housing and affordability crisis 

across the province, as evidenced by the fact that the 

Salvation Army is having to turn people away from its 

emergency shelters in Saskatoon due to over capacity for 

the first time; 

 

And further, that in making this call, the Assembly urges 

the government to do the following: 

1. To immediately assist emergency shelters to increase 

their capacity to provide desperately needed services 

during cold winter months; 

2. To immediately begin the process of developing a 

comprehensive affordable housing strategy and a 

comprehensive poverty reduction strategy to address 

the underlying causes of this crisis. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this motion moved, and again I quote from 

the headline, “On the proposed Motion No. 2 moved by Mr. 

Forbes.” Now, Mr. Speaker, as customary in the Assembly, we 

certainly can’t make reference to the member by name but 

certainly by the seat that they are from. Mr. Speaker, I want to 

point out that the member from Saskatoon Centre who has 

championed this housing issue for a very long time, I certainly 

want to thank him for giving me the opportunity to express 

myself to the Assembly, some of the challenges that we face 

certainly from my perspective and certainly from my region and 

that of course is northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Centre has 

long advocated for many people in his area and many people 

from the rural and from the urban settings. And, Mr. Speaker, 

he was gracious enough to sit down with me and with my 

colleague from Cumberland to talk about some of the northern 

issues in general, the underlying causes of poverty. And 

certainly housing is one of the primary things that we look at 

when we talk about trying to address the root causes of poverty. 

And I was very pleased that the member from Saskatoon Centre 

took the time to seek advice from us and certainly offer his 

perspective and his points of view as well when it comes to the 

southern part of our province. 

 

So what we’re trying to do here, Mr. Speaker, with this — I’d 

like to make reference to him as being a champion of this issue 

— is to try and figure out where we go from here as a province 

and certainly where we go from here as a party to address the 



May 5, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7543 

challenges of rising rents and of course the affordability and 

certainly the condition of many of the houses that 

Saskatchewan people suffer under. 

 

Now I want to turn my attention, Mr. Speaker, to northern 

Saskatchewan. And the reason I do that is I speak with a bit of 

authority in the sense that I’ve lived in northern Saskatchewan 

for all my adult life, and I certainly see first-hand and foremost 

some of the challenges attached to our housing file as we have 

lived in that area for years. I want to say that not out of 

disrespect to some of the southern issues and certainly some of 

the inner-city issues because obviously the member from 

Saskatoon Centre has a lot of information and has a lot of 

perspective and certainly has a lot of solutions. 

 

And I’m quite excited about some of the work that he’s done 

and very, very enthusiastic in terms of some of the policy that 

he’s trying to design, and to assure the people in those 

particular areas that it is an absolute wonder to watch this 

member work because he’s understanding of the issues. He’s 

got some very innovative approaches, and the attention that 

he’s affording the issue about homelessness and certainly the 

affordability and the rising rent is tremendous. And I want to 

point out that not only is the member from Saskatoon Centre 

doing some this work; the leader of our party is doing an 

incredible amount of work to raise the level of importance that 

this has for many, many families throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, from our perspective, from the opposition’s 

perspective, I don’t want to speak too much about the southern 

root causes of challenge when it comes to housing because we 

have some experts. We have some people dedicated to that. We 

have our entire party in sync with this whole notion of rent 

control, this whole notion of affordability, and the list goes on 

as to why we think this is an important issue. 

 

As we’ve pointed out from time to time from the southern 

perspective, renters throughout our province have faced a 

massive increase in their rent. Now, Mr. Speaker, I have a 

couple of daughters that live in Saskatoon, and they tell me 

about some of the rents that they have to pay. And it’s just 

absolutely phenomenal in terms of some of the cost. And their 

chances of ever affording a home on their own, Mr. Speaker, 

while they’re still in school and they’re going through some 

transitions, you know, in their education and their family 

matters, they will eventually be able to buy their own home, but 

it’s going to take them a long time. 

 

And one of the things that’s most remarkable about Saskatoon, 

Mr. Speaker, is that many, many years ago — and I’m not 

saying 50 or 60 years; I’m talking about 10, 15 years ago — as 

was evidenced in some of the other major centres, it was a 

Saskatchewan dream for many families to own their own home, 

Mr. Speaker. That was available then and, Mr. Speaker, today it 

is not. There are many families, young families that can’t afford 

a down payment for some of the housing stock in their cities. 

They simply can’t have that starter home that many of our 

parents or grandparents had. They don’t have that opportunity 

because the affordability is not there; the costs are right through 

the roof. And, Mr. Speaker, that is a crying shame because 

obviously Saskatchewan people from previous generations had 

that opportunity, and they built this province on having that 

affordability opportunity presented to them. So many young 

struggling families today don’t have that same Saskatchewan 

dream of owning their own home. And that, Mr. Speaker, is a 

crying shame. 

 

[12:15] 

 

And that’s why our leader and our critic for Housing is always 

constantly at this current government for one simple message: 

is that you have the resources; why aren’t you addressing this 

issues for young working families, young families that are 

starting out, and give them the same opportunity of having that 

Saskatchewan dream of home ownership that our parents and 

our grandparents had, Mr. Speaker? These guys, this party is 

sitting on record revenues, record revenues, Mr. Speaker, and 

they’re not doing nothing to address the affordability issue on 

housing for young families that are starting off and many, many 

other families in general, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that’s one of the things that, I think, is why it’s important 

that we enter the debate, to tell people out there in 

Saskatchewanland that this is an issue. It’s affecting a lot of 

people. And while it’s not fair, some of the things that that 

government is doing with the resources, the windfall that they 

enjoy, Mr. Speaker, I tell people, well it’s not fair that they’re 

not doing anything. They simply don’t care. They simply don’t 

care, and that’s what I tell a lot of young families that are 

starting off that are struggling. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the next option, completely putting aside the 

whole notion of home ownership, is of course the whole notion 

of being able to afford a place to live. And as I mention, as you 

see the rents increase, and the rents are skyrocketing in a sense 

of the increases. And what does that party do? They sit on their 

hands. They say, oh nothing we can do. And the greatest news I 

heard coming out of these guys . . . And we talked about all the 

challenges related to the housing affordability and the rent 

issues and on and on and on. They have no solution at all. And, 

Mr. Speaker, the sad thing is even if they had a solution, they 

had no plans to do anything about it anyway.  

 

So one of the greatest announcements we heard off these guys 

in the last couple of months is they said to address the housing 

challenges — the sustainability, the affordability, the rent, and 

all the challenges attached to housing — they said, we’re going 

to have a conference. That’s what their solution was. We’re 

going to have a conference, a three-day conference. So 

everybody’s saying, well what’s that going to do to help the 

affordability issue, sit around a room and talk about it? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, once again they’ve managed people; 

they’ve not managed the issue. So people go to these 

conferences with great ideas. And unless and until they have 

real money attached to a strategy on housing — you can have a 

hundred conferences — it ain’t going to make no difference, 

Mr. Speaker. It ain’t going to make no difference. Young 

students, young families, Aboriginal people, immigrants, the 

elderly — they’re all people facing housing problems now. And 

I’m sorry, a conference ain’t going to be any part of the 

solution. 

 

And while ain’t ain’t a word and you ain’t supposed to use it, 

Mr. Speaker, I say it for the fact to try and make it as simple as 

I can to those folks across the way that a conference ain’t going 



7544 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2011 

to do it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned and as the member from 

Saskatoon Centre has mentioned, let’s look at rent controls. 

Let’s look at rent controls in the sense of making sure that we 

don’t have people being taken advantage of when they have no 

choice but to rent. And we’re talking when people rent a unit, 

and there’s varying degrees of cost of course, but I know of an 

example. My daughter pays something like 1,500 bucks a 

month, you know, for a two-bedroom place. And that’s fairly 

expensive for her. It’s a huge proposition. And there’s 

oftentimes that she says, well I simply can’t afford it. She’s 

going to school. So help is afforded to her from a number of 

different sources just to help her cover some of the costs.  

 

And it’s an expensive proposition, paying $1,500 every 30 

days. And if you were to translate that at a cost of per day, I 

would say people are paying 70 to $80 a night to sleep in their 

own apartment — 70 to $80 a night to sleep in your own bed in 

an apartment in some parts of the city. Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

an awfully expensive proposition. And then you throw in the 

cost of food, the cost of fuel, the cost of power, the cost of 

telephone, and all these costs are all going up. You layer that on 

to some of these young families or young people trying to make 

ends meet, all of a sudden you find that you just simply can’t 

cover those costs. It becomes an affordability issue. And this 

government is sitting on billions of dollars, and the rest of the 

people are suffering and they’re struggling. And there’s many, 

many young people that are going through that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So not only have they diminished and dashed the hope for a 

Saskatchewan dream of families owning their own homes, they 

are now dashing the hopes of many young people that are able 

to afford to live in some of the cities to do the things they want, 

whether it’s employment or whether it is education or for other 

means. And that is putting a huge strain on the affordability that 

many young people are often speaking about. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I tell a lot of young people that, don’t sit back 

and don’t wait for this government to come up with solutions. 

We ask them to get active. We ask them to get petitions going, 

a letter-writing campaign. Get involved with politics. Because a 

lot of the folks that are in charge of some of the money, Mr. 

Speaker, especially from across the way there, they simply 

don’t care the effect and the impact it has on young people and 

young families. They don’t care. So if they don’t care, don’t 

expect a solution from them. 

 

I would encourage and urge a lot of the young people out there 

that may be listening to make sure that they participate in the 

democratic process and that they can actually architect policies 

through our party to make sure that this issue is addressed using 

resources from our potash, using resources from our tax base, 

using resources from our economy. What’s wrong with that 

concept, Mr. Speaker? Absolutely nothing wrong. 

 

The only thing missing is the participation of our young people. 

And I challenge them here today to get involved with politics, 

to get involved with policy decision making, the policy 

decision-making process, to architect different concepts in 

different ways where young people and people that are 

struggling financially are able to take advantage of some of the 

great opportunity in homeownership and certainly in the other 

aspects of living in Saskatchewan. And the best way and the 

only way to get involved in bringing your perspective is to 

become involved with some of the processes afforded to you, 

whether it’s education, the arts, or participating in the electoral 

process. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in northern Saskatchewan, I want to point 

out that the housing stock in northern Saskatchewan need a lot 

of work. There’s a lot of challenges in northern Saskatchewan. 

People out there that have been living in some of these 

communities and some of these houses, they see they’re paying 

a lot of money for their rent. They’re paying a lot of money for 

their rent. And there are a lot of complaints. And I want to 

focus particularly on three areas, Mr. Speaker, if I may. 

 

The first one is on the elders. Now I travel a lot of different 

communities, and I talk to a lot of older people. And they tell 

me a number of things, that many people that are older want to 

live in their own home. They’ve raised their children in that 

home. They raised their grandkids. Sometimes you take nieces 

and nephews. They have an extended family. And they bring 

these family members into their home and they help raise them, 

which is an incredible sacrifice and it’s a great show of love. 

Now after they’ve raised their families, Mr. Speaker, it’s that 

whole different culture in the North. They have many, many 

children that go through their homes, and they help as much as 

they can. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as you get older, of course living in a house 

for a year has its wears and tears of having children around and 

raising a family and takes a lot of money to maintain a home. 

So as people get older, the costs for maintaining that home 

becomes more and more their responsibility, and they all live 

on fixed incomes. 

 

I think the base salary for old age security nationally, I think, is 

around $500 or $525. That’s their base allowance allowed 

nationally through the old age security. If you are able to prove 

financial hardship, then there’s a supplementary that you can 

apply for and add on to that amount of roughly $600. So many 

of these older people have roughly $1,100 a month, if they 

qualify through the old age security, to operate and to live with. 

 

Now if you look at some of the housing stock that are in place 

in northern Saskatchewan, many of the older people, they start 

looking at what they have to pay for. The elders, they have to 

pay for the maintenance on their house. They’ve got to pay for 

the costs of power. They’ve got to pay for the cost of heat. 

They’ve got to pay for the cost of food, of fuel, of medicine, 

Mr. Speaker. They’ve also got to pay the costs of helping raise 

children, because as you do these things, it all adds costs to 

your home. 

 

So all these older people living on some meagre amounts of 

money, many of them are doing a tremendous amount of work 

with that small amount of money. And as you know, in 

northern Saskatchewan we don’t have many people that are 70 

to 80 years old that have any pension plans, Mr. Speaker. Many 

of them didn’t participate in that process in their early years. 

They lived off the land and they certainly survived in that way, 

and they taught their kids how to survive, and that’s how we 

sustained our families and our community. 

 



May 5, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7545 

So years later the only thing that they have coming into their 

homes, in terms of financial support, is maybe a bit of CPP 

[Canada Pension Plan], but largely the Old Age Security Act. 

That’s kind of what many of the elders in northern 

Saskatchewan count on. 

 

Now given those low numbers, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what 

they have coming in versus what they have going out, you can 

see there’s not a lot of room for error. And it’s amazing, Mr. 

Speaker, the amount of financial management that I’ve seen 

many elders display in terms of how they are able to make ends 

meet. And I say to myself, my goodness, I wonder how many 

other families throughout Saskatchewan can do what the people 

in northern Saskatchewan, the elderly people, do with the 

amount of money that they have coming in versus all the costs 

and meeting all those costs that they have. 

 

So the moment you start talking about rent, the moment you 

start talking about rent increases for the elderly, which has an 

impact on many of the people in my communities, right away it 

comes at the cost of their budget. So 50, $60, or $100 is 

actually a huge jump for them. And that’s why, when we talk 

about affordability of rent as a party, that’s exactly who we 

have in mind — the elderly people and the elderly people 

throughout the province, but in my case more particularly, the 

elderly people in the constituency of Athabasca and certainly 

from Cumberland as well. 

 

But I want to say that any kind of rent increases, Mr. Speaker, 

have a dramatic detrimental effect on the finances of many 

older people. So when I’m sitting there and I try and find some 

support mechanisms for elderly people. And there are programs 

out there like the RRAP [residential rehabilitation assistance 

program] program, the emergency program to help build and 

fix up your homes. I looked at the HASI program, the home 

adaptations for seniors’ independence which is designed to help 

meet some of the cost of fixing your bathroom to adjust for 

older people and, you know, funding of that sort. 

 

So the old people say, well can we apply for some of these 

programs? Obviously RRAP, ERP [emergency repair program], 

these are some of the programs that have been around, been 

around for a long time. Now what happens now, Mr. Speaker 

— and this is the sad reality — is that some of the older people 

have applied for RRAP or ERP. And one of the conditions that 

I find absolutely ludicrous and unacceptable, and the fact that in 

almost to a point where it’s disrespectful, is that if you owe any 

property tax, if you owe any property tax on your home then 

automatically, instinctively you become ineligible for any 

program support, either through RRAP or ERP or the HASI 

program or any other program that Sask Housing has in place. 

 

And one of the things I think that’s very unfair is that in the 

future, if and when the people of the North, the elderly people 

apply for some of these programs, they’re told, well sorry, you 

know, you simply don’t, aren’t eligible for this program 

because you have land tax arrears. And guess what? That makes 

you ineligible. All that is is a cheap excuse to not spend the 

money that this government has set aside for those programs, 

and in the long run it saves money on the backs of the old 

people. And, Mr. Speaker, that is a crying shame when you talk 

about affordability of housing. It’s a crying shame when 

nothing’s being done to help the rent, and it’s a crying shame 

where rules are made up on the fly by that party to stop older 

people, senior citizens from taking advantage of the programs 

that are out there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I looked at some of the conditions of these homes that 

many of the elderly people live in. And they’re very proud. 

They’re very proud people, as we have many very proud elderly 

people throughout the province. 

 

In northern Saskatchewan, I look at the elders as a source of 

strength because they’re very proud and they’re very 

independent. They don’t want to stay in a nursing home if they 

don’t have to, Mr. Speaker. They don’t want to be able to count 

on anybody for any help if they don’t have to. They don’t want 

to be able to go and bother anybody for some of the things they 

might need. They’re fiercely independent. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the other thing I find most amazing about 

the elderly people in my area — and I’m sure it’s prevalent 

across the province — is the fact that if they’re ill, if they’re ill, 

they won’t express it either. They’ll keep a lot of their illnesses 

away from their family members or from their children because 

they simply . . . That’ s just the way they are. 

 

And so you look at all the pain and suffering that they go 

through, the elderly people, the pain and suffering that they go 

through, whether it’s their health or the challenges with their 

kids or making ends meet in their home. The last thing we need 

to do is have a government that doesn’t care about their 

problems. And that’s exactly what we’re getting from this 

government, Mr. Speaker, in refusing to address the issues of 

affordability and having decent housing for many people 

throughout this province. And that includes housing seniors in 

northern Saskatchewan or giving the means for them to keep 

their own house where they’re able to live independently for the 

rest of their days. And there’s nothing to support that, nothing 

at all, Mr. Speaker, and that’s a crying shame. 

 

[12:30] 

 

And the worst thing is, the worst thing is it’s not as if we’re in a 

deficit, Mr. Speaker. It’s not as if our debt is growing, Mr. 

Speaker. This government enjoys record revenues, record 

revenues. They’re enjoying that. They’re enjoying record 

revenues. 

 

I look back at some of the history of this province. When the 

NDP first took over the government, I think their budget was 3 

billion. I think their budget was 3 billion in 1991, and these 

guys have $11.2 billion. That’s almost four times the money we 

had when we first began government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now you sit back and you say to them, well we can’t afford 

to do these programs. Well absolutely you can. You have the 

money. You have the money. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the 

problem that we get so frustrated on this side, and we tell a lot 

of elderly people throughout my riding, and Cumberland the 

same thing, is that it’s just not fair, the things you’re going 

through, but the Sask Party don’t care. 

 

We know what’s going on, Mr. Speaker. They’re making 

special deals with their friends. They’re giving their friends 

some special projects. They’re giving their friends some special 



7546 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2011 

deals. And, Mr. Speaker, they’re setting themselves up. They’re 

setting themselves up for after government life. That’s exactly 

what’s happening on the other side. 

 

And they simply don’t care what’s happening today in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, where young families can’t afford 

to buy a house, where young families and single mothers face 

skyrocketing rent and where elderlies in the northern part of 

Saskatchewan simply can’t afford the burden any more of 

trying to make ends meet month after month after month, as 

their health deteriorates, as their bills mount, and there’s no 

help from a government that’s flush with cash. 

 

And that’s the problem, Mr. Speaker, of why the people of 

northern Saskatchewan and many elderly people don’t support 

the Sask Party. Because they don’t care about the elderly 

people. They don’t care about the North. And they don’t care 

about the vulnerable people that Saskatchewan has right now, 

Mr. Speaker. They’ve got record revenue and the people of 

Saskatchewan have no support for them whatsoever. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I go back to the . . . I’ve been to a few 

homes where elderly people . . . Again I go back to my example 

where they say, well we need help fixing our home up, but now 

we have these land tax arrears and we’re no longer eligible. 

 

So I walk in this one elderly couple’s place in Ile-a-la-Crosse 

and they say, well nice for you to come see us; we’re glad 

you’re here. I would like to show you our bathroom and see the 

problems we have, and our bedroom. So I walk into the house 

and I go look at the bathroom and the floor is quite in poor 

shape. Over the years of course, you know, as you get . . . 

bathroom has a lot of moisture and there’s mould and there’s 

weakened floors and the toilet is now sitting awkwardly, and 

then that was pretty poor shape, that particular bathroom. And 

then the older lady said, well, you know, we think we can over 

time try and fix this up, but it’d be sure nice if we had help. 

And I said, well that doesn’t look . . . Your bathroom doesn’t 

look all that great; I think you need help now before you fall 

right through the floor. 

 

And she said, well there’s another problem here. And I said, 

what problem is that? So I go into her bedroom and she pulls 

open these long curtains, and when she pulled open these 

curtains there’s a 3-foot-high mould film on her walls. There’s 

mould all along her walls just under the window. She said, we 

had to close this because the mould stinks. I said, oh where do 

you guys sleep? And she said, well we sleep right here and my 

husband actually hasn’t been feeling well because I would think 

it’s because of the mould. Well absolutely it’s because of the 

mould. 

 

So I’m sitting there saying, okay, you’ve got a bathroom 

problem. You’ve got a mould problem. Have you ever tried to 

get any help from the government to fix these through some of 

the programs? And they said, well we tried, and we’d like you 

to try again. So we make some inquiries and we find, oh no, 

they’re not eligible because they haven’t paid their land taxes in 

a number of years. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, news flash to the Saskatchewan Party 

MLAs over there. A lot of elderly people can’t afford to pay 

their land taxes. If there’s anything that they have any money 

left over, it’s being used to help buy food, to pay their bills, to 

heat their homes. And their cost of running a home in northern 

Saskatchewan is a heck of a lot more than it costs to run a home 

in any of their communities, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why they 

don’t care. 

 

And the Minister of Finance is chirping from his seat. If he had 

to sleep in a room that had mould across his wall, Mr. Speaker, 

you’d see action then. If he had to go into a bathroom where 

you’re worried about falling through the floor, I’m pretty sure 

you’d see action then. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance sitting there making 

less of what the elderly people are going for, or challenged with 

in northern Saskatchewan, I want him to get up and say, yes 

we’re going to commit to doing that. We’re going to commit to 

that. Will he do that today, sir? Will he get up and say, we’re 

going to put an extra 7 or $8 million into elderly care when it 

comes to housing improvement? If you’re not prepared to do 

that, then perhaps the member shouldn’t chirp from his chair, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now going back to the elderly, the example of the elderly 

people when it comes to housing and affordability, Mr. 

Speaker, number one is that as the older people were showing 

me throughout their house, I said, have you made any effort to 

pay your property taxes, even as much as you can each month? 

They said we made one payment, but that was about a year ago 

and we had $50 left because we just had won some money in 

bingo. And so we made a little payment on our property taxes. 

 

And I said, well how long has this been going on? And she 

said, well it’s been going on for seven or eight years. Our land 

taxes have piled up. And I said, well why have they piled up? 

And they said, well here’s our bill each month. Each month it 

shows those older people going in deficit at least a couple 

hundred dollars per month. And guess what? The last thing 

they’re going to worry about paying for is property tax. The last 

thing they’re going to worry about paying for is insurance on 

their home. So many times in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, the two places that aren’t being paid, when it comes to 

elderly people owning their home and still living in their home, 

are property taxes and insurance on their home. And that’s a 

huge, huge detriment to many older people owning their own 

home. 

 

And why is it that we can’t stand up in this Assembly to a 

government that’s flush with cash? They have the cash, Mr. 

Speaker. They have the cash. Why is it in this day and age, 

2011, we can’t say to elderly people that own their own home, 

all throughout Saskatchewan, that if you own your own home 

and if you live within a defined amount of money — and be fair 

about that — then we will not impose rules on you that say you 

have to have your property tax fully paid before, before you’re 

eligible for these programs? I think we need to give them a 

break, Mr. Speaker. I think we need to recognize the fact that 

they’re having these struggles and that this is unfair. This is 

unfair of us to ask them for more, when they have no more to 

give. And that’s one of the important things, I think, that a lot 

of the elderly people have told me in northern Saskatchewan is 

that it’s affordability. It’s affordability. 

 

You know, we have to travel south for our medical 



May 5, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7547 

appointments. We have to travel south for our dental 

appointments. We have to travel south for our optometrist 

appointments. And, Mr. Speaker, all those trips cost money. 

Because we’ve got to hire somebody if our kids don’t take us. 

And a lot of the kids are quite busy. Then we have to go on our 

own and that costs money. 

 

So at the end of the day, you look at all these costs: medical 

costs, housing costs, food costs, the whole notion of heating 

your home. All these costs add up. And I’m sorry, but many 

northern people in northern Saskatchewan, and Aboriginal 

families as well and Aboriginal elders, they simply do not have 

the means to meet all those costs. And at the end of the day, 

they simply have a choice to make — either you pay your 

power bill or your property taxes; either you pay your food bill 

or you pay your insurance bill. And guess what, Mr. Speaker? 

We can’t eat an insurance policy, so we buy food. And guess, 

what, Mr. Speaker? We simply can’t pay our power bill with a 

property tax invoice. We have to pay it with cash. 

 

So many times seniors in northern Saskatchewan that own their 

own home, they ought to be supported. They ought to be 

supported with some real programs that recognize their real 

issues and their everyday challenges meeting their financial 

obligations. And, Mr. Speaker, this is pretty prevalent. As I 

mentioned at the early outset, a lot of these older people are 

proud. They want to remain as independent for as long as they 

can and why can’t we afford them the dignity to do that? And 

the best way to afford them the dignity is to recognize their 

financial limitations and to get rid of some of the rules that 

make them ineligible, ineligible for repairs to their homes 

because they haven’t had their full property tax bill paid. If they 

make even a small effort to pay those property taxes, then I 

think you’re going to find that many elders would try. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I also want to point out, in terms of the 

notion of property taxes, I think in northern Saskatchewan 

many of the mayors that are in charges of these northern 

communities, you know, they would certainly, I think they 

could become part of the solution. Mayors are encouraging 

people to pay their property taxes all the time. That’s a 

foregone conclusion. And I think one of the things that in 

northern Saskatchewan in specific communities, if the mayors 

find at the end of the day that 7 or 8 or 10, 15, 20 older people 

that owned their homes, they can’t afford taxes, there’s an 

affordability issue. It’s clearly defined. 

 

If they even got a letter from the mayor saying, we’re working 

on the property tax issue. We’re satisfied that they’re making 

every effort to address those issues, therefore we think that they 

should become eligible for these programs and not have the 

non-payment of property tax become a deterrent for them to get 

in these programs. I think even that would be acceptable, Mr. 

Speaker. Because as I mentioned at the outset, there are so 

many different hard choices that the elderly people have to 

make in northern Saskatchewan, that it just becomes 

ridiculously unfair to them that they can’t do many of these 

things because people across the way simply don’t care. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned at the outset, my colleague 

from Saskatoon Centre is obviously very in tune and is a 

champion of this whole notion of rent control and can speak 

with a bit more of authority and certainly with a lot more 

intelligence when it comes to the province-wide issue. But as I 

mentioned, I’m speaking about northern Saskatchewan 

specifically, and one of the groups I wanted to talk about today 

obviously was the elderly people. Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going 

to continue working with the elderly people, continually 

encourage them. 

 

And there are many times I’ll walk into their homes, I’ll see the 

condition of their homes, and I feel so bad for them. I know I 

will help them with their application, but at the end of the day if 

they owe any property taxes, well right away the Sask Party 

says you can’t have any programs unless you pay those 

property taxes. And they’d say one simple message: we don’t 

have the money to meet all these costs, and sometimes you’ll 

take food over property tax for the last $100 that we have left in 

our accounts. 

 

And that’s one of the things I think people ought to know when 

it comes to northern Saskatchewan, that the elders there are 

suffering and the programs that are being offered to them to 

help them become independent and stay independent, they can’t 

take advantage of that because of the onerous rules put in place 

by the Sask Party. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, what is even 

more of a compelling argument is that they’re not putting any 

resources to address any of their issues when it comes to 

making sure their homes are safe, affordable, and certainly 

comfortable. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to northern Saskatchewan in 

general, I want to talk about the population in the North and 

how important and how integral the whole notion of safe 

housing is part of what we need to address. And I look at 

northern Saskatchewan and you see the demographics of how 

many, many communities have such a huge amount of young 

people. Some communities are as high as 60, 70 per cent in 

terms of young people living under the age of 30 years old or 

25 years old. I don’t have those stats handy, but that’s roughly a 

fair idea as to what kind of a breakdown in terms of our 

population of young versus old. 

 

And I can say, Mr. Speaker, that many of these young families 

— there are single mothers or there may be other circumstances 

where they have three or four kids — it’s always an ongoing 

challenge of raising a family if you don’t have the proper 

housing. And, Mr. Speaker, and every time you have a house 

. . . And I’ll give you a good example. La Loche is a growing 

community, and our party, and our party when we were in 

power, I think they figured that we built in terms of housing 

units — and it could be apartment blocks; it could be housing 

— I think over a period of seven or eight years, we built 

something like 2 or 300 units, Mr. Speaker, and that housed 2 

or 300 families. 

 

But in the process of building those houses, Mr. Speaker, 

another 2 or 300 applicants came in. And all of a sudden this 

whole notion of trying to find houses for La Loche alone 

became such a challenge. But at the very least, we put in 2 or 

300 housing units in that community to help them address the 

housing challenge. And guess what? If a child has a decent 

house to live in, has a safe room to sleep in, and has three meals 

a day, they become very productive people at the end of the 

day. But if there’s seven or eight people living in one house and 

there’s all the interruptions of having all these people in the 



7548 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2011 

home, it’s hard for a child to have a place that they’re able to 

live in peacefully and to feel safe, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[12:45] 

 

And one of the things I looked at when the minister talked 

about her housing strategy, where she’s granting contractors, or 

building contractors, money to build houses, and she said, well 

they’re for modestly priced houses. So what’s modest to her? 

Well modest to her is 300,000, Mr. Speaker. And 300,000 is not 

modest in northern Saskatchewan. That’s very, very expensive. 

 

So why is it the Sask Party’s ignoring all these growing 

families in La Loche, where houses are needed, and saying 

we’re going to give them to our contractor friends who give us 

money, who give money to the party? We’re going to reward 

them for helping us last election by giving them all this 

construction work. We’re going to make them richer. And then 

guess what? They’re going to have money to build houses for 

those families that are eligible for a $300,000 mortgage. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if my memory serves me correct, you’ve got 

to have an income of at least 110, $120,000 each year to be able 

to afford a $300,000 mortgage, given how the mortgage rules 

work. So a news flash to the Minister of Housing: there’s 

probably going to be maybe three or four people in 10 or 12 

communities in the North that can afford a $300,000 mortgage, 

and you better have a contractor friend that’s going to want to 

come and build it for that price in northern Saskatchewan 

because as you move north, there’s going to be more cost 

attached to that. 

 

So the whole notion of her strategy, talking about the hundreds 

of millions she’s going to put into housing, it doesn’t fit. It 

doesn’t apply to northern Saskatchewan whatsoever. It doesn’t 

apply to rent control. It doesn’t apply to helping seniors keep 

their home in good shape for longer. It doesn’t apply to the 

elderly people that have trouble paying their property tax. It 

doesn’t apply to northern Saskatchewan families. And it 

certainly doesn’t apply to people that have low incomes. 

 

So as she announces this grand plan of giving builders the 

money to build modest homes, as she described them, well 

$300,000 is a nice home, Mr. Speaker. And why can’t, why 

can’t we use some of that $300,000 that she’s giving to her 

contractor friends to fix the mould in some of the elderly 

people’s homes in northern Saskatchewan? You know how 

many homes 300,000 could help in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker? It could probably help 50 or 60 homes. You know 

how much another 300,000 would do to help fix another 50 or 

60 homes? And all of a sudden you’ve got 3 or $4 million, can 

fix a lot of homes, fix a lot of poor bathrooms, take away a lot 

of the mould, help address the insulations of these homes so 

they’re properly heated, help the elderly people live in dignity 

for the rest of their life or help a young family afford that home. 

You know how much benefit that would have? 

 

And this government didn’t do a darn thing to address those 

challenges that they are aware of as a result of some of my 

colleague’s work from Saskatoon Centre, and they chose not to 

do anything. What they said instead is, we’ll give our contractor 

friends who’ll give us a whole whack of money during the 

election, for our election, and we’ll give them this bonus. And 

they can build these modest homes for people that need homes. 

And that was their solution. And oh, by the way, we’re going to 

have a conference too. So people on this side of the Assembly 

are saying, well that goes to show that they don’t understand 

what the social agenda is for Saskatchewan. But if you want to 

reduce crises in families, in low-income families, you don’t 

ignore their needs. You help them address the real issue of 

housing, of housing in general in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I look again at the notion of affordability. So 

people in the North said, okay, if I find a contractor and he can 

build me a house — because they’re going to subsidize him to 

build a house — and the price is 300,000, well how many 

people in northern Saskatchewan can afford a $300,000 

mortgage? And how many banks, how many banks would go to 

northern Saskatchewan to lend somebody $300,000 to build a 

house in a market that doesn’t exist? How many banks would 

do that? 

 

So right away the minister has said no, we’re not going to put 

any money in this housing opportunity in northern 

Saskatchewan. We’re not putting one red cent. And she didn’t 

say it that way. She said, oh we’ve got this program. But in 

essence, she has eliminated every person in northern 

Saskatchewan from taking advantage of this program because 

(a) not too many people can afford a $300,000 rent; and (b) not 

very many banks will go into northern Saskatchewan and give 

somebody $300,000 to build a house in a market where the 

banks know they’ll never get their money back in case the 

mortgage has been defaulted.  

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we all understand that. And the member 

says, the minister says, well I didn’t understand it. Well she’d 

be foolish to say that because we know she understands that, 

and we know that she knows about all these challenges. And 

yet she continued to ignore, she continued to ignore some of the 

challenges when it comes to housing, and continues to ignore 

some of the challenges that young working families have and 

young single mothers have in trying to find a decent house to 

raise their kids in — a decent, safe house. That’s all they want, 

a house where you can afford to live. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party, despite all the money they 

have and talk about having quadruple what the NDP had in 

1991, they’re still not putting any money where their mouth is 

when it comes to providing safe, affordable, decent housing to 

many people of Saskatchewan’s North. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I tell people in northern Saskatchewan that 

okay, fine, if we’re not looking for solutions from the province 

because you’ve got a bunch of people that don’t really care 

there, if we don’t want solutions from them, then we’ve got to 

find our own solutions. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, we often 

talk about the notion of resource revenue sharing, resource 

revenue sharing for northern Saskatchewan communities. Now 

if anybody on the other side says, oh we’re not going to do that 

. . . And I heard the Premier mention that one day here that 

when it comes to northern resource revenue sharing, that ain’t 

on. He ain’t going do there. He’s not going there, is what he 

said. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we had that same kind of relationship around 

Esterhazy. Esterhazy has the resource revenue-sharing 



May 5, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7549 

agreement around their community with the mines. They got 

that. We know they’ve got that. They’ve had that for years. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the other point is I tell people of the North, 

if Regina and the Sask Party don’t want to provide solutions for 

us, the solution that we have to implement as a people and as a 

region is resource revenue sharing. And they say, well what the 

heck is that, what is resource revenue sharing? Well I’ll tell 

them that in northern Saskatchewan, we have uranium, we have 

gold, we have — in due time, it’ll come back — we have 

forestry, we have tourism, and all these operations in northern 

Saskatchewan. Let’s say the northern administration, admin 

district — NAD [northern administration district] line, the 

buckskin curtain they call it — in the buckskin curtain, runs 

north of Meadow Lake right across towards Cumberland 

House, they generate hundreds of millions of dollars from the 

resources out of northern Saskatchewan. The government 

coffers bulge at the money that they get from northern 

Saskatchewan. They make a lot of money off the North. 

 

Now I’m saying out of all the money they’re hauling out of our 

northern area, that the non-Aboriginal community, the Métis 

and the First Nations ought to get together and form a strategy 

that says, before one more truck leaves our northern 

Saskatchewan area, we want our roads fixed. We want our 

houses built. We want training programs for our young people, 

and we want services that you get in southern Saskatchewan. 

Otherwise you get nothing. You get nothing. And we say that, 

Mr. Speaker, to absolutely every one of the Sask Party MLAs 

across the way, that unless and until we get northern resource 

revenue sharing addressed, then you guys . . . We don’t have 

any hope of you guys delivering programs that affect our lives 

every day. We will do it on our own. 

 

And I tell people of the North that you take the example of the 

pride that the elderly people have, the hope and ambitions that 

the young people have, and the desire that young mothers and 

young dads have to build a better life for their kids. The 

solution in my books, the solution and the ultimate solution is 

to have northern resource revenue sharing where we say to 

every company — and some of them are thinking about it — 

every company, you want to operate in the North . . . As a 

government, as an NDP government, we’re going to go down 

the path of resource revenue sharing where every day you get a 

chunk of those royalties that goes into your community to 

address some of the challenges with housing, to address some 

of the challenges of repair for our elderly people, to address 

some of the challenges around roads, to address some of the 

challenges on training.  

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is the solution. We start taking resources 

from northern Saskatchewan, and we start building our own 

future using our own land and our own resources as opposed to 

waiting for the Sask Party to wake up and start addressing some 

of these challenges. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s important is that when we talk 

about northern resource revenue sharing, I want the people of 

the North to understand what we’re saying, what we’re doing. 

Because as we see evidence, this party across the way, the Sask 

Party, doesn’t care about the northern and the Aboriginal 

people in general. They have no regard whatsoever. And I’ve 

said it a hundred times, and I’ll keep saying it another hundred 

times, Mr. Speaker, because that is clearly the message that 

they’re giving. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, for the record, I look at housing as a 

particular issue right now. It goes right across the board. 

Whether it’s addiction services for, a good example would be, 

drugs, Mr. Speaker. No services in northern Saskatchewan. 

Young families that are struggling with housing issues may 

have young people in their homes that have drug problems. Is 

there any place for them to go to get counselling and support? 

No. Does that affect the goodwill and the spirit of the home and 

of the family? Absolutely. Absolutely. 

 

Look at the child’s advocate report that came out where you 

have over 90 people, over 90 people, 90 children over the last 

three years actually died in Saskatchewan. And that’s not 

anything that any minister wants on their watch. So, Mr. 

Speaker, you look at all the decline of some of our 

communities, the decline of some of the communities as a result 

of an uncaring government. And you say, well how do you 

know they’re not caring? How do you know they’re not caring? 

Because they’re not addressing housing issues that affect the 

seniors. They’re not addressing housing issues that affect the 

working people. They’re not addressing housing that affects the 

single mother and therefore creates an unbalance within the 

family, Mr. Speaker. There’s no programs to help a young 

person deal with drugs. And the list goes on as to how a family 

is broken down as a result of inaction by the province of 

Saskatchewan and in particular the Sask Party government. 

 

And I say this very clearly and very loud, that we had 90-plus 

children die in government care over the last three years. And 

that is not something, Mr. Speaker, that any minister can boast 

about. That is actually a stain on a government’s record of 

dealing with families in crisis. And guess what? Housing is one 

of those factors that add to that crisis. And that’s my point. 

That’s one of the worst things that anybody could want under 

their watch is to have 90-plus children die in the last three years 

while in care. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that signals there’s a problem. And the 

question you’ve got to ask is, how many more children have got 

to die before this government wakes up to address the root 

causes of poverty and the root causes of the destruction and 

dysfunction of families? Before more children die, we’re asking 

them today to rise up to the occasion and use some of your 

wealth and your resources to finally do something to help the 

families that are struggling. Do something with your money. 

Do something to plan for the future. Don’t just sit on your bags 

of money as you pontificate from atop your mountain of cash of 

how you’re doing all these wonderful things. 

 

Why is it, under your watch, we have lost 90-plus kids? 

Ninety-plus children, Mr. Speaker. It is because they don’t care. 

It’s because they don’t care. They take care of their families 

and they take care of themselves, but if you’re from the North, 

if you’re from rural or the inner cities or some of the other 

places in Saskatchewan that they don’t care about, guess what? 

This whole notion of wealth and opportunity bypasses many, 

many people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And it’s a shame, Mr. Speaker. It’s an absolute shame. And it’s 

a huge blemish that when you have over 90 kids die while in 



7550 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2011 

care of that government and that minister, Mr. Speaker, because 

she has not responded to the crisis when it comes to housing 

affordability. She has not responded when it comes to the crisis 

of single mothers out there asking for help. And, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s worse when you have the money and you don’t do anything 

about it. And, Mr. Speaker, forever, forever and a day, that is 

not a record that any minister wants. And guess what, Mr. 

Speaker? She has that on her record. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 1 p.m., the time of adjournment, 

this Assembly is adjourned until 1:30 Monday afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7523 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7523 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7523 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7523 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7523 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7523 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7523 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7524 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7524 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7524 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7524 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7525 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Teachers Hold Job Action 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7525 

 Skills Canada Saskatchewan Competition 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7525 

 Multiple Sclerosis Awareness Month 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7525 

 Poster Contest Winners Announced 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7526 

 International Day of Midwives 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7526 

 Mother’s Day 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7526 

 Appreciation for Teachers 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7527 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Contract Negotiations with Teachers 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7527 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7527 

 Funding for Education 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7529 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7529 

 Care of Children 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7530 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7530 

 Proposals for Multiple Sclerosis Clinical Trials 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7531 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7531 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Launch of Business Registrations Saskatchewan Website 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7531 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7532 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Health Care Delivery 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7532 

  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7534, 7541 

  Wilson ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7535, 7541 

  Atkinson ......................................................................................................................................................................... 7537, 7540 

  Kirsch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7538, 7541 

  Taylor ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7539, 7541 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7540 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7541 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7541 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7541 



 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS  

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 2 — Housing 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7542 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


