




















































Hansard: March 28, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 38A  MONDAY, MARCH 28, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6909 

 March 28, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, through you and to you to the rest of the Assembly I‟d 

like to introduce a number of medical students. I think there‟s 

10 to 12 medical students that are seated in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker. They‟re the political advocacy committee from the 

Saskatchewan medical society of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I had the opportunity, as a number of my colleagues did, to 

meet with them through the Human Services Committee. I got 

to meet with them and hear some of their concerns. I know they 

met with the opposition, as well as I was able to have a quick 

chat with them in my office, Mr. Speaker. It‟s always a 

privilege to meet with some of the best and brightest in our 

province. 

 

A lot of them are first-year, some are second-year medical 

students, Mr. Speaker. And we look to forward to the day that 

they, the next number of years that they complete their medical 

school and hopefully do their residency here in Saskatchewan 

since we have a number of positions available for them, Mr. 

Speaker, and eventually will then be able to service the people 

of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the ones that I talked to are 

certainly leaning towards Saskatchewan as their first choice. 

We want to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 

with the minister on behalf of the official opposition in 

welcoming the 16 medical students from the U of S [University 

of Saskatchewan] to the Assembly today. 

 

And the minister‟s correct; we had a meeting with these 

students this morning, and it was great to hear from them. And 

it was great to hear about their future plans, and to hear about 

things that can be done here in the province to make their 

medical training more successful and their retention more 

successful over the long term, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again we thank them for being here today, and we wish them 

well for those that are travelling later on today that they have a 

safe return to their home communities. And I would ask all 

members to join me in welcoming them to the legislature. 

Thank you so much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s a pleasure for me to have 

in your gallery today a family of constituents who braved some 

sketchy road conditions on the way in. Mr. Speaker, to you and 

through you I‟d like to introduce Lorie Schlamp. She is a 

mother of three, as you can see, Mr. Speaker. She‟s with 

Austin, Nicky, and Jaci, her children. She is providing them 

home-schooling along with her husband, Bryan. They‟re from 

the community of Beverley, just west of the city of Swift 

Current and located in the constituency of Swift Current. 

 

It‟s always a pleasure to have bosses in watching all of us work 

here. Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I want to welcome 

this family, the Schlamps, to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I too want to join with other 

members in welcoming the students, the med students here 

today. We had great meetings with them this morning. 

 

I also, while I‟m on my feet, wanted to introduce a very special 

person, my son Travis who is here today. Travis is working on 

his master‟s degree in political science at the University of 

Saskatchewan, so I just wanted to welcome my son Travis here 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 

Legislative Assembly I‟d like to introduce Tracy, in your 

gallery, Tracy Goodheart and her husband, Greg, who have 

come here from Saskatoon. Tracy is my constituency assistant. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can‟t say enough about her, Mr. Speaker, 

but there is more. 

 

Tracy has deep roots not only in the Saskatoon community but 

in the labour community in the province here. Now she does all 

of this work, an enormous amount of work, but she also 

combines this with her volunteer work. And this year that‟s 

landed her an award recognized by the community in Saskatoon 

for all the things that she does. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s not a week actually that goes by in the 

office where some constituent doesn‟t come in and say how 

lucky I am to have Tracy in the office. And I can‟t say enough 

particularly so, Mr. Speaker, no better way than to say to all my 

colleagues here, to thank Tracy in front of all of you for all the 

things that she does. So I would ask all my colleagues to 

welcome Tracy and her husband to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — While I‟m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, in the 

east gallery I‟d also like to introduce Gunnar Passmore who‟s 

joined us here today, no stranger to the legislature here. 

Gunnar‟s with the building trades and a sheet metal worker, and 

we always like to see Gunnar in the gallery. And I also want to 

get all of my colleagues to welcome Gunnar to his Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to join 

with the member opposite and welcome Gunnar Passmore to his 



6910 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

Legislative Assembly. He‟s a constituent of mine. He lives in 

Sedley, Mr. Speaker. He‟s not probably a supporter of mine. 

I‟ve come to realize that, Mr. Speaker. But he lives in a 

beautiful two-storey house, right in the corner in Sedley. It‟s 

kind of a nice, kind of a lime green. But, Mr. Speaker, every 

time about this time of year it turns not such a nice colour of 

orange, Mr. Speaker. There‟s a federal election on, and I‟m sure 

it‟s going to be turning orange real soon. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition that speaks to the issue of protecting tenants 

from unreasonable rent increases through rent controls. And it 

points out that there‟s many Saskatchewan tenants have faced 

surging rent increases that are simply making living in 

Saskatchewan unaffordable. 

 

And it also recognizes that a majority of Canadians now live in 

provinces with rent control guidelines, including Manitoba, BC 

[British Columbia], Ontario, Quebec, and Prince Edward Island. 

And that rent-controlled Winnipeg generated more new rental 

units than Regina and Saskatoon from 2007 to 2009, and this is 

backed up with data from CMHC [Canada Mortgage and 

Housing Corporation] that there were fewer than 300 rental unit 

starts in Saskatchewan‟s two largest cities combined, and 

during that same period Winnipeg generated over 1,500 new 

rental units, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, specifically 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the government to 

immediately enact rent control legislation that protects 

Saskatchewan tenants from unreasonable increases in 

rent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I present these petitions from residents in Regina; 

Yorkton; Churchbridge; Moose Jaw; Saskatoon; Melfort; Star 

City; Nipawin; and Watson, Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition in 

support of maintaining quality health care services: 

 

And the petition of the undersigned citizens of the 

province humbly showeth: 

 

That the Government of Saskatchewan ought to recognize 

the need for timely access to comprehensive and quality 

health care for all communities within the province 

including Wakaw and surrounding areas; 

 

And that the disruption of emergency services and 

in-patient services at Wakaw Hospital will not serve the 

needs of the residents in this community and surrounding 

areas; 

 

And that the cuts and access to timely and accurate 

diagnostic and laboratory tests within the community of 

Wakaw and surrounding areas will not serve the needs of 

the residents; 

 

And that the Saskatoon Regional Health Authority 

budgetary reductions ought not to impede the provision of 

valuable, compassionate, and appropriate health care 

services to all citizens within a geographic boundary 

requiring acute care, community and home care, 

long-term care, and public health care; 

 

And that the Government of Saskatchewan realize that the 

utilization and value of the full range of professional 

skills offered by health care providers is promoted 

through the address of critical retention and recruitment 

issues and the ensuring safe staffing levels, and that such 

promotion can only be achieved through the commitment 

of adequate public funding to publicly administer publicly 

accessible health care. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintain quality health care 

services through the commitment of necessary funding to 

address critical retention and recruitment issues. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These signatures are from people in communities of Saskatoon, 

Moose Jaw, Swift Current, Melville, and Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I rise today to present a petition in support of 

eliminating poverty in Saskatchewan. And we know that 

freedom from poverty is an enshrined human right by the 

United Nations and that all citizens are entitled to social and 

economic security, and we know the gap between the rich and 

the poor continues to grow and one in five children in 

Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. And we also know 

that citizens living in poverty have long identified affordable 

solutions, including the Saskatoon health disparities report and 

the Canada Without Poverty, Dignity for All campaign. They 

all call for a comprehensive elimination strategy for poverty. I‟d 

like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Government of Saskatchewan act as 

quickly as possible to develop an effective and 

sustainable poverty elimination strategy for the benefit of 

all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

I do so present. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of my constituents who live in 

Hampton Village about the need for a new school for children 

in the area: 



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6911 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes including education property taxes; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to 

neighbouring communities to attend schools that are 

typically already reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition live in the 

neighbourhood of Hampton Village. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition to restore funding equity to Regina Catholic schools. 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government has changed the 

funding formula for education, and unfortunately it has left the 

Catholic school systems in Saskatchewan behind. Regina 

Catholic schools receive $275 less per pupil than Regina public 

schools, amounting to a funding inequity of $2.7 million in 

total. That funding inequity places program delivery and 

staffing levels at risk, and the Government of Saskatchewan has 

even denied Catholic school boards in the province 

representation on the government appointed committee 

mandated to develop a long-term funding formula for 

Saskatchewan‟s school boards. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to address the funding inequity between 

Regina Catholic schools and Regina public schools that 

provides $275 less per pupil funding for Regina Catholic 

school students, totalling $2.7 million, and make known 

that the continuation for another school year of funding 

inequity places program delivery and staffing levels at 

risk in Regina Catholic schools; and in so doing, 

immediately restore funding equity to ensure that every 

student in Saskatchewan, whether enrolled in a Catholic 

or public school, receives equitable resources to ensure 

every student in Saskatchewan has access to a quality 

education, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by residents all across 

Saskatchewan and specifically Birch Hills and Saskatoon. I so 

present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition on the community-based organizations worker wage 

equity. Mr. Speaker, the workers in community-based 

organizations in Saskatchewan have traditionally been 

underpaid and many continue to earn poverty-level wages. Mr. 

Speaker, the CBO [community-based organization] workers 

care for and provide valuable services to the most vulnerable 

members in our communities. These low wages that are paid to 

these workers result in a high staff turnover, and the subsequent 

lack of caregiver continuity is the result of that, Mr. Speaker. 

This negatively impacts on the quality of care the residents 

would receive. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Government of Saskatchewan to 

implement, act as quickly as possible, a multi-year 

funding plan to ensure that CBO workers achieve wage 

equity with employees who perform work of equal value 

in government ministries, agencies, and offices. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the people, residents of 

Prince Albert and Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

again today to present petitions signed by citizens of 

Saskatchewan concerned about the detrimental effects that Bill 

160 will have on human rights law in our province. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Government of Saskatchewan withdraw 

Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative Assembly 

of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public consultations 

informed by a public policy paper before any amendments 

to the Human Rights Code, the law that supersedes all 

others in our province, are even considered. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Shaunavon; Gull 

Lake; and Eastend, Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of our 

finances by the Sask Party. They allude to a record of a 

government that has tabled deficits and actually increased debt 

at a time of record highs in revenues in this province. Three 

years of adding debt, Mr. Speaker, under the Sask Party despite 

unprecedented highs in revenues — a total of $1.3 billion over 

three years, and this year alone adding $548 million of debt to 

the province‟s public books, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 



6912 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Balcarres, Saskatoon, Wapella, Whitewood, Moosomin, 

Wolseley, and Regina. I so submit. 

 

[13:45] 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Remembering the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory Fire 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

commemorate one of the worst industrial disasters in North 

American history, a tragedy that prompted many of the labour 

and safety laws we take for granted. 

 

On the afternoon of March 25th, 1911, fire broke out at the 

Triangle Shirtwaist Factory in New York city. The employees 

were mostly young immigrant women, some just teenagers who 

worked 13-hour shifts sewing ladies blouses for 13 cents an 

hour. When the fire started, they were trapped because the 

factory owners had locked them in. Mr. Speaker, 146 people 

were killed as a result. 

 

This horror galvanized the labour movement, social reformers, 

and politicians. Within a year, New York state passed new laws 

addressing sanitation, hours of work, child labour, and 

workplace injuries. New York‟s example led to change 

throughout the US [United States] and entire Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to safety. In 2010 

Saskatchewan achieved its total workplace injury rate, in 20 

years the lowest rate. We stepped up occupational health and 

safety inspections and last year initiated a record number of 

prosecutions. We acknowledge solid progress but still have 

more to do. Anniversaries of tragedies like the Triangle Factory 

fire remind us why we put so much effort into safety legislation, 

standards, and enforcement. On days like this, we renew our 

commitment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

New Democratic Party Convention 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to give 

an account to this House of the incredibly successful NDP 

[New Democratic Party] convention held this past weekend in 

Regina. Policy Eleven Saskatchewan Solutions generated so 

many positive ideas, the Sask Party had to send not one, not 

two, not three, not four, but five government staffers just to 

count all the ideas. We could tell they were a bit overwhelmed 

by all the policy talk, Mr. Speaker, being used to attending 

conventions where the number of policies debated is usually, to 

use a round figure, zero. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the newspapers report that about 680 people 

attended the convention as registered delegates. They have to 

estimate, Mr. Speaker, because they know at least one of the 

convention attendees doesn‟t appear on the delegate list. That‟s 

the member from Thunder Creek, Mr. Speaker, who drove all 

the way to Regina to comment on a convention but didn‟t pay 

the fee to officially register. 

 

We‟re not sure why, when he‟s so willing to open his mouth to 

the cameras about our convention, he was so unwilling to open 

his wallet to pay the ten fifty it cost for visiting delegates to 

attend our convention. Was it too costly for him, Mr. Speaker? 

We‟re not sure. But we do hear rumours that he‟s saving up 

every penny to buy a membership in the Saskatchewan Party 

Enterprise Club. It‟s a great club, Mr. Speaker, whose members 

get exclusive meetings with cabinet ministers. Maybe that‟s 

why the member is saving up to join the Enterprise Club, Mr. 

Speaker. After all he doesn‟t get to see his cabinet colleagues 

quite as often as he used to. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone. 

 

Team Canada Wins Silver in World Women’s Curling 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, all eyes in our province and indeed our entire country 

were glued to the TVs early yesterday morning as 

Saskatchewan‟s own, actually Kronau Curling Club‟s own 

Amber Holland rink, played in the final game of the World 

Women‟s Curling Championship in Denmark. All week we 

watched with tremendous pride as Holland led her team 

consisting of third Kim Schneider, second Tammy Schneider, 

lead Heather Kalenchuk, and fifth member Jolene Campbell, as 

well as coach Merv Fonger, do an amazing job. 

 

Throughout the week the team gained momentum, overcame 

obstacles, and played with solid determination. They won six 

out of seven must-win games to finish with a seven and four 

record and made it to a tiebreaker. In the tiebreaker game, they 

beat Switzerland 8-6. Then onto the 3-4 Page playoff game 

where they beat Denmark 10-7 and advanced to the semifinal 

where they beat China 8 to 5. And in the final game against 

Sweden, they showed remarkable composure and dignity in the 

face of some very tough challenges. The outcome was that the 

team will be bringing home the silver medal back to Canada — 

a wonderful achievement. 

 

If there was something that could go wrong in the 10th end, it 

did go wrong. It‟s a game of inches, and unfortunately Canada 

was on the wrong side of those inches. That still means, Mr. 

Speaker, we‟re extremely proud of the work that this team has 

done from the small town of Kronau to represent Saskatchewan 

and Canada so very well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Saskatchewan Housing Strategy 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

condemn this government‟s lack of a housing strategy for 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, it must have been because so many 

of the Sask Party government staffers were busy getting ready 

for the NDP convention that no one on that side of the House 

could figure out their government‟s policy on housing. A month 



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6913 

before the housing summit in Saskatoon, in the middle of a 

so-called consultation process, this minister blurts out that she 

now has a major plan for housing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s re-announced money in the paltry annual sums 

that won‟t come close to matching the government‟s beer bonus 

for off-sale owners, let alone matching the need for affordable 

housing in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the only reason she has 

200 million of those imaginary dollars to announce is that 

they‟re for the Head Start program that she announced over a 

year ago and which has yet to put a single family into an 

affordable home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there wasn‟t a word about a comprehensive 

affordable housing plan in last week‟s budget, and now this 

minister has been embarrassed into action by an NDP 

convention where affordable housing was top of the agenda. 

Mr. Speaker, people see, people see through this phony strategy 

from a government that gives more thought to putting out press 

releases than it does to putting Saskatchewan families into 

affordable homes. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Reaction to Saskatchewan Budget 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week our 

government outlined its vision for the future of Saskatchewan. 

We defined the Saskatchewan advantage of lower taxes, a better 

quality of life, a balanced budget, and reduced debt. 

 

Now since last Thursday, others have had the opportunity to 

weigh in on the Saskatchewan advantage. Robert Kavcic, the 

economist with the Bank of Montreal, said, and I quote: 

 

The province of Saskatchewan is projecting a $383 

million surplus in the General Revenue Fund in fiscal 

year 2011-2012, a rare achievement in a year that will see 

most provinces digging their way out of deficit. The 

surplus sits at $115 million or about 0.2 per cent of GDP. 

That‟s still a tall accomplishment in this challenging 

fiscal environment. 

 

FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] Chief Guy 

Lonechild said: 

 

This government has put its money where its mouth is. 

This is an opportunity for us to start doing much needed 

work to roll up our sleeves and start improving 

educational outcomes for First Nations people (including) 

early childhood development, K-12, and post-secondary 

education. 

 

Brett Fairbairn, University of Saskatchewan provost, summed 

up the Saskatchewan advantage perfectly when he told The 

StarPhoenix this budget is, I quote, “. . . a reminder of how 

lucky we are to live in Saskatchewan.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, different people of different stripes have voiced 

their opinion on the Saskatchewan advantage, yet the chorus of 

enthusiasm for the Saskatchewan advantage appears to unite the 

entire province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendments 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to talk about the 

assault on Saskatchewan‟s proud tradition of protecting human 

rights represented by the Sask Party‟s Bill 160. The Sask 

Party‟s proposed Bill would dramatically change the Human 

Rights Code, and it is an attack on universal human rights 

within this province. 

 

Amnesty International, a Nobel Peace Prize-winning body, 

defends the human rights of people around the globe. Just 

recently the president of Amnesty International Canada, Alex 

Neve, travelled to Saskatchewan to speak out against this 

flawed Bill. He wrote in one of his articles for The StarPhoenix 

on March 12, 2011: 

 

Most worrying about Bill 160 is its intention to abolish 

the Saskatchewan Human Rights Tribunal. The tribunal 

currently is responsible for hearing human rights 

complaints that cannot be resolved by the Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Commission — a model used by every 

other Canadian jurisdiction. 

 

We in this Assembly have a duty to the people of the province 

to watch out for their best interests. There is no way 

conceivable that this Bill would be in the best interests of the 

province, and the Sask Party should immediately rescind this 

Bill. The Sask Party is failing our province, our people, and the 

oath they took when they accepted their seats in the Assembly. 

As best said by Alex Neve in closing this article, “The Bill itself 

is seriously flawed and must be withdrawn.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is the hope of the NDP opposition that the Sask 

Party government does the right thing and withdraw this Bill 

160 immediately. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Fiscal Fitness 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, last week our government 

presented The Saskatchewan Advantage budget. It‟s a balanced 

plan that lowers taxes, improves government services, and 

reduces the debt, all within a balanced budget. In fact BMO 

Nesbitt Burns has declared that Saskatchewan is now Canada‟s 

most fiscally fit province. 

 

Now contrast that to the NDP‟s half-baked plan that they passed 

at their convention on the weekend. Mr. Speaker, there are over 

300 promises in the NDP‟s policy document, and not one of 

them is costed out. In fact the only numbers in their entire 

document are the page numbers. Billions of dollars of promises, 

huge tax increases, and huge deficits — that‟s the NDP plan. 

 

So today in Saskatchewan, we have a government with the most 

fiscally fit plan in Canada and an opposition that is fiscally way 

out of shape. Mr. Speaker, it‟s going to take a lot more push-ups 

to get that tired, old NDP back in shape, and real push-ups. I 

think what I saw the Leader of the Opposition doing the other 

day were NDP push-ups — the stuff that‟s supposed to be going 



6914 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

down is going up; the stuff that‟s supposed to be going up is 

going down. Just like when the NDP were in government, Mr. 

Speaker, taxes were going up, population was going down. 

 

Today everything‟s moving in the right direction. Taxes are 

going down. Debt is going down. Population‟s going down . . . 

going up. And Saskatchewan is the most fiscally fit province in 

Canada. That‟s the Saskatchewan advantage. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Supply of Physicians 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question to the Minister of Health deals with the issues that 

were raised by the medical students, first- and second-year 

medical students who were good enough in a large group to 

come here today to meet with members of the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

One of the issues that they raised was the issue and lack of 

teaching doctors or preceptors in the province of Saskatchewan. 

And as the number of seats at the University of Saskatchewan 

has increased, the number of teaching doctors has basically 

stayed the same and hasn‟t increased, and particularly in rural 

Saskatchewan where we certainly have a shortage of doctors. In 

fact the vacancy rate has increased substantially since the Sask 

Party was elected. 

 

My question to the minister is: what is his plan and when does 

he intend to implement it? We‟re in the third year, in fact, very 

close to the end of his term of office. Does he have any plan in 

place to increase the number of teaching doctors or preceptors 

in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it certainly is a privilege 

to answer the question. And I had the opportunity to meet with 

a number of the medical students here, as I have over the last 

two or three years as being the Minister of Health. Mr. Speaker, 

it‟s a real privilege to meet with them. There are more of them 

in the province today than there ever has been in the past, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and we know that with growth, we know that with 

growth there becomes . . . there are some issues, Mr. Speaker. It 

isn‟t not only when we see growth in the province, that we‟ve 

seen unprecedented growth in the province; we‟ve also seen 

growth in the medical school and the residency positions, Mr. 

Speaker. And with that, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve implemented some 

plans. More work to do. There is a distributive education model 

that‟s being implemented throughout the province. There are 

residents in Swift Current, Mr. Speaker, for the first time ever, 

Mr. Speaker, under this government. There‟s still more work to 

do. There are still more preceptors to bring on, Mr. Speaker, but 

they have increased, Mr. Speaker, as well as the students in this 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the minister‟s right about 

one thing. The growth is, though, in the number of doctor 

vacancies in this province, which now is increased by 114. The 

realization that many of the medical students have, in talking to 

residents and interns, is that the resident and intern group have 

been without a contract now for two years in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And while many of the med students, in fact the 

majority are planning to stay in the province, by the time they 

get to be interns and medical graduates and residents, over 50 

per cent now intend to leave the province. And while the 

number of seats is increasing, cost to the taxpayers is 

increasing, the percentage that are leaving the province is also 

at record numbers. In fact Saskatchewan has the worst record of 

retention of grad students from medical school of any med 

school in the country. 

 

Mr. Minister, it‟s your responsibility to recruit and retain 

doctors in this province . . . 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I‟d ask the member to place his 

question through the Speaker. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s the duty of the minister 

to recruit and retain doctors. And the best place to do that is at 

the medical school in Saskatoon, and that isn‟t being done. My 

question to the minister: when will he get a contract for our 

medical students and graduates in the province of Saskatchewan 

so our record isn‟t bottom of class? And when will it move to 

top of class in terms of retention in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 

inaccuracies in that member‟s question. Number one, medical 

students don‟t receive a contract, Mr. Speaker. They‟re medical 

students. Residents, Mr. Speaker, are the ones that we‟re 

working on on a contract with, Mr. Speaker, as we go forward, 

and I believe that a contract will be there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member is right though, when he says at 

unprecedented levels has this government increased the number 

of medical seats and increased the number of residency 

positions. Mr. Speaker, I don‟t have to go too many years back. 

In fact under their watch, Mr. Speaker, I used to say that they 

had 60 medical seats under their watch. In fact they reduced it 

through the mid-‟90s down to 55 medical seats, Mr. Speaker. 

He starts talking about vacancies in this province right now, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s because they never trained enough . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The minister may finalize his 

comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, if they‟re talking about a 

shortage of physicians right now or more vacancies, our 

government has attracted 228 more doctors since we‟ve become 

government, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s in spite of the fact that 

they reduced the College of Medicine down to 55 students on 

their watch, Mr. Speaker. 

 



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6915 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the fact is that today there 

are 114 doctor vacancies in the province of Saskatchewan. 

That‟s up massively since this government was elected in 2007, 

and that‟s a new record if he wants to talk about records. 

 

The fact of the matter is, the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, 

that retention of doctors and recruitment is a huge issue. We are 

now graduating a number of doctors, a large number of doctor, 

50 per cent who plan to leave the province. That‟s not a very 

good record or a record this government should be proud of. 

 

My question to the minister or to the Premier: what are you 

going to do to retain doctors and to attract young, qualified 

Saskatchewan resident doctors to stay in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, in the old Saskatchewan 

we had 60 residency positions. Mr. Speaker, under this 

government we‟ve increased that. We‟ve doubled it to 120. 

There are residency positions for every medical student from 

Saskatchewan that wants to accept those, Mr. Speaker. If they 

choose to go out, that‟s, Mr. Speaker, their choice. But for once 

we have enough residency positions, more residency positions 

than we have students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we go back to the old Saskatchewan under the 

NDP, Mr. Speaker, the College of Medicine was under 

probation . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I find it somewhat ironic 

that the members who are asking the questions are creating a 

difficulty for the individuals who would like to hear the answer, 

to hear the answer. I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the answer isn‟t what 

they want to hear, that the College of Medicine was under 

probation under their government . . . [inaudible] . . . Mr. 

Speaker, we were in threat of losing the College of Medicine 

completely here in Saskatchewan under their watch, Mr. 

Speaker. That will never happen again, Mr. Speaker. Under our 

watch, we‟ve increased the number of medical seats. We‟re 

increasing the number of residency positions, Mr. Speaker. And 

as a result, we‟re increasing the number of physicians working 

in this province, year over year. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

College Merger 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister for Advanced 

Education has claimed that it is his desire to depoliticize the 

post-secondary education system in our province. Yet we know 

this is the same minister who funnelled millions and millions of 

dollars, of taxpayers‟ dollars, to St. Peter‟s College and Carlton 

Trail Regional College in order to grease the wheels for his pet 

merger project. 

 

To the minister: how many taxpayers‟ dollars did he pour into 

his pet merger project? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for 

an opportunity to talk about post-secondary education in the 

province of Saskatchewan. As recently written in the Canadian 

University Guide, 2011 edition, and I quote, “There has never 

been a better time to consider Saskatchewan as a place to attain 

a great post-secondary education,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, regarding the proposed merger, the member 

opposite knows that those talks began even before the last 

provincial election. Mr. Speaker, a proposal was submitted last 

June, Mr. Speaker. We submitted that, we submitted that, Mr. 

Speaker, to an independent process. That independent process 

came back with a recommendation. The recommendation: don‟t 

go forward with the proposed merger. We came forward and 

made that the decision. 

 

They also had some questions, Mr. Speaker; Mr. Speaker, at 

this point a number of questions. But today I‟m happy to report 

that some of those questions are being cleared up. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, what we see is that $273,000 sits today in an account 

at Carlton Trail, Mr. Speaker. Day by day we‟ll report on every 

dollar for taxpayers. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Day by day, Mr. Speaker, coming from the 

minister, Mr. Speaker, who‟s had his fingerprints over this mess 

from the very beginning . . . The problems, Mr. Speaker, 

originate with this minister, and no one in this province believes 

that he‟s up to the job of getting to the bottom of the mess. 

 

The minister funnelled over $9 million infrastructure funding to 

St. Peter‟s. That amounts to over $60,000 per student. By 

comparison the minister gave just $1,300 per student to SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology], 

which is in desperate need of infrastructure funding so bad that 

the board went rogue in an attempt to secure additional 

property. Sixty thousand per student for a private institution that 

was attempting to take over a public institution, but just $1,300, 

$1,300 for SIAST. It‟s obvious that the minister was greasing 

the wheels for this merger with taxpayers‟ dollars. 

 

To the minister: how can people have confidence in his handing 

of the post-secondary education system when he chose to funnel 

over $60,000 per student into his pet merger project while 

largely ignoring the needs of institutions like SIAST? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite‟s 

probably going to have to go back and do a little bit of 

homework here because, Mr. Speaker, he‟s making reference to 

the knowledge infrastructure program. Mr. Speaker, this was 

about $117 million, $117 million spread over 20 projects, Mr. 

Speaker, and that included contributions from the province and 



6916 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

the federal government. Mr. Speaker, the dollars that he just 

referred to as being provincial dollars actually are federal and 

provincial and, Mr. Speaker, 6 million of those were actually 

federal dollars, Mr. Speaker. Is he suggesting that we wouldn‟t 

accept, Mr. Speaker, federal dollars for post-secondary students 

in this province? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we work co-operatively with the federal 

government. The knowledge infrastructure project is one key 

example of where post-secondary students across the province 

benefited from this partnership. Mr. Speaker, more than $117 

million for post-secondary students spread right across the 

province, Mr. Speaker, in an attempt to make up for the 

infrastructure deficit that all of us inherited from the members 

opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can talk to me like 

I‟m stupid, but I‟m not, and neither are the people of 

Saskatchewan. This is the exact same tone the minister took in 

committee a year ago. This is the exact same tone the minister 

took when concerns were raised in this Assembly on other 

occasions. It will not serve him well. Mr. Minister, you need to 

do a better job. 

 

KIP [knowledge infrastructure program] dollars included both 

federal and provincial funding, but it was allocated based on 

what the provincial government wanted. Everyone knows the 

decisions went through the minister‟s office. And it‟s clear that 

this minister wanted his legacy to be this merger project. No 

other institution in all of Canada received more KIP funding per 

student than St. Peter‟s. The minister delivered just $1,400 per 

student for the University of Regina, 1,350 for the U of S, and 

$1,300 for SIAST, but he funnelled more than $60,000 per 

student to St. Peter‟s. 

 

To the minister: he‟s been dragging his heels on a full 

investigation, a forensic audit that needs to occur immediately. 

To the minister: why is he dragging his feet on a forensic audit? 

Is he afraid of what will be found out? Does he know of things 

that occurred that were improper? Why does he not call for a 

forensic audit today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, there have been ongoing 

dialogue and discussions with the Provincial Auditor, Mr. 

Speaker. And I‟m happy to report today that the Provincial 

Auditor has concurred that a financial audit of St. Peter‟s 

College should occur immediately. In fact we have written 

confirmation of co-operation from St. Peter‟s College. And, Mr. 

Speaker, what we have from the Provincial Auditor is that he 

has said the securing of a public accounting firm to do this audit 

is appropriate and sufficient and may in fact be more timely 

than having his office actually undertake this audit, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Regarding the notion of federalism, Mr. Speaker, what‟s vitally 

important here when we think about the KIP initiative, Mr. 

Speaker, and that is, the institutions — and this is important for 

the public record — the institutions were asked by the federal 

government to submit their application directly to them, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we worked co-operatively with the 

federal government to ensure that we could maximize those 

dollars here in Saskatchewan to the benefit of post-secondary 

students right here in the province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Oh, he maximized dollars for his pet project, 

$60,000 per student; when it comes to SIAST, $1,300. A bit of 

an imbalance there, Mr. Speaker. The minister didn‟t just dump 

millions into the merging colleges in July 2009, he also poured 

money in five months earlier as part of a $26 million 

announcement. This was all part of his grand plan, Mr. Speaker. 

He appointed a merger-friendly board. He approved a joint 

CEO [chief executive officer]. He had a representative on the 

transition board and he ignored concerns and plowed straight 

ahead. 

 

Now we have a merger that has failed, seven people that have 

been fired, accusations that abound, and a minister that won‟t 

take responsibility for his actions. The people of Saskatchewan 

do not have confidence in this minister to oversee the 

post-secondary education system in the province. Curious that 

in his comments, Mr. Speaker, he does not talk about timelines 

for this forensic audit that is to occur at St. Peter‟s. Will the 

minister clearly state the timelines for this forensic audit and 

when the results will be revealed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — As we‟ve said, Mr. Speaker, we feel that 

this should be done in a timely fashion. We have agreed that 

they have our full co-operation, Mr. Speaker, our full 

co-operation. 

 

But as far as a grand plan, Mr. Speaker, as far as a grand plan, 

there was a grand plan, and that grand plan was to make sure 

that medical students in the province of Saskatchewan didn‟t 

see their college on probation and that the rest of the people of 

this province didn‟t lose the College of Medicine, Mr. Speaker. 

That‟s why, in addition to moving forward with new residency 

seats and with moving forward with new doctor seats and new 

nursing seats, Mr. Speaker, we‟re actually seeing real 

construction, Mr. Speaker, on the College of Medicine to ensure 

that never again does it fall into the disrepair that the NDP 

allowed it to. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I had 

delivered to the Minister of Justice a letter giving him notice of 

questions I was going to ask today concerning administration of 

justice in the province. I would‟ve just sent an email but we 

know that that can take months to get to a cabinet minister. 

 

So my first question‟s to the Minister of Justice: has he received 

one or two or more referrals from the Minister of Advanced 

Education regarding the Carlton Trail merger? When did he 



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6917 

receive them? And what matters were referred to him? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for 

the opportunity to answer the question. And I‟d like to thank the 

member opposite for providing us with a written list of the 

questions, and I‟m hoping that that‟s something that his 

colleagues over there will fall in line with. I think it‟s a nice 

practice, and we appreciate the accommodation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite is aware, the Ministry of 

Justice provides legal services to all other aspects of 

government. Every ministry has got legal counsel assigned to it 

to assist them in matters that they have. 

 

The Ministry of Advanced Education contracted with Meyers 

Norris Penny to prepare a report on the feasibility of a merger 

between Carlton Trail and St. Peter‟s College. Mr. Speaker, I 

can advise the members opposite that that report or the 

information that was requested was directly from Meyers Norris 

Penny to Ministry of Justice lawyers. It did not flow through 

my hands, nor did it flow through the hands of the Minister 

Responsible for Advanced Education, Employment and 

Immigration. Mr. Speaker, I don‟t how many pieces of 

correspondence went through, but I understand the 

correspondence is continuing to flow back and forth at the 

present time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, another lesson in what 

this government considers to be ministerial responsibility for 

their departments. 

 

Second question to the Minister of Justice: Mr. Kobussen 

appeared eligible in 2010 to receive a tax credit of $558 on a 

$1,000 donation paid in 2009, with public money, to the 

Saskatchewan Party. Is this one of the matters that has been 

referred to the Minister of Justice by the Minister of Advanced 

Education? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the member 

opposite that nothing was referred to by the minister. The 

officials within his ministry may have forwarded information; 

so has Meyers Norris Penny. And as well, information could 

have been provided or requested from Deloitte who is involved 

in this matter as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I can advise the members opposite was that 

in September of 2009, Mr. Kobussen forwarded a cheque for a 

membership in the Enterprise Club for the year 2010. Because 

this is a membership in a club, there‟s a progressive amount 

that‟s available because some of it is for meals; some of it is for 

the membership cost; some of it is a donation. The receipt for 

that was issued to Mr. Kobussen in early 2011, as it would in 

the ordinary and usual course of any other member of the 

membership club. 

Mr. Speaker, it has become apparent that the monies came from 

another party. The monies have in fact been returned by the 

Saskatchewan Party to St. Peter‟s College. Mr. Speaker, we 

have as well advised Mr. Kobussen he cannot use that tax 

receipt. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Justice: there 

is a donation to a political party that is made with public 

dollars; there may be a tax credit paid to an individual on at 

least one donation to a political party that was made with public 

dollars; and there are allegations of double charging for 

mileage, a 52-inch TV purchased by St. Peter‟s that is 

unaccounted for, and a $60,000 increase in Carlton Trail‟s 

operating grant going to St. Peter‟s without proper 

documentation. 

 

In light of a donation to the governing party with public funds, 

the eligibility for a tax credit which is not yet accounted for, and 

the political nature of all these issues, will the matters referred 

to the Minister of Justice be reviewed by Crown prosecutors 

from outside the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the matter is under 

investigation by the various parties that are involved in this. If 

there is any issue that there is any potential misconduct by any 

member of this government or anybody that‟s closely tied to 

this government, this will absolutely be referred out of the 

province, as it would have been by that member opposite when 

he was the minister. And I believe that was his practice and it 

will be the practice of this government, to ensure that things are 

investigated in a clear, open, and transparent manner, Mr. 

Speaker. That is absolutely the practice of this government and 

will continue to be so, Mr. Speaker. And I would expect 

nothing less from the members opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Housing Announcement 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 

know, I‟d like to read from a press release that‟s dated March 

24, 2011, and it reads: “The government announced today a 

new program called „Headstart on a Home‟ to help . . .” Sorry, 

Mr. Speaker, this is actually from March 24, 2010. Sorry, Mr. 

Speaker. Well here we are, March 28, 2011 — 2011, a year 

later — and it quotes the minister as saying, these five new, five 

new measures will help the housing shortage. The first of the 

new measures is the Headstart on a Home. 

 

To the minister: why announce these earth-shaking new 

projects after the budget, when you didn‟t even put enough 

money in the budget in the first place? Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m very pleased to rise in 



6918 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

the House today to talk about the Headstart program and the 

other five initiatives that we talked about today. Mr. Speaker, 

Headstart has been discussed with the federal government for 

just about a year now to make sure that we meet all the 

regulations and that we can agree on a program that will work. 

 

Today as the government, we announced $252 million for home 

ownership and rental property. This is going to get 4,600 . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. If the members want to lose the 

time of question period, continue to interfere with the minister‟s 

response. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the money that we 

announced today, the $252 million, will allow 4,600 new 

homeowners . . . [inaudible] . . . Mr. Speaker, the $200 million 

that we‟re talking about came from the Immigrant Investor 

Fund. And they talked about it over a year ago. We‟ve been 

making arrangements with the federal government and today 

we‟re announcing it. And I can assure you people in this 

province are delighted. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — You know, Mr. Speaker, consultation is a 

quirky thing for this government. We saw last year the wildlife 

habitat fiasco, and the minister lost her job over that. And here 

we‟re in the middle of stakeholder consultations, and now we 

have a document in hand which promises a snake oil cure to 

everything that ails the housing crisis here in Saskatchewan. 

 

To the minister: why waste the time of stakeholders and the 

people that have been invited to the summit when it‟s obvious 

she thinks she has all the answers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the number of 

people that have been going to the consultation meetings right 

across the province are very encouraged by the fact that not 

only do they have a voice there and at the summit, but there is a 

long-term plan that we‟ll have in place at the end of June. 

 

But in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, we have five initiatives that 

we know will be helping the people of the province. We have 

Headstart on a Home. That will mean 1,000 new units, and it‟s 

going to be $200 million. We have the affordable home 

ownership, which will be 600 units, which is about $3 million. 

We have the rental construction initiative, which is another 

2,900 units. We have $34 million in money that was announced 

through Sask Housing and more money for Habitat for 

Humanity. All those initiatives can work in with the plan that 

we have as government, part of the long-term plan, and we‟re 

looking forward to talking to the municipalities about it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 

Speaker, the issue we‟re debating today is all about how people 

are going to make ends meet. And you know, as we approach 

the end of this month, people are thinking, how are they going 

to pay the rent? How are they putting gas in their tanks? And all 

these issues about food going up on April 1st, they‟re all 

coming together. That‟s what we‟re really talking about. 

 

So I want to ask this minister: when will she drop the 

government, the party line, and develop a real housing strategy 

that includes next generation rent controls? Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I knew the member 

opposite would get around to the word of rent control. There is 

nobody except the 20 members opposite that believe that‟s 

going to work. What has to work is making sure that we have 

new housing units. We now have 112 . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — We know that what we need is to 

increase the number of units we have in the province. That‟s 

why we‟re working with municipalities and developers and 

with city councils. I had an opportunity this morning to talk 

about it, and there was an absolute delight knowing that the 

government could look at their responsibility on the housing 

continuum and do some work. At the same time, we must work 

with our stakeholders to make sure that there are housing 

developments right across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s more work to be done. This is part of the 

plan. There is more of a plan out there when we develop it with 

the stakeholders, and I‟ll be delighted to announce that plan at 

the end of June. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Housing Plan 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise in the 

House today to introduce a plan that will take our government 

another step . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I‟d ask the members to 

come to order. And I believe the minister didn‟t even have a 

chance to let us know what her ministerial statement was. And 

there was an announcement this morning that I‟m aware of, so I 

recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very 

pleased to rise in the House today to introduce the plan that will 



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6919 

take our government another step down the road to overcoming 

the challenges in housing. The Saskatchewan advantage 

housing plan is a five-point action plan that will help create a 

housing market that matches the demands of a growing 

economy and a growing population. It builds on our 

government‟s actions since November of 2007, and it will 

complement our discussions with stakeholders in the industry 

and how we go forward in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our province is projected by most major economic 

forecasters to lead the nation in growth over the next two years. 

This growth gives our province a distinct Saskatchewan 

advantage. We also know that with growth comes challenges. 

Fortunately, Mr. Speaker, we can afford to make significant 

investments where we know the need is the greatest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the five housing initiatives outlined in the 

Saskatchewan advantage housing plan will add over 4,600 new 

housing units over the next five years in entry-level and rental 

housing. The first program with the details is called Headstart 

on a Home. Headstart will help eligible first-time home buyers 

achieve home ownership, thereby making more rental housing 

stock available across . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I‟d ask the member to state his 

point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I have in my hand today a press 

release dated March 24th, 2010 in which this program was 

announced over one year ago. Mr. Speaker, in order to be a 

ministerial statement, it has to have been relevant and it has to 

have been this the first opportunity to raise in the House. Mr. 

Speaker, I can provide you with the government‟s news release, 

Mr. Speaker, of over one year ago. This is abuse of ministerial 

responsibility, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize . . . Order. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the minister has risen today to outline and put in specifics as to 

what the new housing strategy is, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the program name is similar to the one from last year, 

but the details are completely new. All of the projects, Mr. 

Speaker, that the minister has announced this morning and is 

trying to announce to this House at present time, Mr. Speaker, 

are new projects, new programs for the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I‟ve listened to the point of 

order. I‟ve listened to the response from the Government House 

Leader. I‟ve also heard about the announcement that was made 

this morning. I believe the minister has the responsibility or the 

opportunity to make her ministerial statement. I will review the 

point of order for the details and specifics. 

 

Minister of Social Services. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Housing Plan 

(continued) 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Headstart will help eligible 

first-time home buyers achieve home ownership, thereby 

making more rental housing available across the province. At 

least 1,000 new entry-level homes will be built in Saskatchewan 

over the next five years. As part of this program, and the details 

I am announcing right now, loans will be provided to 

developers for 90 per cent of construction costs for the 

construction of new or redeveloped housing projects. This is 

almost 200 million over five years will be made available for 

these low-interest loans. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second part of our plan is the affordable home 

ownership plan. This program will engage municipalities and 

prospective homeowners to provide another avenue for 

increasing the supply of entry-level home ownership 

opportunities. The province will reimburse participating 

municipalities an amount equivalent to the education portion of 

property tax for five years to a maximum of $5,000. Over five 

years, it is expected that this program will be able to deliver 600 

home ownership opportunities in municipalities right across the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the third program applies to rental construction. 

The rental construction incentive is designed to help 

municipalities and developers create new rental home units and 

increase the opportunities for low-income people to find safe 

and affordable housing. This . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I 

recognize the Minister Responsible for Social Services. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the rental construction 

incentive is designed to help municipalities and developers 

create new rental home units and increase the opportunities for 

low-income people to find safe, affordable housing. This 

program provides participating municipalities a provincial grant 

of up to $5,000 to match municipal grants or incentives for 

developers for each eligible new rental unit constructed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the five years of this program, it is expected 

to yield approximately 2,900 new rental units. Mr. Speaker, to 

complete the rental construction incentive, our government has 

invested 34 million to develop more affordable housing units. 

This money will support new units in communities with 

long-term housing needs. In addition, some of it is earmarked 

for rehabilitating homes and rental units that otherwise would 

have been lost. Mr. Speaker, we are renewing and expanding 

our partnership with Habitat for Humanity. Over the last two 

years, the province has provided $2 million to help . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Someone‟s speaking about . . . 

Order. I hear someone speaking about a mockery of this place. 



6920 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

Well I think members themselves are the ones who police it, 

and the opposition has been continually interfering and not 

allowing the minister to make her ministerial statement. The 

opposition will have the opportunity to respond to that 

statement. 

 

I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, over the last two years the 

province has provided $2 million to help Habitat for Humanity 

assist 40 families to achieve the dream of home ownership. 

During that time, cities across the province have benefited from 

the investment. There‟s new homes either built or being built in 

places like Saskatoon, Regina, Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, 

Lloydminster, and Yorkton. 

 

This year our government is expanding its commitment. A total 

of $1.5 million will be provided to give another 30 families the 

opportunity to build a better future by literally helping them 

build their own home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this five-point plan is only part of our efforts. We 

are currently conducting extensive consultations with 

stakeholders right across the province. These consultations will 

be used to create a comprehensive, longer term strategy for 

housing. Mr. Speaker, this is exactly what the Saskatchewan 

advantage is made of — having a government that works hard 

to overcome the obstacles to growth and having citizens who 

aren‟t afraid of a challenge. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the embarrassment 

continues for this government, for something that was thrown 

together obviously over the weekend. And we take a look at this 

propaganda that was coming out last week, not a mention of 

this, not a mention at all in this brochure that was coming out 

from the government. Not a word, not a word and all of a 

sudden they realize, they realize that they missed it. They 

missed it. 

 

This is like déjà vu all over again from 2008 when we had the 

Merriman-Pringle report the day before, the day before the 

budget that year when they realized they hadn‟t done a thing 

about housing in the budget and they needed to do something. 

So the day before the budget they called together this 

consultation process with Mr. Merriman and Mr. Pringle to put 

something together to get them out of a jam because once again 

they are in a jam. 

 

And ironically, like déjà vu all over again, they‟re going to 

release at the end of June, they are going to release at the end of 

June that year. They‟re going to do the same thing this year. 

This is when we were expecting . . . And look at the minister‟s 

outrage. And we see this game over and over and over and over 

again. 

 

We saw it last December with the child welfare review. It 

should have been released during the session but it was released 

the week before Christmas, the week before Christmas. I cannot 

believe this. This is an embarrassment, an embarrassment for 

this minister and for this government. 

You know, I asked the questions about consultations, about how 

this government performs their consultations. They go out and 

they get their stakeholders together and they say we really want 

to hear what you say. We really want to hear what you say but 

not really, not really, not really, you know, because we hear the 

consultation . . . the pre-consultation meetings are tomorrow in 

Swift Current, the city with the longest waiting lists for Sask 

Housing, the city with the longest waiting list. They‟re not 

waiting, they‟re not waiting to hear what the folks in Swift 

Current have to say. 

 

And, you know, while I have the floor, Mr. Speaker, you know, 

I have to remark about how this minister has politicized things. 

You know, I was disinvited. I got a phone call from Sask 

Housing a couple of Fridays ago to say — now they used my 

name, but I‟ll say the MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] from Saskatoon Centre — we don‟t really want to 

see you come to the meeting in Saskatoon. We really don‟t 

want to see you come to the meeting. 

 

You know, this government used to be open and transparent, 

used to be open and transparent, but I‟ve never had a phone call 

from the government saying please don‟t come, we don‟t think 

we‟d like to see you there. And I think it‟s that minister there, 

that minister who‟s pulling the strings. 

 

You know when they did the big thing about the CBO summit, 

when they did the big thing about the CBO summits, I was 

welcome. I was welcome and I was introduced at every one. 

And the minister . . . or the member from Yorkton will know 

that, he was a legislative secretary for the CBO summit. He 

knew why I came and it worked out really well. 

 

But this minister decided to politicize this and say don‟t come, 

no MLAs coming. And particularly the member from Saskatoon 

Centre, we don‟t want to see you there. We don‟t want to see 

you there. In fact, we really don‟t care if anybody comes 

because we got our mind made up. We got our mind made up or 

where our mind‟s made up is that we‟re not going to be 

embarrassed. But I got to tell you, people can see through this 

really quickly, really quickly. 

 

The math is something else — $250 million? How does that add 

up? How does that really add up? You know? That‟s incredible 

because we know that 200 million is . . . Apparently this 

program, Headstart, and today she‟s saying it‟s brand new, 

brand new, but it‟s not. The former minister announced a year 

ago and said that we‟d hear in a few . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I‟ve been listening very 

closely and the member has been fairly wide- and 

broad-ranging in his comments. But also, also, also . . . Order. 

Order. The members are also aware, and a number of the 

members on the opposition side were in government when the 

rules were changed. And the rules were, it was brought to 

member‟s attention that the response was to be no longer than 

the ministerial statement. The ministerial statement was three 

minutes and fifty-five seconds. We‟re now at four, thirteen. 

Three minutes, fifty-five; we‟re now at four, thirteen. 

 

We‟ll move on to the next order of business. Order. Why is the 



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6921 

member from Saskatoon Massey Place on his feet? 

 

Mr. Broten: — To ask leave to move a motion under Rule 59. 

 

The Speaker: — The member may state his arguments to ask 

leave for under rule 59. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 

Audit of Colleges 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In light of the 

comments made by the minister that a forensic audit of St. 

Peter‟s College and Carlton Trail Regional College is 

completely appropriate, but given the fact that the minister 

provided no details with respect to mandate and no details with 

respect to timeline to ensure that the findings are reported in a 

timely manner, I move the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly mandate the Provincial Auditor to 

immediately conduct a special investigation and forensic 

audit of the governance, financial management, and 

leadership of Carlton Trail Regional College and St. 

Peter‟s College for the period covering January 1, 2009 to 

present; direct the government to provide the auditor 

sufficient resources and authority to complete the 

investigation and audit and table a report with this 

Assembly no later than May 12, 2011; and further to 

accomplish these goals, empower the Provincial Auditor 

to extend his investigation to the Ministry of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration, the office of 

the minister and to the minister himself, the Member of 

the Legislative Assembly for Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

With that motion, Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to move a 

motion under rule 59. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has not been granted. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 898 through 950. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 898 through 950 are tabled. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well yet again 

it‟s a pleasure to stand up in this Assembly to take part in the 

budget debate, another historic budget by the Saskatchewan 

Party government. 

 

But as always, before I begin, I want to take some time to 

extend my gratitude and my thanks to my lovely wife, 

Charlene, and our daughters Alyssa and Mackenzie who are 

without a father most of the time because of my responsibility 

as an MLA and as a minister. And you know, she keeps my 

family in check and makes sure the girls get to volleyball 

practice and to basketball and to other things. She‟s a very 

strong lady who is always there to ensure that the girls have a 

strong parent at home and a presence. And when I come home, 

I‟m always told I shouldn‟t mess up with the rules, everything‟s 

functioning well. Just come in, do my thing, and go back to 

Regina and work. And that‟s how we seem to get along. So I 

want to thank her and my girls for supporting me all throughout 

this adventure. 

 

This is an adventure, Mr. Speaker, because every year as we see 

what happens in our province — the changing population 

numbers, the amount of foreign investment, the economic 

indicators always showing that we are either leading or in 

second place, or will lead in the future — it‟s great to be in this 

province at this time.  

 

I look to my daughters for their future. I think that everyone of 

us on either side of the House will acknowledge the fact that we 

did this, we get involved, we do this job to leave this province 

hopefully better than when we found it, especially when we 

have the privilege to form on the government side and to bring 

policies in place and to put together historic budgets year after 

year that are showing a debt reduction, lowering taxes, and 

improving the quality of life for all the people in this province. 

So that‟s an important factor when we this year name this the 

Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s one of these kind of budgets where if 

you look at the minutiae of the budget, the details, the fine 

details across this great province of ours, everybody will benefit 

from this budget, Mr. Speaker. We talk first of all about the 

lowering of taxes, where we see a family of four now has to 

make $45,550 before they‟re having tax implications on their 

dollars earned, which means more taxes saved, which means 

more dollars in their pocket, which means more dollars for them 

to spend on their families, their children, their personal 

recreation, or to purchase goods and services in the province. 

And the cycle continues again, Mr. Speaker, where the 

Saskatchewan advantage is at play where people are earning 

more income as well now. And that‟s a strong signal going 

forward where we‟ve seen our population increase over the last 

four years where now we‟re at the record high of just over 1.05 

million. So that‟s the highest it‟s been ever in this province. 



6922 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that what I would like to do is talk about 

some of the other advantages of The Saskatchewan Advantage 

budget, the fact that it‟s balanced yet again on the summary and 

the General Revenue Fund, Mr. Speaker. So that‟s another 

important . . . moving forward. 

 

I look again at my daughters and how this government and how 

our Premier and how our Finance minister has taken us now — 

and the previous Finance minister, the member from Melfort 

who did a great job in letting this province reach its potential 

where we are today — but I look at my daughters‟ future and 

think that our best days are still ahead, Mr. Speaker. It‟s 

because of their commitment that they want to stay in the 

province. They want to take post-secondary education in our 

province. They may travel a bit. They want to come home and 

they want to start their families here and that‟s always a 

positive. And it‟s one of those things we‟re seeing more people 

do that, Mr. Speaker, where more people want to stay in this 

province or want to return. And that‟s important. 

 

We‟re bringing immigrants in like no other time before to fill 

jobs that have been posted for a number of months, but the 

expertise is around the world. And I want to give credit to the 

minister involved with immigration because of his work and the 

work of his ministry, that we‟re seeing barriers reducing the 

time lag to get into the province to work. 

 

Great relationships with the industrial sector, with the business 

sector in our province who are finding that internally there are 

people, to be sure, for these jobs, but they‟re also finding 

expertise and skill sets outside of the province. It‟s great to have 

those new citizens not just in our country but our province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The next factor I want to talk about is, because of the fact we‟ve 

been able to keep our promises as a government, we have now 

fulfilled the one point of PST [provincial sales tax] and revenue 

sharing to all of the municipalities through the rural, urban, and 

the village sector, resort villages, and the North as well, Mr. 

Speaker. And that‟s an important staple now because these 

leaders can now see this guaranteed funding coming to them. 

And as I stated to the sector on the day of the budget, if 

projections remain the same, because of the growth in the 

province and the PST numbers increasing, there is a very, very 

strong likelihood that we will see those numbers again increase 

for the municipalities and across this province so they can 

guarantee on more revenue sharing next year, Mr. Speaker, to 

be shared amongst the pools. So that‟s one of those factors 

where, as we see our municipal sectors, our partners 

establishing budgets now, we‟re seeing that that one point of 

PST is allowing them across the province to keep their taxes 

low. 

 

[14:45] 

 

They do see a need for some other tax increases. And in my city 

of Prince Albert, it‟s deemed to be, what would be a reasonable 

tax increase to address concerns they have because their 

population‟s growing? Their infrastructure demands are higher 

than they ever were before in this province, and they‟re using 

some of those infrastructure . . . the revenue-sharing dollars to 

offset those costs to the tax base. I know my city manager and 

my mayor have talked about that, and they‟re very happy with 

the increase to $6.4 million this year, Mr. Speaker. So that‟s 

great that I‟m able to provide that to my city but also to have 

the honour and privilege to be minister and serve the Crown and 

serve the people and to provide those revenue-sharing dollars 

across the province. 

 

The education portion of property tax was a promise that we 

made, and we‟ve kept it now, Mr. Speaker, in this budget. 

We‟re seeing the agriculture sector seeing an 80 per cent 

reduction. We‟re seeing residential reductions by 29 per cent. 

And the commercial base has also seen reductions as well in 

this, what I believe is a historic way to look at how we‟re going 

to fund education moving forward, Mr. Speaker. And on those 

notes, we‟ve heard from the representation from the SUMA 

[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] and SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] sector that 

they‟re very happy with the revenue-sharing piece but the 

education portion of property tax piece as well. It‟s one of those 

promises we made, and now we‟ve kept it in this budget, Mr. 

Speaker, fully. 

 

I think it‟s the time that I start talking a little more about the 

budget implications for my city. I think it‟s been great that, as a 

previous minister in charge of Policing and now with the new 

minister in charge of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing, 

we see the fulfillment of our 120 police officers as made as a 

promise in our election campaign platform. 

 

What‟s important that I recognize that, you know, over the 

years the previous government tried. They kept making the 

promise year after year and through two election cycles. But I 

had the honour of being on the provincial board of Federation 

of Police Officers, and I was able to find out that, through 

research, that sadly they were unable to keep their commitment 

to the people of this province. 

 

So as a government forming a campaign platform, the promise 

of 120 new police officers was one of those kind of 

commitments that was critical, as we saw and we believed the 

province would grow in population. We also recognized that 

there was a demand placed on the police agencies, local and 

RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police], to ensure that we 

have a quality of life that also ensures prevention of crime, 

apprehension of criminals, and safety in general for our people. 

And in this budget we are making that commitment of 120 

police officers. 

 

So I‟m sure that my city will see more additional police 

officers. To date we‟ve funded 11 police officers under the 

Saskatchewan Party government, which is a lot larger number 

than were ever funded by the NDP government, Mr. Speaker. 

And those are targeted at specific units that are in fact making a 

difference not just in Prince Albert but the North as well. 

 

As some members will recall, I had the honour of introducing 

my chief, Chief McFee from Prince Albert Police Service. And 

he‟s got a vision. He‟s been a leader since his days on patrol, 

Mr. Speaker. And he‟s been able to develop a good relationship 

with the RCMP officers in and around Prince Albert, and 

they‟re doing a lot of joint task force missions and operations 

together. So I want to thank the Minister of Policing for his 

promise this year to maintain that commitment of 120 full 

officers in this year‟s budget. 



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6923 

The next critical piece I want to talk about is education. As a 

government we were able to fund numerous small infrastructure 

pieces, capital improvement projects in Prince Albert and area, 

roof replacements and other such things. We were also able to 

fund St. Anne School. So that completion of that project, I 

understand, will be coming forth here in the next couple of 

months, with students arriving within or I think before the 

school year is finished. So I know that‟s a critical piece for the 

West Hill area of town to have a brand new school. And a 

school, Mr. Speaker, that although promised and talked about 

by the previous government for many years, they never cut the 

cheque. For whatever reason, never cut the cheque. And we‟re 

able to do that as a new government, and we‟re seeing that 

school come to fruition. 

 

And I‟m also able in this budget to talk about the Carlton High 

School that my daughters attend. They‟ve been asking for 

another gymnasium because they have the largest student 

population enrolment in the province for a high school. And in 

this year‟s budget we‟re able to provide money for that project 

to go forward, so that‟s excellent. 

 

I‟ve been blessed because my daughters have played high 

school sports at a very high level, and I know there‟s lots of 

students in Carlton High School that . . . The teachers need to 

be acknowledged and the extra-curriculatory coaches, because 

no student is turned away from a sporting opportunity at 

Carlton High School. But this new gym will give more 

opportunity for more students to play more often, which is 

important, as opposed to maybe doing some of the activities 

over lunch hour and maybe in the evenings for practices. It‟ll be 

one of those facilities that‟s long overdue, and I‟m very proud 

that our government‟s been able to bring that to Prince Albert. 

 

You know, the next thing I want to talk about in the province, 

Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the last three and a half years 

moving into this budget cycle, was level of foreign investment. 

Our Premier said many times after the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan-BHP takeover scenario, story, that the province 

is still open for foreign investment. 

 

And what we saw in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, is a dormant 

pulp mill that was closed for a number of years, but more 

recently three foreign companies were bidding on that site, Mr. 

Speaker. And we have a successful bidder of Paper Excellence 

with foreign ownership, subsequent to the fact that they have a 

Canadian office. But we‟re seeing that that‟s critical because we 

have no taxpayers‟ dollars at risk on that venture, Mr. Speaker. 

So that‟s also going to be one of those cases moving forward 

where we get to actually see an operation that should have been 

looked at many years ago with power generation on-site sold 

back to the grid, Mr. Speaker, which is in great demand. 

 

Our province has a booming population. The industrial sector 

requires more power on grid as well, and I say we‟re able to, 

again through the Minister Responsible for SaskPower, to take 

a leadership role with the Minister of Energy and Resources to 

ensure that we had the right people at the table at the right time 

to ensure that when a deal was made that it wouldn‟t be 

mothballed. It didn‟t involve taxpayers‟ dollars to be wasted on 

a potential investment. And we‟re providing a service now to 

the province that‟s long overdue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know the people of Prince Albert are very happy that the mill 

will be opened. And I met with the CEO, Mr. Roste, last week 

in Prince Albert and he was very happy to report that they‟re 

looking at hiring people immediately to fulfill some 

management positions because they want to get the operation 

up and running sooner than later. And that‟s positive. 

 

I also had the opportunity to talk to a high school friend of 

mine, the president of the local union in Prince Albert, the day 

we made the announcement and he was very happy that we 

were able to make this announcement. I invited him to come to 

the announcement and he had said to me over the phone that, 

we‟ll let you have this moment but we will definitely be 

commenting, as they did, as the national union did as well, that 

they are very happy that there is a return to the site. 

 

By their own acknowledgement they recognize that these are 

new jobs, new technology, and that although there are a little 

less than what was there before, the union does recognize the 

paper operation was shutting down under Domtar. And what we 

see now is that we‟re going to have about the same number of 

folks coming into work at the site as would have been without 

the paper mill. 

 

And let‟s talk about the new, the investment from the foreign 

company which means that . . . Over $200 million means there 

were be a lot of women and men coming to Prince Albert to get 

the mill fired up again, to renew the infrastructure on-site, 

which means that the people of the province and the people of 

Prince Albert, the local businesses will benefit as well. That‟s a 

great news story. 

 

So I also want to talk about what we‟ve seen around Prince 

Albert just in the last two weeks, three weeks. The twinning of 

Highway No. 11 under the Minister of Highway‟s leadership 

and direction is taking great strides. If you were around PA 

[Prince Albert] over the last couple weeks, you notice that they 

have equipment working in the treelines, mulching up the trees 

and the ground, getting it prepped for the actual level of 

aggregate that will be used for the roadbed. 

 

We saw around the Macdowall area, mountains of aggregate 

again being delivered over the winter which will be utilized this 

spring as they develop the twinning of No. 11 Highway which 

will be done . . . I‟m understanding if the weather stays within 

reason, September 2012 will see the completion of that 

highway, twinned all the way to Saskatoon which is yet again 

the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

We‟ll see goods and services transported back and forth. We‟ll 

see families going back in a safe manner on a Sunday night or a 

Monday night after a long weekend to Saskatoon and points 

south, or coming north as the weekend starts to go camping and 

enjoying our great lakes and our great tourism infrastructure we 

have up around Prince Albert and area and points north of that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

One factor that was talked about in the budget — the Minister 

of Health is to be commended for this — was the funding, the 

implementation of the STARS [shock trauma air rescue service] 

air ambulance program. I think that . . . I had the privilege as 

the minister involved with public safety to attend a fundraising 

event in Calgary three years ago at the invitation of the STARS 



6924 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

[Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] people foundation. And 

you know, the service is one of those kind of services, as you 

see a population increasing with the level of traffic and issues 

across our province in the industrial sector, in the farming 

communities, where this is a system that‟s going to augment the 

current land-based road ambulance service. 

 

And we‟re going to be able to see that when there‟s serious 

trauma involved here, that we‟re going to see these people 

receive that immediate care, trauma centre type care in a 

platform of rotary-winged, rotary air ambulance system. And 

that‟s going to bring a stability to this province where we‟re 

going to see people very happy I believe, very thankful when 

the . . . And hopefully they never have to use the service, Mr. 

Speaker. We all hope that no one has to use that service. But 

because it‟s in the province, will be in the province, it‟ll be 

there and hopefully that people will see it as saving lives and 

being an advantage — again a Saskatchewan, another part of 

the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

I mentioned earlier in my comments, Mr. Speaker, that we have 

the foundation of lowering debt, lowering taxes, and improving 

quality of life. That lowering debt is something that I know 

every one of us, I think on both sides of this House, would 

believe is an important factor. That, as we look at our own 

personal debt, we want to lower it as fast as we can for other 

means, to maybe fund our kids‟ education or to get ourselves 

ready for retirement. And we‟ve been able to, over the cycle of 

this government, over three and a half years — a short time I‟d 

have to add, Mr. Speaker — we‟ve been able to reduce the debt 

down to $3.8 billion. This year alone, another $325 million put 

on the debt. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker, that . . . And we‟re 

projecting in the out years, the budget to be balanced as well. 

And I‟m sure as we see this province repeating the 

Saskatchewan advantage over and over again by the great 

leadership of the government MLAs and our Premier, that we 

will see more surplus budgets. And we‟re hopeful that of course 

that does happen, which indicates we‟ll see more reduction in 

debt, which means that . . . Again I turn to my daughters‟ 

future, and that is the Saskatchewan advantage for them. 

Alyssa, my oldest, will be going to university in another year 

from now, and Mackenzie soon to follow. So we‟ll have a lot of 

opportunity for their future where their tax dollars will be spent 

and any surplus budgets coming forward will allow for them to 

still benefit from the Saskatchewan advantage because of the 

hard work the Minister of Finance has been doing to pay off the 

debt in this province, and the previous minister was as well, the 

member from Melfort. So that‟s a very critical part as well, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

You know, the infrastructure around Prince Albert has been 

benefiting from the previous budgets as well as this one. I look 

to the Green Energy Park just outside the airport where we have 

a sod turning will be taking place and there‟ll be . . . 

Development will start in the spring of this year for a 

component around that area where the Government of 

Saskatchewan has been able to contribute money to the city of 

Prince Albert to develop the Green Energy Park, which is 

critical. 

 

And I want to also add that that‟s an interesting hub piece 

where the airport in Prince Albert has received substantial 

increases in funding and infrastructure work on behalf of the 

federal government, who is responsible for the scheduled air 

service airports like Prince Albert. But it was the hard lobbying 

by the Premier and the member from Sask Rivers and myself to 

our Member of Parliament, who has taken the message back 

and has delivered on that request to provide infrastructure 

dollars to improve the airport. And that‟s going to go on. I mean 

even the mayor of Prince Albert took a leadership role 

involving the funding of — future funding, I believe — for 

terminal improvements and other issues out there by imposing a 

tax or a charge on each ticket. 

 

The airport has got busy traffic. I have been privileged to, as a 

minister, an MLA, to fly into the airport with the great service 

provided by Executive Air. And it‟s many times where as you 

fly in, you‟re waiting for the big planes to come in who are 

dropping off and picking up mine workers on a regular basis in 

Prince Albert. So the airport is very well utilized. And I want to 

thank the Member of Parliament, Randy Hoback, for his work 

on that. So as a government we committed to improving the 

airport infrastructure and improvements, and we‟ve done that 

through lobbying the federal government, which is important. 

 

We‟ve also improved infrastructure by funding partially the 

green energy park for the city of Prince Albert. And like I said 

before, Mr. Speaker, we‟ll see that starting up here in the spring 

of 2011. And that‟ll be tied to, I believe, developments with the 

pulp mill and the forestry sector in general because those 

particular start-ups will have interest from the green energy 

park developers as they move forward. 

 

We‟re going to see a lot of opportunity, new dollars again for 

new companies coming into Prince Albert. And my city will do 

very well, I believe, moving on as part of the Saskatchewan 

advantage, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other part that is critical I think, as we look at the demands 

placed on the province in general, I mean we see a huge amount 

of infrastructure dollars being put into education, health, and 

highways. Municipal sectors are benefiting from these dollars 

for health and safety, water, waste water. But in total over the 

four years of government, we‟ll see about a $4 billion increase 

in infrastructure dollars coming in on projects and such, Mr. 

Speaker. So I think that overall that‟s imperative to look at that 

number. 

 

You know, we see that driven by the growth of this province 

where we see various companies coming in. We see population 

growth, like I‟ve stated, and we need these dollars to improve 

the quality of health and safety for our individuals in the 

province. And that‟s very critical moving forward. 

 

I also want to say that the current infrastructure pieces that are 

in place see funding going up through and finishing on 2014, 

Mr. Speaker, with a strong component from the federal gas tax 

as part of that, letting municipalities budget and use those 

dollars for infrastructure as they see fit. So as a great 

partnership moving forward, the federal Conservative 

government and the Saskatchewan Party government, along 

with our municipal sectors of partners, have also provided 

dollars as we move forward to — and I hate to say it — but 

after 16 long years, improve the deficit that this province has 



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6925 

had and the infrastructure of so many different venues, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[15:00] 

 

So you know what, Mr. Speaker? I see my time has come to the 

end right about now. I just want to close off by saying that 

again The Saskatchewan Advantage budget is one that I believe 

will secure the future for my daughters, will see this province 

move forward, will see additional investment dollars coming 

forward from foreign investors, and will provide a stable 

platform for our country to look at to see a province that was a 

have-not province to be a have province in a very short time 

frame, Mr. Speaker, because of the positive outlook that we 

have. 

 

So as I take my seat, Mr. Speaker, I just want to close off by 

saying that I will not be supporting the amendment, but I will be 

supporting the budget. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

I‟m delighted to follow my colleague from Prince Albert. He‟s 

very articulate and passionate about his family and all families 

right across our province and for good reason. Today marks 

another good day for the people of this province, and especially 

when we start to talk about why this budget serves not just the 

interests of today but also for many bright tomorrows. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to start by paying a special thanks to our 

Premier. Whether he is working locally, whether he is 

recognized globally, whether he‟s on the national stage, you 

know, Mr. Speaker, he is seen as one of the foremost statesmen 

in our country, a proud representative of the people of this 

province. And people respond very, very positively to his 

message of optimism and growth and moving the province 

forward. And so it‟s a special thanks that all of us on this side of 

the House owe to our Premier for his tireless efforts in making 

sure that we stay focused on ensuring that we‟re working on the 

priorities of the people of this province. 

 

To that end, I‟d also like to add, and be remiss obviously if I 

didn‟t, thank our Minister of Finance. He worked tirelessly 

during the Treasury Board deliberations to ensure that top 

priorities were kept top of mind. And to all Treasury Board 

members, it was a special pleasure to serve with them during 

this year and obviously last. And in reference to last year, I‟d 

like to pay special tribute to our former Finance minister. He 

worked very hard over his years at Finance to ensure that we 

were in a position to be able to move forward in a way that we 

are today. 

 

I‟d be remiss of course if I didn‟t extend that thanks to key 

members of my family, to my wife, Martha, to our daughter 

Jacqueline who today is writing a test. She was studying all 

weekend. She was worried about her test, so I hope that‟s going 

very well. And then she‟s off to the orthodontist. She‟s facing 

some of the challenges that other 11-year-olds face, and she 

does that with a spirit of optimism and bounce in her step, and it 

keeps all of us going. 

 

To all members of my family, I‟d be remiss if I didn‟t say thank 

you to them on this occasion. Most especially to the citizens of 

Saskatoon Greystone, a special thanks for the honour and 

opportunity to represent the interests of this wonderful 

constituency, a diverse, dynamic, and cosmopolitan 

constituency. And so a special thanks to everyone in Greystone. 

 

As it relates, Mr. Speaker, to the budget, we‟re especially, I 

think, pleased to be able to talk about five or six key general 

priorities that I think resonate and make sense to the people of 

this province. First and foremost, I would like to make specific 

reference to this balanced budget, and that is a GRF [General 

Revenue Fund] pre-transfer surplus where revenue exceeds 

expenses as well as summary financial statement that has a 

surplus of more than $50 million. 

 

And we can quote one of the journalists, distinguished 

journalist from CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] who 

offered a couple of quotes on budget day. And I‟ll just quote 

specifically, “Well for one thing, it‟s a real balanced budget.” 

And the second quote, “This is a real balanced budget. Even the 

auditor would agree with that.” And I think that‟s important to 

make reference, especially when we sometimes hear members 

opposite questioning that. This is a balanced budget. It makes 

sense for the people of our province both for today and for 

future generations. 

 

A second point that I‟d like to highlight relates to key 

investments that this budget makes for the people of our 

province — our province, one of the fastest growing provinces 

in the country right now. Obviously projected to be a growth 

leader this year and well into the future. And so we can see that 

that Health is increasing, the investments in Health, by more 

than 6.2 per cent. Education — we know how important young 

people are and always will be to this province — an increase by 

more than 9 per cent. Social Services, an increase of more than 

8 per cent. And of course, Agriculture, something that speaks to 

the very heart and essence of our province, an increase of more 

than 8 per cent. For the ministry that I have honour of serving, 

the Ministry of Advanced Education, Employment and 

Immigration, we see an increase of more than 3 per cent. 

 

These are important, Mr. Speaker, because they recognize that 

the government plays a vital role within communities. That 

being said, we also appreciate and respect that these 

communities have their own sense of vitality. And we‟re here to 

support and sustain the efforts that are being made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to also highlight that debt repayment has 

been a vital priority, not just this year, but for this government 

since we‟ve come into office. This year, we‟ve seen the 

reduction of the debt by $325 million. And the general public 

debt as of March 31st, 2012, will be at 3.8 billion, a decrease of 

$3 billion since March 31st of 2008. 

 

I think this makes a great deal of sense to the people of this 

province. And certainly I hear from people in Saskatoon 

Greystone saying, pay down the debt. It‟s like a provincial 

credit card; pay it down. And, Mr. Speaker, they just simply 

say, that way we can use the interest for investments here 

within the province. And we‟re going to continue to focus on 

that with a great degree of discipline and deliberation, Mr. 

Speaker. 



6926 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

Finally on a general theme — and, I think, importantly — we 

see taxes going down for people across this province. We see 

more than 110,000 people have been removed from the 

obligation of paying taxes. And, Mr. Speaker, I can recall when 

I first moved to Saskatchewan, I was a graduate student. And 

frankly I was surprised and shocked that graduate students were 

going to be placed in a position of having to pay that kind of 

tax. We know there‟s more to do with more than 110,000 

people taken off the tax rolls, those people who need the breaks 

the most. And I think this really speaks to a very progressive 

social agenda, an agenda that‟s set on ensuring that people 

across the province are able to benefit from the growth that‟s 

under way. 

 

In addition to seeing these personal and spousal exemptions as 

well as those made for dependent children, we also see and 

certainly I‟ve received very positive feedback, again from 

Saskatoon Greystone as well as other ridings regarding the 

lowering of small business income tax rates from 4.5 to 2 per 

cent effective in July. And we know how important these 

themes are taken together — balanced budgets, Mr. Speaker, 

sound investments, debt repayment, and lower taxes. This is a 

powerful combination that will ensure that this provincial 

budget stands out in contrast to many others from across this 

country and actually across other jurisdictions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I could, I‟d shift gears now to speak a little bit 

about some of the specific initiatives within the Ministry of 

Advanced Education, Employment and Immigration. We know 

how important post-secondary is to today and for tomorrow. In 

fact, here in the Assembly earlier today, we had medical 

students from the University of Saskatchewan. And we know 

there‟s more work to do, but certainly the feedback I get is that 

those students and faculty members are very pleased to see the 

construction that‟s under way at last at the Academic Health 

Sciences building. Both wings are . . . we‟re seeing significant 

construction progress on each of those. 

 

We can speak specifically to start with regarding the capacity to 

help ensure that excellence and affordability remain the 

watchwords for this priority in our partnerships with 

post-secondary education. That‟s why we‟ve put forward $24.6 

million to limit tuition increases to an average in and around 

about 3 per cent. Obviously we respect the autonomy of the 

respective institutions and we work in partnership and 

collaboration, but that‟s the ballpark of what students can and 

should be looking for. 

 

In addition to that, we‟ve been able to move forward on yet 

another campaign promise — well over 100 of them kept, Mr. 

Speaker. $3 million for the new Saskatchewan advantage 

scholarship. We know how important this will be. And certainly 

we‟re rolling up our sleeves, working with our post-secondary 

institutions and with some industry players that have already 

come to the table and said it‟s vitally important for trades to be 

included. And I want to make sure we applaud those individuals 

and entities that are putting dollars up front, applauding this 

initiative and saying that they want to continue to invest in 

Saskatchewan students as well. 

 

In addition to this, we see $97.8 million in support for students 

through a number of initiatives, and I‟ll highlight just a few of 

those. A number of initiatives including support for the Student 

Aid Fund, the provincial training allowance, and a broad range 

of other initiatives including the provincial graduate retention 

program. And we know how important that is. That‟s a program 

that focuses on ensuring that as students are successful in their 

studies, that we encourage them to stay in Saskatchewan. And 

over the course of seven years that applies to those participating 

in and graduating from programs that range from apprenticeship 

programs all the way through to their undergraduate degrees. 

There‟s just a small sampling. 

 

Now, some of the feedback that we‟ve had within the 

post-secondary sector is very encouraging. It reflects and 

reinforces that we remain on the right track. While we know 

there‟s more to do, certainly there is considerable 

encouragement. From Chief Guy Lonechild: “This government 

has put its money where its mouth is.” And to continue the 

quote: 

 

This is an opportunity for us to start doing much-needed 

work to roll up our sleeves and start improving 

educational outcomes for First Nations people (including) 

early childhood development, K-12, and post-secondary 

education. 

 

And there‟s just a brief snapshot. We know how much more 

work there is to do in partnership and in collaboration. And we 

applaud the efforts that Chief Lonechild‟s making as well as 

others are making, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are some additional quotes that I‟d like to make reference 

to. From Robert Doucette, the president of the Métis Nation 

here in Saskatchewan, and recognized nationally for his good 

work. In fact, a few weeks ago he was at the table of the 

national Aboriginal organization, and did just remarkable work 

helping to ensure that Métis people right across the country 

were given voice, especially in key areas of education. And I‟ll 

just simply borrow a quote here. 

 

“Whenever you can get increased resources to deal with 

the issue of education and re-education so people can 

enter the work force, it‟s a good thing for us,” he said. 

“I‟m happy with what I see.” 

 

And from a few other individuals: to draw on Richard 

Florizone‟s statement. He‟s the vice-president in finance at the 

University of Saskatchewan. 

 

Compared to other universities around Canada and North 

America, it‟s a pretty good time to be in Saskatchewan. 

So universities are seeing a lot of cuts and adjustments 

across continents, and we‟re seeing good, strong support. 

 

As well, Brett Fairbairn, who‟s the U of S provost, 

vice-president academic: 

 

“Across the country we see other universities are 

suffering, but in Saskatchewan there are still positive 

investments,” said Dr. Fairbairn. “We‟re fortunate to be in 

a province that is still investing in post-secondary 

education.” 

 

And one more quote: 

 



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6927 

It‟s a pretty good budget overall for the province, and 

within that we heard about some positive investments for 

post-secondary education and for students. 

 

From the University of Regina, I‟ll draw upon the president of 

the students‟ union, Kyle Addison. He quotes generally that the 

budget has been positive for students. And specifically, and I 

quote: 

 

“Scholarship funding is great,” he said. “We‟ll take 

anything we can get. We‟d like to applaud the 

government for actually putting more into scholarships.” 

 

And there‟s just a small sampling of some of the initiatives that 

we have. Certainly the apprenticeship component is vitally 

important, and with more than 9,000 people participating in the 

apprenticeship initiative, we‟ve seen rapid increases over the 

last three to four years. And we want to applaud and continue to 

support that. 

 

In addition to that, I‟ve made reference to the continued funding 

regarding the Academic Health Sciences building, Mr. Speaker. 

And I‟d also like to highlight that there is an additional $6 

million to continue the expansion of nursing and physician 

training programs here within the province, obviously first and 

foremost to ensure that people across the province have 

enhanced access to high-quality medical care that they know 

they can count on. And there‟s always room for improvement as 

well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:15] 

 

We know there‟s more to do regarding health research. We can 

see that through a number of initiatives. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

know this because obviously there‟s also support for increased 

numbers of students, both within nursing and within doctors, as 

well as increasing number of residencies. 

 

I‟d like to speak specifically about an emphasis, an emphasis on 

First Nations and Métis peoples. Mr. Speaker, we have seen an 

additional $7 million from the province for adult basic 

education and the provincial training allowance, targeted 

specifically First Nations and Métis students. 

 

As well there‟s a initiative that we‟re going to be working with 

First Nations, and I hope also the Métis Nation of 

Saskatchewan, focusing on education and employment. We‟re 

taking a key role in that. As well we‟ve been able to put a 

specific focus — $600,000 — on the apprenticeship piece to 

help ensure that more First Nations and Métis participants can 

actually succeed in their studies and then stay. 

 

As well we‟ve put forward $1 million for the International 

Centre for Northern Governance and Development at the 

University of Saskatchewan. This is important as what we hear 

from communities in the North is they want more students not 

just simply studying in the North but also staying and 

succeeding in the North. And we know how important that is. 

 

In fact on Friday I had an opportunity to visit both Stony Rapids 

and Black Lake. And I‟ve seen some of these investments 

paying off, but most importantly, that these dollars are just 

simply helping to ensure that individuals have an opportunity to 

reach their full potential. It was an inspirational day. And to the 

instructor, to Waldo, and to his magnificent seven students 

working away there at the arena, I just want to say how much I 

appreciated the opportunity to spend some time and share with 

them some of their experiences and the importance of their 

experiences. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, that there are several other points that 

can and need to be highlighted here regarding immigration. We 

know how important immigration has become, not in isolation 

but as an overall strategy to help ensure that we continue to 

foster and facilitate the growth of more diverse, dynamic, and 

cosmopolitan communities. 

 

First and foremost, as I‟ve highlighted already through the 

post-secondary piece, investing in Saskatchewan students. 

 

Secondly, inviting back expats, inviting back our expats. We 

know that there were tens of thousands of people that left the 

province under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. And since we have taken 

over, 45,000 people have come to Saskatchewan, either for the 

first time or returned to Saskatchewan. So we‟re hearing from 

families and communities, Mr. Speaker, how important that is. 

 

We‟re also welcoming newcomers from across the country and 

around the world, and that‟s why we‟ve added an additional 

$1.8 million to enhance settlement services. Mr. Speaker, we 

anticipate that there will be between 4,000 and 4,100 

nominations this year into the Saskatchewan immigrant 

nominee program. And as a result, when we put in the families 

included into that nomination, into that nomination number, we 

anticipate that there will be 12,000 people moving to 

Saskatchewan in the coming year, Mr. Speaker. We know 

there‟s more to do, but this is a very significant sign. 

 

As Tony Blair has said, Mr. Speaker, as Tony Blair has said, 

there‟s a very, very simple equation: are more people moving to 

a jurisdiction or moving from a jurisdiction? And from the 

members opposite, they were moving from the jurisdiction; 

under the current government, they‟re moving to this 

jurisdiction. In fact we‟ve had a member of the opposition say, 

obviously people are going to go to where the jobs are, and 

certainly, Mr. Speaker, we see that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that there is much to do, but I would like 

to just highlight a few key areas of innovation. And, Mr. 

Speaker, through the areas of innovation, that‟s focusing on 

prosperity, a real prosperity agenda not just simply for today but 

for tomorrow. And that‟s why we‟re moving forward with 

nearly $6 million to the international vaccine centre. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to give credit — sometimes I‟m critical of the 

members opposite — I want to give credit in this instance: they 

started this initiative. And we wanted to make sure that we were 

helping to finalize this and get the international vaccine centre 

up and operational. 

 

We‟re also moving forward with more than $11 million in the 

Innovation and Science Fund, Mr. Speaker, and that‟s for a 

broad range of initiatives. As well we‟ve seen a $1.5 million 

increase to the Saskatchewan Research Council, another entity 

that I have the privilege of working with and helping to oversee, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 



6928 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

More dollars for the Canadian Light Source synchrotron. We 

know how vitally important that is. In fact what we‟ve recently 

undertaken is key research initiatives with the Canadian Light 

Source synchrotron, first and foremost through the creation of a 

linear accelerator. I want give credit to our federal government. 

They came in with $10 million; we came in with 2. We‟re 

moving forward with a linear accelerator to see if we can 

produce medical isotopes at the Canadian Light Source 

synchrotron. This will be cutting-edge research, not simply for 

Canadians but for all people around the world, being 

undertaken right here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And we 

know how important it is. 

 

That was then followed up by additional announcements, one 

regarding a cyclotron because we‟re moving forward with a 

PET [positron emission tomography] CT [computerized 

tomography] scan to help ensure that after years of neglect from 

the other side, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province 

have access to a PET CT scan. As soon as we announced that, 

then the question is, will we be importing medical isotopes or 

creating them here? The answer is obvious and immediate. We 

want to create them here, hence moving forward with a 

cyclotron. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve said we‟re also moving forward 

with a nuclear centre of excellence. We want to make sure 

we‟re focusing on nuclear medicine to help ensure health care 

increases here within the province for the people of our 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re also moving forward on material sciences, 

and that‟s a broad range really from research in computers all 

the way through to cholesterol, Mr. Speaker, and we know how 

important that is. And added to that obviously, with our 

thoughts going to the people in Japan, we know how important 

more science is going to be in the area of nuclear research. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would just like to highlight a few key projects 

within Greystone and in and around Greystone, and most 

especially being able to move forward with St. Matthew School, 

Georges Vanier School which has been on the list for years, and 

Holy Cross High School. Mr. Speaker, there is much good 

news, but it is rooted in the fundamental pillars of making 

sound investments within a balanced budget, paying down the 

debt, and lowering taxes for the people of this province. That is 

a recipe for success, not just for today but for the new 

Saskatchewan for future years to come. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my pleasure to 

rise today and speak to the budget as the member of Regina 

Lakeview. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that in my 

constituency, budgets are extremely important because many 

people are directly related to and are involved with the 

preparation of the budgets and then actually spending the 

money to provide the services to the people of Saskatchewan. 

And so, Mr. Speaker, it‟s not a distant thing that‟s happening. 

This is something that is right at the heart of what the people in 

Regina Lakeview and I would say Regina are concerned about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we had an announcement on housing from 

the Minister Responsible for Housing that seems to be or is 

exactly the same announcement from a year ago. And the 

explanation that we understand was provided in the rotunda 

after question period is, well we‟ve been working on it for a 

year. Well, Mr. Speaker, they‟re still working on it, as I 

understand it. It‟s not completed. I would suggest that 

ministerial announcements about programs should be 

completed before they‟re dealt with in this particular place. Mr. 

Speaker, this kind of off a piece of paper, ad hoc, sort of done at 

the last minute, these kinds of things are not very well done but 

they, more importantly, they hurt people. They hurt people who 

are concerned about housing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there‟s another example of something that‟s 

not in this budget and something that‟s a fallout from last year‟s 

budget. That once again was a piece of paper that went out and 

then was denied. That was a piece of paper that went from the 

member from Canora-Pelly when he was the minister for 

Education where he said, oh you in your education districts, 

you‟re supposed to reduce the number of educational assistants. 

But then all of a sudden, no, that letter didn‟t go out. And what 

we have now a year later, Mr. Speaker, is over 300 educational 

assistants gone. 

 

Now this affects those particular special education students, and 

often these educational assistants dealt with between six and 

fifteen people each, but more importantly it affects every 

student in the whole education system in the province. Mr. 

Speaker, that is fundamentally wrong, that these kinds of things 

are done once again sort of in a slapdash, poor way without an 

acknowledgement that that‟s what‟s being done. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what we‟re doing now is taking a look at 

this budget and trying to figure out what are the things that are 

going to affect people as we move forward because we know 

there‟s a whole lot of flim-flam here. There‟s a whole bunch of 

surface cover that‟s disguising what‟s actually happening. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that in the whole area of the arts, many 

people were expecting that when the economy is supposedly 

doing a whole lot better, that there would be some money 

replaced for the Arts Board or for other places. They got some 

fairly flatline budgets. The $3 million that has been eliminated 

from this budget for the Saskatchewan Communications 

Network has just disappeared. It hasn‟t been transferred into 

other arts kinds of things. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people notice these things because they affect 

many, many groups, many, many people right across the 

province. And I give a lot of credit to our civil service who try 

to do the best they can with the resources they get. But, Mr. 

Speaker, when there‟s a fundamental flaw in the perspective of 

the Premier and the Minister of Finance about what makes a 

good community, then there‟s a fundamental flaw in the whole 

document that we have. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this particular budget, I think, is a dishonest 

budget. It‟s a fudge-it budget, if I can use the Minister of 

Finance‟s own words that he used a few years ago. And what I 

want to say, Mr. Speaker, is that in 1992, in February, there was 

an attempt to try to sort out what kind of funny business had 

gone on in the end of the ‟90s and in ‟91. And in ‟91 as 



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6929 

everybody knows, we didn‟t even have a budget because the 

Premier was afraid to do it. But at that point, when people were 

trying to clean up the mess, they ended up preparing a report 

called the Report of the Saskatchewan Financial Management 

Review Commission, February 1992. And there‟s a whole 

number of recommendations in here, but the bottom one, the 

final one was the business of government should be open to 

greater public scrutiny. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that over the decades we‟ve 

developed more reporting systems, more ways of getting that 

information out. We‟ve got the quarterly reports, things like 

that. But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, in these budget documents 

this year, there‟s a whole number of issues that create risks for 

the public and for all the services that they received that are not 

fully stated in what goes on here. 

 

Now just a simple example is that in March, a few days before 

the budget‟s released, and actually distributed at the same time 

as the budget is an expenditure statement of almost half a 

billion dollars that is sent out the door in March of 2011, prior 

to next year‟s budget. A lot of those things could have been 

included in this particular document, could have been done in 

last year‟s document. And, Mr. Speaker, we end up then with 

people playing around with the rules. And that‟s why I say that 

this whole document is fundamentally dishonest and it fudges 

things. 

 

There have been all kinds of materials that have been 

distributed. And I know that this went out in the mail today, this 

bit of propaganda that came from the Minister of Finance. And 

in there, it talks about a balanced budget and where debt is 

being reduced. But when you actually read the document that 

the pamphlet was based on, page 60, it says very clearly: 

 

Public debt is forecast to increase by $375.9 million 

during 2010-11 and increase by an additional $485.3 

million in 2011-12. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is happening through this Premier and this 

Finance minister is that they are shifting the debt onto the 

Crowns exactly the same way as what the Gass Commission, 

the financial management commission in 1992 said. They‟re 

shifting it over to the Crowns so that they can look as if they‟ve 

got some kind of handle on what‟s going on, looks like they‟re 

managing what‟s going on in the government. But in fact 

they‟re shifting debt over to another part of the government 

operation. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that bond rating agencies, 

lenders, others look at when they look at the management of 

funds in a government, relates to how open and accountable 

they are in their financing and in their description of what 

they‟re doing. And, Mr. Speaker, the rules continue to evolve 

and change as the years go on to make sure that, as it relates to 

public companies that are trading on the stock exchange or 

other places, that the investors have accurate information on 

which they can base their investment choices. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, part of what we tried to do when we were in 

government was to increase the visibility, increase the 

accountability to the public for all of these things so that it 

would be clear what kinds of commitments were being made in 

each year by the government which would then have to be paid 

for by the citizens of the province and in many cases more 

likely the children or grandchildren of the citizens of the 

province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the newer concepts that‟s coming up 

in the accounting business — and now I‟m going to quote from 

the Certified General Accountants‟ magazine dated 

March-April 2011 — is a description of hedge accounting. And 

basically this is the International Accounting Standards Board, 

has begun the process of looking at hedge accounting and 

making sure that those concepts are tied together with risk 

management. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that it‟s important that these concepts 

be used as we look at these budget documents because, Mr. 

Speaker, there are risks taken. There are hedges made. There 

are things that are done in this particular budget which have not 

been fully disclosed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve asked questions about some of these things 

over the last years; we don‟t have the answers. You‟re probably 

wondering, well what is it that appears to be not disclosed? 

Well, Mr. Speaker, one that my colleague from Saskatoon 

Nutana has asked a lot of questions about is called Amicus 

Health. We don‟t know exactly what kind of commitment the 

Minister of Health has made through the Saskatoon Health 

Region to a third party. We don‟t know — it doesn‟t show up in 

the books of this province — what the long-term commitment is 

on the financing of that project. The minister refuses to provide 

us with copies of the documents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, what happens is that 

this Minister of Health has come up with up another method of 

financing things because he hasn‟t been able to do a single new 

project as a Minister of Health. I‟m very pleased, on Friday, Mr. 

Speaker, to go to Humboldt and be part of the opening of the 

new Humboldt Hospital, a project that was . . . We worked at 

for a long time to get built. And, Mr. Speaker, what happens is 

on Amicus Health, we have once again a situation where this 

government is hiding the information from the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now let me go on to another project. Mr. Speaker, we have a 

project in SaskPower where they have effectively contracted out 

10 per cent of the power production of SaskPower to Northland 

Power up by North Battleford. And, Mr. Speaker, we don‟t 

know what the terms of those contracts are on that particular 

project. We don‟t know what the risk is. We don‟t know what 

the hedging is that‟s been done there. And, Mr. Speaker, this is 

fundamentally wrong. It‟s fundamentally against the principles 

of public accountability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s another one we can go on. The member 

from Kindersley has announced a project in Prince Albert 

relating to this new mill which conveniently is sort of spread 

over a couple of years. But, Mr. Speaker, once again we don‟t 

know what kinds of contracts that they have made around 

purchase of power. We don‟t know how long a term they are. 

We don‟t know what other subsidies are in that particular deal 

that are not totally revealed. We don‟t know what kind of 



6930 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

subsidies he‟s paid for the wood supply for that particular, 

particular mill or that particular plant. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are a whole number of things which 

have great risk to them, which are not revealed. And, Mr. 

Speaker, this is fundamentally wrong. It‟s fundamentally 

against the principles of public accountability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have another kind of a deal that‟s been raised. 

There‟s an agreement with the Saskatchewan Medical 

Association. We have a bit of an idea what the responsibilities 

are there, but there appear to be some things that aren‟t totally 

revealed what the cost is. 

 

We also are in a situation where we have a whole number of 

labour contracts that are not negotiated. They‟ve been stalled 

out or whatever, whether it‟s the residents or whether it‟s the 

health sciences. And, Mr. Speaker, those things are not in this 

budget. Those amounts are not in here and we know that. When 

the Minister of Finance was asked about this last week, he said 

oh, it‟s somewhere in there, that we got some money that‟s 

maybe going to be a bit more. But it‟s not there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also have the unfunded pension liability which 

continues to be a cloud over the books of this province. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, when we are in a situation like this where we have 

a Premier and a Minister of Finance who are not willing to 

provide the full information to the people of the province and 

more specifically when they don‟t want to answer questions that 

come from the people who have been asked to ask those 

specific questions, then we are concerned. We get very 

concerned because the net effect of deals that have risks, that 

are long-term ones, that create great obligations are that they 

then subsequently will be have to be paid. And at that point, 

services will be reduced. Good capital projects will have to be 

delayed. Many different things will have to be done to make up 

for the poor decisions that have been made earlier. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when the government gets into any kind of a 

situation where they start guaranteeing debt, then we need to 

know about that, and we need to know the full details of what 

they‟re doing. And I know this, that it probably would be 

advisable for the Premier, for the Minister of Health, for the 

Minister of Finance to sit down and read the comments from 

Mr. Gass, and even if they just read the four, five, six pages of 

summary at the beginning and to remind themselves why there 

were so many difficulties in trying to meet the regular services 

of the people after the budgets in Premier Devine‟s government 

because, Mr. Speaker, that becomes one of the fundamental 

issues as we move into a situation where we actually have 

resources. 

 

And we know that the government right now has 10.7 billion, or 

approximately that amount, of revenue available for them as 

they move forward in providing the services in this province. 

And that‟s a substantial increase over the kinds of revenues that 

were here just a few years ago. But, Mr. Speaker, then the 

question comes, well what are they doing with those revenues? 

How are they being spent, and how are they being accounted 

for? And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s where the questions arise in this 

particular budget. 

 

Now when one has the responsibility of governing, there‟s a 

responsibility of making sure that decisions are done in a proper 

fashion. We know from some of the announcements earlier 

today around housing that there appears to be a sort of a 

recklessness in how some of these things are done. We know 

that the decisions as they move forward on a whole number of 

areas, they end up being ones that people will challenge. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the people of the province want to believe 

that things are good and are going ahead in a very positive way. 

Unfortunately when you end up with budgets that seem to 

spend money in a lot of ways that don‟t directly help many, 

many people who need the help, a lot of questions are raised. 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that‟s the fundamental problem with 

this particular budget. It leaves a whole number of people 

whose rents are going up, who have a difficult time affording 

the fuel to drive their vehicles, who are even looking hard at the 

cost of food. Many of these people are totally left out of what 

happens here. 

 

It‟s interesting, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the Social 

Services budget, that three years ago there was an annual rent 

subsidy that was budgeted in that budget of about $5.6 million. 

I urge all of you to go and look at the Social Services budget in 

this one, where that same budget line for rent subsidy is $31 

million. So in three years you‟ve seen this dramatic increase. 

 

Now the difficulty is that there doesn‟t totally seem to be an 

answer about where all that money is going. I mean, there‟s a 

bit of an explanation in the sense that we know that rents are 

going up. But, Mr. Speaker, where are these dollars going? Are 

they actually helping people or are they going to places that end 

up not in a situation to be providing help to people? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the fundamental question about any budget is, 

does it provide help for people, especially the people that have 

the toughest time in our society? And, Mr. Speaker, there are 

many things that we provide, but unfortunately that kind of an 

emphasis has been somewhat ignored as we look at this 

particular budget. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there‟s an overall lack of accountability on 

the overall scheme of how this is being done. And we‟re going 

to pay for that lack of accountability, not just this year but 10 

years from now and 20 years from now. So, Mr. Speaker, I will 

be voting for the amendment and against the main motion. 

Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I recognize the 

member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker. 

I‟m pleased to enter the debate today. At the close of my 

comments I will be supporting this budget. But prior to doing 

that I want to recognize and thank a number of people. First it 

would be my constituency assistants back in Yorkton: Lauretta 

Richie-McInnis, Ingrid Stumph. They do a lot of great work in 

helping me to serve the people of Yorkton. And we have a new 

addition to our team, a part-time addition, Ms. Sarah Stumph. 

It‟s a great, great news story there is that she moved back to 

Saskatchewan from Alberta, and she‟s expecting a child so soon 

we‟ll be recognizing another resident of our fine city, Yorkton. 

So firstly I want to thank them and recognize them for the hard 

work they do. 



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6931 

Secondly would be the staff here in this building — the caucus 

staff, the ministerial staff — that go out of their way to help us 

day to day to provide us with information, work through 

casework and the like. It is very appreciated and I really want to 

thank them as well. 

 

Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Chair of Committees, would be 

my colleagues here. The opposition from time to time can be 

helpful. My colleagues on this side of the House are very 

helpful, very supportive, and it‟s great working with a bunch of 

people that we do have in the government. 

 

[15:45] 

 

As well, I really have to recognize the Minister of Finance, the 

Deputy Premier, the member from Canora-Pelly for the hard 

work, all the work that he‟s put in over the years to develop not 

only the party but develop platforms in all the work that we do, 

but build a strong opposition and now a strong government. 

Working through the Education portfolio and then now into the 

Finance portfolio, recognizing the good work done by the 

previous minister, the member from Melfort, and all the fine 

work he has done, the three balanced budgets prior to this one 

and now, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees. The work he‟s done 

on this budget, which is recognized by not only us and many 

individuals around the province from a diverse background, but 

many people in the province as not only a balanced budget on 

the general accounting principles but also on the summary 

statement. 

 

I also want to thank the people of my constituency of Yorkton, 

not only the people of the province for giving us the mandate to 

from government and serve them in the capacity that we do, but 

also the people of the constituency of Yorkton. They have given 

me the privilege and the honour to working with them and 

serving them in the capacity that I do and I look forward to 

serve them after November 7th if that is in their wishes. So I 

really want to thank them as well. 

 

Lastly, but not least by any stretch of the imagination, would be 

my family. My wife and daughters, very supportive. I couldn‟t 

imagine doing this without their support, Mr. Chair of 

Committees, and they are very appreciated. And the support 

that I get from them day in and day out, it‟s hard to even put 

that into words, Mr. Chair of Committees. The love and the 

support that they show me makes this job a lot easier to do. 

 

My one daughter actually described it to a friend of hers as, 

having a dad that‟s an MLA is very much like living in a 

fishbowl. And you do come under criticism. You can‟t be all 

things to all people. But the way that they handle themselves, 

respectfully and honourably in the community, and supporting 

me as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is very, very acknowledged by 

myself and I‟m very thankful for that. 

 

Well I‟ll start into some of the notes I have on the budget. And 

I‟ve got to admit, as I was drafting these comments right after 

the budget last week and then over the weekend, different ideas 

kept coming to my mind. And, you know, I handwrote a whole 

bunch of pages here that I had to get through before I got to the 

budget. And the reasoning for that is a lot of things that had 

happened in history and things that I‟ve seen, I personally 

witnessed in this Legislative Assembly, really called into 

question some things. And I just wanted to address those as I 

move along here from time to time. 

 

And there‟s no doubt I really like the theme of this budget, The 

Saskatchewan Advantage, slightly borrowing from Alberta, but 

clearly Saskatchewan at this point, as especially my colleagues 

on this side of the House recognize that we truly do have an 

advantage, not only across many provinces throughout our 

whole country, but as well around the world. And that 

advantage is getting very well recognized, largely due — I 

know our Premier‟s quite humble about this — but very largely 

in and because of the work done by our Premier in telling the 

Saskatchewan story around the province where we have, we‟re 

blessed by divine providence in this province with our 

resources, our environment, our people. 

 

We are now, as the releases showed last week, way up above 

150,000 people and climbing — the highest population we‟ve 

had ever — and truly realizing our potential that this building 

was built to support a province of a couple million, 3 million 

people. A third largest at the time in economy and third largest 

in population when this building was built, and now the 

building . . . the forethought of those of our forefathers building 

this building, and now we‟re growing into that potential. 

 

The theme of the budget, Saskatchewan advantage, keeping that 

advantage going, if you really look at the nuts and bolts of this, 

it‟s mainly about keeping our momentum, increasing that 

advantage. But to what end? The Premier‟s very clear, over and 

over again, that we have to recognize, what is the use? What is 

the benefit of having that strong economy? Is it just for creating 

numbers, creating wealth? 

 

Well, Mr. Chair of Committees, I would say yes. But the end 

would be delivering that quality of life for people of the 

province. And by the theme of this budget, we can see by 

lowering taxes for mainly the lowest income of the low income, 

as well as other people benefiting it as well, 114,000 people will 

now be off the provincial income tax rolls. Lowering that debt 

which makes our interest payments on the debt lower, Mr. 

Chair of Committees, helps us to be able to finance the support, 

that quality of life improvement that people realize in this 

province. 

 

You know, I‟ve got to admit the day after the budget I walked 

into the Assembly — I‟m usually in here a little bit earlier and 

we usually have a little bit of fun across the floor — and I had 

to ask the Finance critic if somebody played a joke on him. Did 

somebody punk him? And he asked why. And I said, well 

surely somebody gave him a different copy of the budget than 

we had seen because, by what we had seen, it was a positive 

budget. All the feedback we got, a very positive budget. People 

of diverse backgrounds as well — whether it‟s in the social 

background, educational background, business background, all 

different backgrounds — really saying that they really liked a 

lot of different things in this budget. Again, not all things to all 

people, but a very positive budget that serves the people of this 

province very well. 

 

And I guess it shouldn‟t have surprised me too much, you 

know, being in opposition and, you know . . . My view of 

opposition is to offer positive ideas, you know, different things 

that we can do. If we‟re not addressing things as well as maybe 



6932 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

we can, offering other ideas, not just trying to shoot holes in 

something for the sake of shooting holes, not just criticizing for 

the sake of opposing but to offer different ideas. And I didn‟t 

really see a whole lot of that. And I think that was reflective in a 

lot of the media reports that came out afterwards somewhat 

criticizing the Finance critic for some of his comments. 

 

Although again it shouldn‟t surprise me, I suppose. I‟ve spoken 

publicly with, alongside some of the members of the opposition, 

and I‟ve actually heard them say that New Democrats by nature 

are critical people. And that somewhat surprised me. I thought, 

you know, maybe it was just a bit of a game that gets played in 

this building. But truly I do see that crabs-in-a-bucket mentality, 

where you see a crab climbing out of the bucket. Instead of the 

other crabs helping them out of the bucket, they‟ll drag that 

crab back down, which is I guess the critical-by-nature type of a 

thing. 

 

You know it‟s no wonder. The Leader of the Opposition, he‟s 

been talking recently again about equalization as part of their 

plans in the future. And we clearly see the people of this 

province recognize that we are a have province. In order to get 

back into equalization payments, we have got to become a 

have-not province. And I don‟t know. The members opposite 

seem to be wanting to go down that road. I don‟t know why. 

For the sake of getting a handout or a welfare payment from the 

federal government. 

 

I don‟t want to go back to where we were before. I would rather 

be building our economy, helping those that we need to help 

within our province, and using those resources and that 

expertise to go outside of our borders and help others outside of 

our borders. Not be so inward-looking, Mr. Deputy Chair of 

Committees, but to be outward-looking and to help those who 

need help regardless of where they are. And I think we are very 

well suited to be doing that in the state of the country, the 

world, and considering again our blessings in this province that 

we should use those for the advantage of many. 

 

A lot of the comments made so far about the budget by the 

opposition, one comment that struck me awfully strange, and 

I‟ve got to focus on this a little bit: the only people that are 

doing well is the government. Now, Mr. Chair of Committees, 

I‟m not sure what the members opposite thought when they 

were in government. I‟m not . . . It‟s just I was really 

flabbergasted by that comment. It is not the government‟s 

money. The government manages the money for the people of 

this province. It‟s the people of the province‟s money that we 

manage for them. 

 

And judging by the feedback of this budget, they‟re very, you 

know, 70 per cent that I‟ve seen, 60 to 70 per cent, are very 

encouraged by what they‟ve seen. About 20 per cent don‟t 

really care either way. They think it‟s positive, but they‟re not 

really too engaged. There‟s about 10 or 15 per cent that aren‟t 

really happy about it. So you know, not that you can be again 

all things to all people, but a lot of positive feedback. 

 

So in that respect it is the people‟s budget. And I‟ve heard a 

little bit of criticism from some of the media about the 

140-some-odd thousand dollars spent for letting the people of 

the province know the details of their budget. A lot of them 

don‟t listen to the Assembly. A lot of them don‟t get a lot of the 

media hits. So it‟s important, I think, for the brochure that was 

sent out to let people know what‟s in the budget for them so that 

they can take advantage of that. 

 

I will point out one thing though, that, you know, it‟s their 

budget. We send out that brochure for them to know about their 

budget. We look not so long in the past when the New 

Democrats were formerly in government. They spent around 

$500,000 or so for their Finance minister of the time to star in 

his own commercial. And when asked why, he said, well it‟s 

my budget. 

 

So I guess if you look at the terminology, you look at the way 

they think, you know, their budget, their money, not the 

people‟s money. Maybe more the . . . I don‟t know, the fatherly 

mentality of, you know, we‟ll take all the taxes we can and 

we‟ll designate it where we see fit, rather than our philosophy 

of leaving more monies in people‟s pockets so they can spend 

where they see fit. Although the key is to still have enough 

taxation to deliver the core services that government needs to 

deliver — public safety, health care, education, and social 

programs for those that need help. So I think that‟s very 

important to strike that balance of proper taxation, not 

overtaxation. And I believe in deciding for myself where to 

invest my money, not into firms in BC and potato farms and 

whatever else we might see invested in. 

 

So that really struck me as odd. And I really like how the 

Premier pointed out very clearly — I think it was on the last 

question in question period last week — where he admitted, 

yes, Sask Party supporters are the ones benefiting from this 

budget. But also, he clearly pointed out, New Democrat 

supporters are benefiting from this budget. Liberal supporters 

are benefiting from this budget. Green Party supporting are 

benefiting from this budget. Apolitical people in the province 

that don‟t even vote are benefiting from this budget. So clearly 

all people in the province has the opportunity to benefit from 

the budget brought down by our Finance minister, the member 

from Canora-Pelly, including newcomers that are immigrating 

to the province, people coming from other provinces to our 

province, and expatriates. 

 

Especially I want to focus on expatriates that are now coming 

home. We‟ve heard many stories of people that have moved 

away. With some of the business tax changes, the personal tax 

changes that have been announced, they are now looking to 

come back to Saskatchewan to take part in our economy, 

contribute to our province, and keep us moving forward as we 

have been. 

 

Very much like I operate my office at home, Mr. Deputy Chair 

of committees, we treat everyone the same. Now regardless of 

political stripe, we have people from all political stripes coming 

to our office to seek help. And quite frankly in a town the size 

of Yorkton, you pretty much have a good idea of where 

political affiliations lie. But really that doesn‟t matter a whole 

lot to me when people come to my office with a problem. 

Regardless of where they sit politically, they get the same 

treatment. They get the best treatment I have within my ability. 

And I do continue to do that. And I‟m very proud that this truly 

balanced budget does the same — treats everybody the same. 

 

Now some of the inconsistencies I‟ve noted that really struck 



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6933 

me as odd as well, this one thing really stood out to me. It came 

to my mind this weekend. Last year‟s budget, it was a good and 

balanced budget, but admittedly there were some things that the 

media poked at and the opposition poked at. And I mean that‟s 

fair game, the little room to criticize. But one thing I did notice, 

the Leader of the Opposition took advantage of that 

opportunity. He took to his feet and left his critic, his Finance 

critic sitting in his chair, which should be his duty. That‟s his 

position is to bring this budget to show the shortcomings or 

whatever he could find, yet the Leader of the Opposition took 

advantage of that opportunity to take the camera. Well that‟s 

one thing that striked me as a bit odd last year. 

 

But then I pondered, what happened last week on Wednesday 

was the opposite. This year we have, by all accounts, 

independent sources from very diverse backgrounds saying this 

is a good, balanced budget. If I have time, I‟m going to try and 

get into some of those quotes, but very little to criticize brought 

out by the media, by again people with very diverse 

backgrounds. This year the leader finally allowed the Finance 

critic to make his speech, say his piece, and speak to the budget. 

 

So I guess by being critical by nature, you can‟t say much good 

about it. I suppose that‟s their job to try and poke a whole 

bunch of holes that aren‟t there, and I understand, you know, to 

bring to light the things that maybe are falling short. But when 

you just start the shotgun approach to try and blow the whole 

thing apart, it doesn‟t serve you well. It doesn‟t give you any 

credibility. 

 

But I found it was very odd that in an opportunity like this, the 

Leader of the Opposition did not take to his feet. He let the 

Finance critic take to his feet, try and blow holes in this budget 

and pretty much took one for the team. Or I would consider that 

the Leader of the Opposition actually threw his Finance critic 

under the bus. So I don‟t know if I would agree. That‟s just not 

the type of leadership style that we have over on this side of the 

House, but you know, I just found that it‟s very odd. 

 

Another inconsistency I started thinking about this weekend, 

over the last three years I‟ve heard the same rhetoric over and 

over again about this inheritance left by the New Democrats, 

left by the former government to the Sask Party government — 

1 billion, then it‟s 2 billion, then it‟s 3 billion. Yet on the other 

hand they say over and over again that, oh we would have done 

all these things you guys are doing if we had the money. Well if 

you‟ve got 1 billion, 2 billion, $3 billion to let the next 

government look after, why would you leave that to chance 

without spending it where you need to spend it? It just doesn‟t 

square with me, Mr. Chair of Committees. I couldn‟t figure that 

out. 

 

[16:00] 

 

So when you look at all those things, if they have the money 

and then they have this inheritance rhetoric, why wouldn‟t they 

do something with it? And I go back to a statement I made just 

previously about the former Finance minister and saying, well I 

was in the commercial, a half-million-dollar commercial, 

because it was my budget. Which makes me think they think 

it‟s their money, not the people‟s money. It just doesn‟t square. 

 

So I guess in that respect it makes sense if they left that 

inheritance for the next government to start addressing some of 

the shortcomings and infrastructure potholes and the like that 

they left behind. That kind of squares. But again they must have 

thought it was truly their money if they actually left that money 

for the next government to spend, but didn‟t allow the people to 

benefit from it. Did they truly think it was their money? Were 

they leaving it in a mattress? I‟m just not too sure, Mr. Chair of 

Committees. 

 

But one thing I will say, you know if you‟re going to make a 

story, if you‟re going to develop a story, you have to stick with 

it. You have to be consistent or it‟s unbelievable. You can‟t say, 

uranium is good; uranium is bad. This is good, then it‟s bad. 

You know if you waffle and you flip-flop on just about every 

subject depending where the wind blows, to try to shore up 

support and get some support, you lose credibility. And I think 

the people of the province are really starting to see that happen. 

 

Another example a year ago: boom to bust. We saw our Premier 

very, very clearly displayed on a very poor photocopy of a poor 

brochure, describing this boom to bust. The only difference, the 

only thing was that the only people that thought there was a 

bust going on was the New Democratic Party across the floor. 

Nobody else even thought there was a problem. Now they say 

there‟s a boom and no one is benefiting. So again, 

inconsistency: bust, boom, boom, bust. You got to pick a story 

and stick with it. What is it? Again it doesn‟t square. 

 

I heard it said at one point that if you‟re going to tell a fib often 

enough, it will become the truth. But members opposite need to 

stick with the story that once it‟s been crafted. That‟s one 

suggestion I would give to them if that‟s the tactics they want to 

use. 

 

So that‟s enough of the inconsistencies for now and questions I 

had. My head‟s been spinning all week in thinking about these 

inconsistencies and trying to square it. And I don‟t know, I just 

couldn‟t make sense of it. I would spend the rest of my time on 

our budget, The Saskatchewan Advantage. 

 

The one last thing I will point out though, Mr. Speaker, came to 

my attention today after the convention the New Democrats had 

this weekend. And I‟ll quote from this press release: “NDP 

Leader Dwain Lingenfelter talked tough about potash royalties 

and heralded the party‟s new policies as [what?] a “beacon of 

light” during the . . . annual policy convention in Regina.” And 

you know that phrase stuck in my mind. I thought I‟d heard it 

somewhere before. So I looked back a year ago in some of our 

own documentation. And The Globe and Mail on March 25th of 

2010 had this to say: 

 

Amid the ruin that has devastated most governments‟ 

balance sheets, Saskatchewan stands a beacon of light, 

tabling another balanced budget yesterday. The province 

has a tradition of fiscal rectitude that crosses party lines, 

but what is encouraging about this budget is that the 

government has taken a pre-emptive stab at spending cuts, 

although times there are relatively good. Other 

jurisdictions could stand to learn from its example. 

 

And that‟s The Globe and Mail from March 25th, 2010. So I 

don‟t know if you‟d call that plagiarism or what you‟d call that, 

Mr. Speaker, but I guess the best, the best form of recognizing 



6934 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

somebody is impersonations. So I guess that‟s what we‟re 

seeing here. 

 

I realize my time is coming to a close. There‟s so much 

information and so many quotes here I‟d love to go through, but 

I know over the course of few days, my colleagues will 

definitely be going through that. 

 

So thank you for the time to spend to point out some of these 

shortcomings and these inconsistencies, Mr. Speaker. With that 

I will just close by saying, I will be supporting the budget 

brought forward by the member from Canora-Pelly, the Finance 

critic, Deputy Premier. I will not be supporting any amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 

indeed an honour to stand here today and join in this important 

budget debate. Mr. Speaker, before I begin to speak about this 

budget, I would like to take a moment to thank the people of 

Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley, the good people of Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley and the constituents who have contacted me 

at my office over the past year. And they have brought forward 

many important issues to my attention. It is indeed an honour 

and a privilege to represent these constituents and as their MLA 

in the Regina, Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

I‟d like to also take this time to acknowledge my family for 

their ongoing support. As well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

thank my staff in my constituency office and in my minister‟s 

office. They work hard to serve the citizens of this great 

province. I‟d like to thank my constituency assistant Kelly for 

doing a wonderful job in my constituency office. It is through 

her support and help that the job gets done. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to also thank the ministerial staff in my office here at 

the legislature: Selena, Gary, Sally, and Joette. 

 

I would also like to take the time to thank the Minister of 

Finance for the leadership that he displayed in delivering this 

very fine budget. Mr. Speaker, this is our government‟s fourth 

balanced budget. In this budget we have balanced discretion on 

the revenue side with sound spending while taking an overall 

balanced approach to the province‟s finance. We understand 

that as a government we need to invest in key capital areas that 

ensure that the citizens of this province continue to receive 

important programming and services. We did this in a way that 

focuses on sustaining and enhancing our core government 

services with a view to reducing the footprint of government 

while being fiscally responsible with government spending. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government‟s vision is a secure and 

prosperous Saskatchewan, leading the country in economic and 

population growth while providing opportunities for a high 

quality of life for all the residents of Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, I am proud that the Saskatchewan advantage budget 

builds on economic momentum that the province has 

experienced over the past couple of years. This budget also 

reflects the overall optimism that the people of Saskatchewan 

have. This budget will continue to strengthen our economy and 

make life more affordable for the people of Saskatchewan by 

reducing their taxes. This is the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Since introducing our first budget, we have paid down the 

provincial debt by $3 billion. We introduced the largest budget 

for our highways in Saskatchewan‟s history. Mr. Speaker, we 

had to do this in order to deal with the provincial infrastructure 

deficit left behind by the members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this budget, the Saskatchewan government 

introduced the largest single-year income tax reduction in 

Saskatchewan‟s history. And what does this mean, Mr. 

Speaker? It means there was more money in Saskatchewan 

people‟s pocket. This is the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we watch what is happening in Saskatchewan, 

we see that there‟s more jobs now than there has ever been in 

the history of this province. We have so many reasons, Mr. 

Speaker, to be optimistic in this province. And I want to talk 

about a couple of those things because this province is rich in 

resources, and we are very fortunate. 

 

We have been affected by the worldwide recession and we have 

felt the recession in this province, but other provinces were 

impacted far more than we were. As we know, Ontario was a 

have province and Saskatchewan was a have-not. Now that is 

no longer the case, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan is now envied 

for what is happening here. We are at the front of the pack, Mr. 

Speaker, and this budget, along with the last couple of budgets, 

will prepare this province for the future. This budget will 

continue to strengthen our economy and make life more 

affordable for Saskatchewan people with tax cuts that were 

introduced in this, the Saskatchewan advantage. Saskatchewan 

is rich in resources. We have potash, diamonds, uranium, oil, 

gas, coal, and we have a vibrant agricultural sector in this 

province. There are so many good things going on in 

Saskatchewan that we are a government that welcomes growth 

and investment. 

 

I would like to take a minute and speak about the ministry I‟m 

responsible for, which is Government Services. The Ministry of 

Government Services may not be well-known among the 

public, but without the hard work of the Government Services 

employee the work of government would not be able to happen. 

Government Services leases or owns 741 buildings across our 

province, and we manage the central vehicle agency, the 

government fleet of vehicles which is approximately 4,800 

vehicles. We manage the government‟s air fleet that also 

includes three aircrafts for the province‟s air ambulance, as well 

as three aircraft for executive air services. Beyond the 

Government Services other core businesses include mail 

service, record management, telecommunications, and the 

operations of the purchasing branch. 

 

Government Services supports government‟s desire to have a 

smaller footprint. We are focusing on reducing government‟s 

footprint through the following initiative, the provincial space 

management strategy. Government Services continued to 

review its portfolio and manages plans of owned and leased 

spaces. We analyze space requirements and accommodation, 

the options for tenant‟s requests, and lease renewals. 

 

Identifying opportunities and devising plans to reduce the 

government‟s footprint, Government Services uses forward 

planning, an approach to provide adequate, usable space for all 

the ministries we serve. This work will become more 



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6935 

increasingly important as all the ministries implement their 

workforce adjustment strategies and will renew their workplace 

standards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, previously there was no standard for government 

working space, which meant that the workspace in government 

offices ranges anywhere from 18 to 27 square metres per 

employee. Now we have brought that standard across 

government down to 18.6 square metres. Now this new standard 

is going to result in a much smaller footprint for government. 

The challenges will be to relocate these spaces in ways that 

increase the efficiencies of government through smaller 

accommodation and the footprint decreased cost for taxpayers, 

and reduces the environmental impact on government‟s 

operations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, within the central vehicle agency, we introduced 

fleet right-sizing strategy. Progress has been made to reduce the 

size of the fleet, and as a result of reusing vehicles, reuse 

inventory, and disposing of aged Crown corporation vehicles 

and discontinued services to non-government organization, the 

central vehicle agency has reduced its overall fleet by 15 per 

cent. During the 2011-2012 fiscal year, the central vehicle 

agency will continue to pursue the reduction of its fleet through 

initiatives such as reducing the size of the central vehicle 

agency‟s redeployment and daily rental inventory. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Government Services is 

committed to the philosophy of resource and energy 

management. The ministry has implemented a number of 

energy management initiatives in its core buildings that has 

significantly reduced energy consumption, resulting in a 17 per 

cent reduction in the CO2 footprint for buildings. Mr. Speaker, 

this results in less money being spent by government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, this budget will continue to 

strengthen our economy and make more life affordable for 

Saskatchewan‟s people. Mr. Speaker, this budget builds on 

strong foundation that we introduced in our first budget and will 

continue to build on with the following. We will continue to 

build on the successes we have had in rebuilding this province‟s 

infrastructure and revitalizing the economy through historic tax 

cuts. Mr. Speaker, this is the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I was campaigning in 2007, knocking on 

doors and talking to the residents in my constituency of Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley, they told me they wanted a fiscally 

responsible government that would keep an eye on spending 

and pay down the debt. On March 23rd, we had tabled our 

fourth balanced budget. While our neighbouring Western 

provinces posted deficit budgets, we will post a surplus which is 

expected to be at 54.3 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 2011-2012 budget will see a debt payment of 

325 million to the General Revenue Fund, bringing down the 

debt to 3.81 billion. That is a reduction of 3 billion or 44 per 

cent since our government took office. That‟s within four years. 

Now this is the lowest level since 1987-88. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget will continue to strengthen our 

economy and make life more affordable for Saskatchewan 

people by reducing taxes. Saskatchewan families with 

dependent children will earn more tax-free income than 

anywhere else in Canada. The basic and spousal exemption 

amounts to an increase by $1,000, and the exemption amount 

for dependent children is increased by $500 per child. This will 

result in the savings of almost $2,500 in income tax for a family 

of four earning $50,000. This is the Saskatchewan advantage. 

This tax reduction will see another 22,000 people coming off 

the tax rolls. That means since our first budget was introduced 

in 2008, 114,000 Saskatchewan people are no longer paying 

provincial income tax. 

 

The 2011 and 2012 budget fulfills the government‟s 

commitment to reduce education property tax while making 

very important investments in school capital projects. The 

reduction in education property tax will mean a savings of 55.6 

million on farm land, residential property, and commercial 

property owners. That translates into an approximately 20 per 

cent reduction for residential property owners and by 

approximately 80 per cent on farm land. 

 

Saskatchewan farm families have shouldered an unfair burden 

of education funding through property tax on their land. Now 

our government is committed to creating a fair, balanced budget 

by reducing this tax burden. And we have kept that promise. 

Our government continues to work to meet the needs of 

Saskatchewan farmers. More than three-quarters of this year‟s 

Agriculture budget will fully fund business risk management 

programs including crop insurance, AgriStability, and 

AgriInvest. With this commitment, producers can head into the 

upcoming growing season knowing this government will stand 

behind them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, when speaking with my 

constituents from Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley they expressed 

their concerns for wanting to see more money in infrastructure. 

And our government listened and responded to those concerns. 

In this budget we also wanted to make sure that we maintained 

our momentum in eliminating the infrastructure deficit that was 

built up over many years prior to us forming government. The 

growing economy and population has put more demands on our 

roads and highways, and this budget will see 556.2 million 

invested in highways. In the four years, the Ministry of 

Highways and Infrastructure has improved over 6170 

kilometres of provincial highways, and efforts to improve and 

repair Saskatchewan‟s long-neglected highways continues. And 

what does this mean? This means safer roads for our school 

buses to travel on. It means, Mr. Speaker, our children, the 

future of Saskatchewan, are safer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have more people living in this province than 

we have ever had before. Our population is now at an all-time 

high. Mr. Speaker, we are seeing Saskatchewan family 

members coming home. They‟re coming home to new job 

opportunities. And we are welcoming new residents from across 

the country and from around the world. In my own 

constituency, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve witnessed that growth 

first-hand. 

 

On February the 1st, 2011, the Premier along with Mayor Pat 

Fiacco joined the Canadian Logistics Service president, Joe 

Roeder, in celebrating the grand opening of the company‟s new 

distribution centre at the Global Transportation Hub. This 



6936 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

distribution centre will generate up to 800 jobs when fully 

operational, and this, the Canadian Logistics Service 

distribution centre, is the first of major development at the 

Global Transportation Hub located in west Regina. And this 

Global Transportation Hub is stimulating the provincial 

economy by providing enhanced and efficient global supply 

chain for Saskatchewan exporters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government recognizes the need for everyone 

to have the opportunity to participate in the workforce. Thus our 

government has improved child care, and this budget has 

provided 2.1 million for 500 additional child care spaces since 

forming government. The number of child care spaces in 

Saskatchewan will have increased by more than 30 per cent. 

Now this is the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is investing 34 million in the 

children and youth agenda. The children and youth agenda 

identifies funding and programs across several ministries that 

addresses common problems facing children and families at 

risk. Our government is committed to responding to the 

recommendations that were brought forward by the 

Saskatchewan child welfare review panel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has not forgotten about 

low-income earners. As previously stated, our government has 

introduced an income tax reduction that will see another 22,000 

people coming off the tax roll. Our government has not 

forgotten about Saskatchewan‟s most vulnerable. 

 

Investments will bring on commitment to improve the quality of 

life and that sense of community that are the hallmarks of 

Saskatchewan. The 2011-2012 budget includes 2.3 million for 

the continued development of Saskatchewan assured income for 

disability program. We are committed to an additional 14 

million for further support for people with intellectual and 

cognitive disabilities. This funding will continue the progress 

on the multi-year initiative that provides specialized residential 

and day program services for people with intellectual 

disabilities. These investments, combined with 

across-government investment in Saskatchewan child and youth 

agenda, will work towards the goal of ensuring that our 

province‟s most vulnerable people receive the support they 

need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the Minister of Social Services, 

announced today Saskatchewan‟s advantage for affordable 

housing plan. Now this plan builds on the government‟s actions 

since taking office in 2007. We have invested $80 million to 

complete over 860 new, affordable rental housing units across 

the province. We have assisted nearly 400 households across 

the province to achieve ownership. 

 

Our government has five programs that will help increase 

housing supply and address housing affordability. The first is 

Headstart on a Home. The second is affordable home 

ownership. Third is rental construction initiative. The fourth is 

34 million investment in rental units. And the fifth is more 

money for Habitat for Humanity partnership. 

 

Our government will continue to embrace the benefits and the 

challenges of economic and population growth by creating 

more housing supply and working hard to make sure that life is 

more affordable for people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are investing in health care. The Saskatchewan 

Advantage budget will see an increase of 260 million from last 

year‟s budget. Our government is committed to provide 

Saskatchewan people with timely and quality health care 

services. This budget invests in the health needs to help the 

people of Saskatchewan who demand it. We are meeting the 

demands of our growing population. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the members opposite were sitting on this 

side of the House, they refused to set targets to tackle the 

serious nursing problem, the shortage of nursing in our 

province. Our government set a target to hire 800 nurses. Now 

this target has not only been met, but surpassed. 

 

We are addressing the need to access top physicians and health 

care providers in this province. We are funding more 

recruitment and training so Saskatchewan people can receive 

more timely access to health care. This budget continues with 

education and recruitment and retention of health care 

providers. 

 

For many years, Saskatchewan was actually losing people. 

People couldn‟t build their futures here. Saskatchewan is now 

the fastest growing province in the country. People are looking 

for opportunities and a great quality of life. And that‟s what we 

have right here in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that is what we 

call the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can‟t imagine nothing better than having 

everyone in this House vote in favour of the 2011-2012 budget, 

a budget that will continue to promote and move our province 

forward. That is why, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting this 

budget, and proud to do so. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased today to enter the debate on the budget of 2011, Mr. 

Speaker, the budget of the Minister of Finance delivered last 

week on March the 23rd. Mr. Speaker, this is certainly an 

interesting budget. We‟re hearing a number of things from 

government members, in government brochures, and in 

government speeches around the province, Mr. Speaker. But the 

important thing is, is that Saskatchewan people need to ensure 

they have all of the information necessary in order to judge this 

budget. 

 

And it‟s not just a single budget, Mr. Speaker. In fact this 

government is on its first and perhaps only term, electoral term, 

in government, Mr. Speaker. First elected in 2007 and now, Mr. 

Speaker, this is the fourth budget delivered since that election. 

We should perhaps, Mr. Speaker, judge this government and 

this budget, not on the specifics of one budget, Mr. Speaker, but 

on the specifics of all four. I think, Mr. Speaker, you will hear 

me say a couple of times over the next 20 minutes, four years 

and $40 billion later, what have we for the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? Four years and $40 billion. It‟s 

about priorities and where, Mr. Speaker, does the Sask Party 

place its priorities as opposed to where do the people of 

Saskatchewan see their priorities. 

 



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6937 

Let‟s start, Mr. Speaker, by having a look at what has been 

written recently, Mr. Speaker. An editorial in the Saskatoon 

StarPhoenix the day after the budget, Mr. Speaker, the headline 

on the Saskatoon StarPhoenix editorial is “Vision for future 

needed to retain Saskatchewan advantage.” Mr. Speaker, the 

first paragraph of that editorial reads, “Budgets, particularly in 

an election year, are as much political documents as they are a 

blueprint for the upcoming year‟s revenues and expenses.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the editorial then goes on, and I‟d like to quote 

this paragraph from the Saskatoon StarPhoenix of March 24th: 

 

This year, the Saskatchewan government chose to hang its 

political hat on an openly plagiarized slogan from the 

heady times of its western neighbour. Finance Minister 

Ken Krawetz recently told The StarPhoenix editorial 

board that his budget slogan, “Saskatchewan Advantage,” 

is copied directly from the “Alberta Advantage,” [Mr. 

Speaker]. 

 

Interesting point, the Saskatchewan Party in opposition used to 

think a lot about, used to speak a lot about how good things 

were in Alberta and how poor things were in Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, now in government over the last four years we can 

point to a large number of policies and programs and events, 

Mr. Speaker, that show that this government would rather be an 

Alberta-related party, Mr. Speaker, than a Saskatchewan-related 

party. Obviously their election budget presented last week in 

this Chamber, the slogan for that budget — advantage — is 

taken directly from the direction organized by or previously set 

out by the Alberta government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now let‟s take a look at another article from The StarPhoenix, 

Mr. Speaker. This is an article that came out just before the 

budget. StarPhoenix article on the third page of the March 17th 

edition of The StarPhoenix, the headline on the article is “The 

Alberta way now takes the wrong path”. And the article in the 

third paragraph says, and I quote, “In spite of Alberta‟s great 

resource wealth, this most prosperous of Canadian provinces 

has run up successive deficits while depleting savings 

accumulated over decades to pay for runaway spending.” 

 

[16:30] 

 

Then the article quotes Roger Gibbins, political scientist and 

head of the Calgary-based Canada West Foundation. The article 

says: 

 

According to Gibbins, Alberta‟s experience only confirms 

how difficult it is to control public spending in times of 

plenty. For governments to say “no” to spending demands 

is easy when there‟s no money. When there is plenty of 

money coming in, it‟s easier to say “yes.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the article then goes on to conclude, “What is 

required [in a province like Saskatchewan] . . . is an iron-clad 

[iron-clad] savings plan and a consensus that the savings are 

inviolable, except under the most dire circumstances.” And 

finally, Mr. Speaker, the articles concludes, “Here, the 

Saskatchewan Party . . . has indicated it is open to the idea of 

saving a percentage of resource royalties . . . Except that 

provincial debt increased this year, with government spending 

at a rate that requires all our resource revenues and then some.”  

Mr. Speaker, the article says, “That‟s more like Alberta under 

Ed Stelmach than it is like Norway,” a country that the article 

also praised, Mr. Speaker, for dealing with resource revenues 

adequately. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, here we have a government that brings down a 

budget based on an Alberta example, an Alberta example that‟s 

big on debt, big on spending and, Mr. Speaker, depleting the 

province‟s savings. So does this budget or have any of the 

budgets over the last four years, Mr. Speaker, followed the 

example of the name, the advantage that is Alberta‟s, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Well interestingly enough, as we‟re seeing, while the 

government talks about this budget reducing debt, Mr. Speaker, 

I think the Saskatchewan people need to and have access to 

page no. 61 of the budget document, Mr. Speaker. While there‟s 

a nice, glossy pamphlet circulating or about to be circulated in 

the province, Mr. Speaker, about the Sask Party government 

paying down debt, page 61 of the government‟s own 

documents, Mr. Speaker, shows the public debt of the General 

Revenue Fund in 2009 being $7.7 billion; 2010, $8 billion; 

2011, $8.4 billion; 2012, $8.9 billion; 2013, 9.7 billion; 2014, 

10.3 billion; and 2015, 10.5 billion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while the government will tell you that they‟re 

paying down debt — and to a certain extent they have indeed 

applied some money to the government‟s general revenue debt, 

Mr. Speaker — the public debt of the General Revenue Fund 

shows, establish, and proves beyond the shadow of a doubt that 

that comment in the pamphlets and the speeches is misleading 

the Saskatchewan population, Mr. Speaker. The public debt of 

the General Revenue Fund is increasing this year and will 

continue increasing through the four-year projected period of 

the budget to the year 2015. 

 

That having been said, Mr. Speaker, when the government says 

that they have taken funds this year to pay down government 

general debt . . . they‟re reducing that debt, as the member from, 

who spoke just before me, Mr. Speaker, they‟re taking that 

general debt from 4.1 billion to 3.8 billion. Mr. Speaker, if you 

look at the projections for the next four years, remembering this 

is an election budget, that 3.8 billion remains exactly the same 

through the next four years. 

 

All said and done, Mr. Speaker, this debt repayment that the 

government‟s talking about is not overall debt. But also, Mr. 

Speaker, it sends a message that this government believes in 

paying down debt when funds are available. There‟s no future 

debt paydown planned after this budget is concluded, Mr. 

Speaker, which is after the next election. So pay down some 

debt, go into an election, and don‟t project any further debt 

paydown at all. 

 

The public that is saying to the members of the Sask Party on 

the doorstep and in the coffee shops in their constituency, we 

want you to pay down debt. Mr. Speaker, they‟re being told by 

the Sask Party we‟re not paying down any more debt after this 

election. We‟re not paying it down. Mr. Speaker, it‟s clearly 

itemized on page 61 of the budget documents. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, we should be paying attention to the fact 

that this budget one week later is already out of date. It‟s not 



6938 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

actually accurate, Mr. Speaker, as far as the so-called surplus is 

concerned or the debt line items. 

 

Two things have happened, Mr. Speaker. After the budget was 

brought out, questions were asked of members of Treasury 

Board and the Minister of Finance. Teachers are in salary 

negotiations, Mr. Speaker. The teachers of the province of 

Saskatchewan are currently without a contract, and when a 

settlement occurs, if a settlement does occur, Mr. Speaker, it 

will apply for this fiscal year. Where is that money in this 

budget for settling a new contract with teachers, Mr. Speaker? 

Whether it be 2 per cent, 3 per cent, 10 per cent — Mr. Speaker, 

where is that money in the budget? The Treasury Board has 

indicated, Mr. Speaker, that it‟s not in the budget. It will be 

dealt with later. And funds for the teacher settlement, Mr. 

Speaker, will come out of where? Listen carefully, Mr. Speaker. 

It comes out of the surplus money available to the province. 

 

So in fact, Mr. Speaker, this surplus that their members are so 

haughtily talking about doesn‟t actually exist in the number 

that‟s in the budget. If the teachers‟ salary negotiations are 

completed, Mr. Speaker, that amounts to anything more than 

$50 million, this is a deficit budget, Mr. Speaker. And the 

government knows that. They know that clearly. But they‟re 

ignoring it, Mr. Speaker, in the interests of having their message 

communicated to the Saskatchewan population. 

 

And just today, Mr. Speaker, the government announces a new 

housing program that‟s going to rely on $200 million worth of 

loan guarantees. Where in the budget does that debt show, Mr. 

Speaker, if not for this year, in the four years projected out? Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s not in the budget. It‟s not in the budget. Two 

hundred million dollars of loan guarantee is government 

accepting new debt. It‟s not there. 

 

This budget is already out of date one week after it‟s delivered 

in this Chamber. The message that the government is moving to 

the Saskatchewan public about spending under control, about 

taxes going down, about debt going down, Mr. Speaker, this 

message is completely false. The debt is underrepresented, Mr. 

Speaker, and the surplus is misrepresented, Mr. Speaker. This 

budget is out of date, and it‟s out of whack, Mr. Speaker, and 

we should be holding . . . the public will be holding the 

government accountable to those matters. 

 

But let‟s go back to some of my original comments, Mr. 

Speaker. This is one of four budgets, four years of . . . This is 

the highest-spending government in the history of 

Saskatchewan. Members opposite in their speeches have talked 

about having spending under control, Mr. Speaker. But four 

years and $40 billion later, what do we have, Mr. Speaker? We 

have a housing program that‟s mostly debt based, the cash 

available, $1.7 million, $1.7 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we in The Battlefords could spend that on one 

project. For a provincial plan, Mr. Speaker, this is inadequate 

and it doesn‟t represent the needs of Saskatchewan people. Mr. 

Speaker, a growing economy needs the government to pay 

attention to certain things. This government, over this four-year 

period, has not paid attention to these things; and going into an 

election, Mr. Speaker, the public will hold them accountable. 

 

In The Battlefords, as in the rest of the province, Mr. Speaker, 

for a growing economy to sustain itself, for an economy of any 

kind, Mr. Speaker, to be able to sustain long-term growth, we 

need to ensure that we have a good, strong labour force, Mr. 

Speaker, and we need to be able to accommodate that labour 

force. 

 

So in The Battlefords, our issues are significant. They are 

similar to everywhere else, Mr. Speaker. We need to have a 

commitment to housing. We need to have a commitment to 

training. And we need to have a commitment to transportation 

and highway management, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have seen an inadequate response to housing in the three 

years to date and an inadequate response to housing in the 

current budget. We have a inadequate response to training, Mr. 

Speaker. This budget, as far as funding for regional colleges for 

training outside of advanced basic education, a hold-the-line or 

a maintenance budget, Mr. Speaker. No additional funding for 

training for the employees of our new growth industries in this 

province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in terms of The Battlefords in any case, 

certainly trying to find funding to ensure that we can manage 

the transportation crisis that we have going on, Mr. Speaker, 

there‟s absolutely nothing in this budget addressing that. Mr. 

Speaker, we‟ve got Highway 4 North that‟s overwhelmed with 

trucks coming down from Meadow Lake because primarily the 

railway from Meadow Lake has been shut down, Mr. Speaker. 

And there‟s no more lumber, no more forest product moving on 

the rail line, Mr. Speaker. It‟s all on the highway. It‟s increased 

damage to the road, and it‟s increased safety problems on 

Highway 4 North, Mr. Speaker. The communities have been 

talking to the Ministry of Highways for the last three years, Mr. 

Speaker, and so far nothing to reply. 

 

At the same time, just north of The Battlefords, Highway 378, 

Mr. Speaker, a very narrow, very curvy road, Mr. Speaker, 

that‟s received virtually no support over 40 years, Mr. Speaker. 

Obviously for the community to grow north of The Battlefords 

and contribute to the economy of The Battlefords, we need to 

see activity on that secondary road and other secondary roads 

across the province. 

 

The member from Meadow Lake is trying to engage in the 

debate. I anticipate a great speech about the rail line from 

Meadow Lake coming from the member when he gives his 

speech. I‟ll look forward to that, Mr. Speaker, because the RM 

[rural municipality] of Meadow Lake and the town of Meadow 

Lake or the city of Meadow Lake, Mr. Speaker, are very 

concerned about the lack of rail line access to that important 

part of the province, Mr. Speaker. Lots of very, very important 

things happening there. 

 

Speaking of four years, $40 billion worth of spending, Mr. 

Speaker, and what does that mean for Saskatchewan Hospital at 

North Battleford? Mr. Speaker, the mayor of North Battleford is 

disappointed that this budget contains no funding for 

Saskatchewan Hospital. The president of the Battlefords 

Chamber of Commerce is disappointed that there‟s no funding 

for Saskatchewan Hospital. The representatives from Prairie 

North Regional Health Authority disappointed that there‟s no 

funding for Saskatchewan Hospital. Representatives of the 

mental health community, Mr. Speaker, and professionals in the 



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6939 

mental health field are disappointed that there‟s no funding for 

the Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford. Mr. Speaker, 

representatives of the Canadian Mental Health Association are 

disappointed that there‟s no funding for the Saskatchewan 

Hospital. 

 

There‟s really no excuse for this, Mr. Speaker. When Prairie 

North made its first proposal for including a replacement of 

Saskatchewan Hospital as its priority for regional spending in 

2004, Mr. Speaker, the response was very well received by the 

Department of Health. And, Mr. Speaker, as funding became 

available, the commitment to the Saskatchewan Hospital 

replacement project was made, Mr. Speaker, in 2006. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have in my hand the proposal that was made by 

Prairie North Regional Health Authority to the Saskatchewan 

Party government earlier this year, Mr. Speaker. In fact, the 

minutes of the regional health authority would indicate that the 

board approved this proposal coming forward in October to 

ensure that it would be considered in the budget planning for 

this year. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to read from the conclusion of the 

Prairie North proposal that has gone back to government, Mr. 

Speaker. Here‟s the conclusion that‟s in their report, and I 

quote: 

 

Individuals struggling with long term psychiatric illness 

and/or high complex needs are amongst the most 

vulnerable members of our society. Their needs often go 

unexpressed by virtue of the individual‟s limitations. 

Their voices are amongst the most difficult to hear. It falls 

to us all to listen, reflect, and act to address their needs 

across the entire continuum of mental health care and 

service by providing appropriate facilities and programs, 

with appropriate resources and supports that other 

segments of society have come to expect. The provincial 

strategy proposed by this report — with replacement of 

Saskatchewan Hospital North Battleford at its core — 

puts the needs of these patients/clients first. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government came to office four years ago. 

They said, we are going to address health care from a 

patient-first perspective. Four years and $40 billion later, the 

health region is saying to this government they have not yet put 

the patient first in the mental health field, Mr. Speaker. It‟s time 

to do that. 

 

The Prairie North Health Region also says: 

 

Replacement of Saskatchewan Hospital North Battleford 

affords the perfect opportunity to improve the quality of 

care, the quality of life for all mental health patients and 

clients across the provincial spectrum of mental health 

services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, having received that document, having reviewed 

that document, Mr. Speaker, having reviewed the entire Health 

budget, Mr. Speaker, that contains more spending this year than 

ever before, the Minister of Health had the audacity to stand in 

this Chamber just a week ago, a week and a half ago, Mr. 

Speaker, and say that it‟s time to take mental health delivery out 

of the back bushes of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The minister misunderstands the proposal in front of him, he 

misunderstands the needs of the mental health community, and 

he has failed to convince the Minister of Finance and his 

cabinet colleagues of the value of this project, Mr. Speaker, to 

all Saskatchewan residents represented by people not only in 

The Battlefords, but across the entire spectrum in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a hugely important project. The folks at 

Prairie North Regional Health Authority have been working 

since 2004, Mr. Speaker, to package this appropriately for 

government. They acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, in the very first 

study that they did, Mr. Speaker, with the backing of and 

support of Saskatchewan Health and the minister of Health in 

2004, they put their facility audit and building program analysis 

together, Mr. Speaker. This was the first major step towards 

ultimately getting a new hospital. This 2004 report was done by 

Friggstad Downing Henry Architects, Mr. Speaker, and the first 

recommendation in the report was: the time is past due to 

redirect facility changes at Saskatchewan Hospital, North 

Battleford. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another recommendation: the program 

requirement for Saskatchewan Hospital, North Battleford can 

be much better served in a new facility which is designed to 

meet current functional programming objectives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2006, Prairie North Regional Health Authority, 

Saskatchewan Property Management, and Saskatchewan 

Ministry of Health retained and paid for Cannon Design in 

association with AODBT architects and planners to undertake a 

process redesign study, a functional program and concept 

design, for the new provincial tertiary psychiatric rehabilitation 

facility in North Battleford. 

 

Prior to the 2007 election, Mr. Speaker, all of the work of that 

architectural and concept study, Mr. Speaker, was presented to a 

public meeting in the city of North Battleford and approved by 

the community as a whole. The next step, to be funded by the 

Saskatchewan Party government after the 2007 election, Mr. 

Speaker, was to take those designs and move them to the bid 

process, Mr. Speaker. Four years and $40 billion of spending 

later, and that still has not been done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This budget could have had a simple, simple line item in it that 

indicated this project can be moved to tender, Mr. Speaker, by 

having the concept work moved to the architectural work, Mr. 

Speaker, to ensure that the contracts can now be bid upon, that 

the contractors have an opportunity to tell us what the cost of 

this project is going to be. 

 

This government failed, Mr. Speaker, to respond to that. They 

have failed to provide the necessary funding to take this project 

further, Mr. Speaker. All they have done is called for a 

rescoping of the project which in fact is reducing the number of 

beds in the facility, Mr. Speaker, and developing a broader 

based response to mental health needs in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I will acknowledge and accept that we need 

a broad-based strategy to deal with mental health in 

Saskatchewan. I think Prairie North has hit the nail on the head, 



6940 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

Mr. Speaker, in the way in which it has presented its plans to 

the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. At the core of 

it, however, at the core of the plan is the replacement of 

Saskatchewan Hospital, North Battleford — replacement that 

could easily have been started by funding from this 

government. 

 

There‟s been money for a domed stadium that‟s not going to 

happen. There‟s been money set aside for a carbon capture 

project that‟s not going to happen. There‟s been money set 

aside for an isotope development program at the University of 

Saskatchewan that‟s not going to happen. But four years and 

$40 billion worth of spending later and still no further 

development at the Sask Hospital project. Mr. Speaker, this is 

disappointing. It‟s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker. The commitment 

of this government has to be to the people in the mental health 

community in Saskatchewan. 

 

Let‟s go back to my comments off the top, Mr. Speaker. The 

StarPhoenix said, in response to the March 23rd budget, vision 

is needed for the future in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. If 

there‟s an advantage in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and it‟s not 

just a duplication of Alberta‟s advantage, if there‟s an 

advantage in Saskatchewan, we need vision to ensure that it 

moves ahead. Mr. Speaker, that vision includes a new 

Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford. It includes a 

housing program that is not just adding debt to the 

Saskatchewan bottom line. It needs a transportation policy that 

takes into account changes in the way transportation is 

occurring. And it needs training opportunities for the new 

labour force, Mr. Speaker, that‟s going to help to develop a 

long-term, sustainable economic growth program for the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it‟s very simple to see why I cannot support 

the budget that‟s brought down by this government. Not only 

the budget presented this year, but when you accumulate 

everything that‟s been said, Mr. Speaker, the misrepresentation 

of the debt in the province and the lack of commitment to those 

things that will really help our communities, Mr. Speaker, it‟s 

obvious I can‟t support this budget. I will support the 

amendment that‟s on the table, Mr. Speaker, because it talks 

about building growth in this province, specifically on housing, 

and providing a revenue base that will allow us to build a 

savings program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity for letting me say 

a few words about the budget today. And, Mr. Speaker, as 

everyone in my community knows, I‟ll be happy to answer 

questions in The Battlefords on the budget on any opportunity 

provided to me. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much 

for the privilege to speak on this fantastic budget. First of all, I 

would like to thank the people of Batoche. My Batoche 

constituency is a very diverse, very diverse communities. 

We‟ve got a large Ukrainian population, a large French 

population, a large Métis population, and a large Norwegian 

population, and also a large German population. 

 

So we are very diverse, but it is a beautiful, beautiful 

constituency. I‟d also like to thank my CA [constituency 

assistant] Mary Anne Telfer and her husband Don for the work 

they do for the constituency, and it is muchly appreciated. 

Thank you very much Mary Anne and Don. I‟d also like to 

thank my wife Valerie for her years of support and her constant 

aiding and assisting me in my duties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after 16 years of NDP government promises, the 

Saskatchewan Party government is moving forward — not just 

promising — moving forward with projects like the building of 

the St. Louis Bridge. With the groundwork well under way, it is 

an exciting project to actually see coming to fruition. For the 

people of the area, it means a lot of possibilities that were not 

achievable before. To the province, it means the final link for 

primary weight hauls on the No. 2 Highway from Regina to La 

Ronge. We are all looking forward to the day of the grand 

opening of the new bridge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, three and a half years ago, even though the forest 

industry world wide was going into a slump, the former NDP 

government proposed dumping $100 million into the P.A. pulp 

mill. With the way world markets made their downward spiral, 

this would have meant Saskatchewan people would have lost 

$100 million along with the pulp mill. 

 

Now the Saskatchewan Party, through due diligence and careful 

planning, has guided the sale of the Prince Albert pulp mill to a 

company called Paper Excellence. They will be manufacturing 

pulp fibre that will be processed into rayon cloth. This is 

fantastic news for Prince Albert and surrounding area, in fact all 

of Saskatchewan. This is truly a win-win situation for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan‟s birth came in 1905, but 

Saskatchewan‟s rebirth comes with this budget. After 60 years 

of dormancy, Saskatchewan has come out of its cocoon. We 

have shed the cocoon-like blanket that has been smothering us 

and dragging us backwards since the dirty thirties. Just like that 

cocoon, Saskatchewan was hanging in the dark, upside-down 

world with no hopes, dreams, or expectations of a brighter day 

— just eternal darkness, failure, and continued decline as we 

begged for more equalization payments. These were the barriers 

surrounding us on all sides, letting no one in, driving away 

investment, and sending our children to seek their futures 

elsewhere. Everyone said woe is poor Saskatchewan, the poor, 

little have-not province. 

 

Now Saskatchewan is like an emerging butterfly spreading its 

wings for the first time. Now we can finally believe in ourselves 

and take our destiny in our own hands. We are shedding the 

blanket of fear, loathing, and insignificance that has been 

dragging us backward and destroying us as our young people 

left and our population fell. As we take flight, we can see on our 

horizon sights that, just a short three and a half years ago, 

seemed unattainable. We see Saskatchewan as an economic 

powerhouse, not just in Canada but as a global juggernaut. 

 

As we spread our wings, the world is watching. We have what 

the world needs. And the world‟s population growth, the need 

for potash grows. Today and the future, world food supplies 

will be dependent, dependent, Mr. Speaker, on Saskatchewan 

potash. In order to supply the food needs of the growing 

population of this planet, maximum food . . . 



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6941 

The Speaker: — It being 5 p.m., the House will take a 

welcome recess. We‟ll resume again at 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6909 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6909 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6909 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6909 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6909 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6910 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6910 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6910 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6910 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6911 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6911 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6911 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6911 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Remembering the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory Fire 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6912 

 New Democratic Party Convention 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6912 

 Team Canada Wins Silver in World Women’s Curling 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6912 

 Saskatchewan Housing Strategy 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6912 

 Reaction to Saskatchewan Budget 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6913 

 Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendments 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6913 

 Fiscal Fitness 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6913 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Supply of Physicians 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6914 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6914 

 College Merger 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6915 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6915 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6916 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6917 

 Housing Announcement 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6917 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6917 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Housing Plan 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6918 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6920 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6919 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6919 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6919 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 Audit of Colleges 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6921 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6921 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6921 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6925 



 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6928 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6930 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6934 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6936 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6940 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


