




















































Hansard: April 11, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 46A  MONDAY, APRIL 11, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7175 

 April 11, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all of my colleagues in the Assembly I‟d 

like to welcome some very special guests from the Parkinson 

Society of Saskatchewan: President Floyd Manz, Else Manz, 

Colleen Crossman, Pat Duggleby, Kate Duggleby, Katrine 

McKenzie, Sandi Hewitt, Betty Lou Earl, Lindsey Olson, 

Warren Sharp, and Kevin Kirkness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these people are here to watch the proceedings in 

the member‟s statement today in recognition of April as 

Parkinson‟s Month. And I would like to thank them for being 

here and providing the inspiration for many of us who have 

Parkinson‟s. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to add the 

opposition‟s welcome to the Parkinson Society to the legislature 

today and thank them for all the good work that they do 

supporting people with this disease. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast, the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to 

introduce our victims services and volunteers and would request 

leave for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for the opportunity, 

asked for leave to do an extended introduction. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 

to all members. This is Victims of Crime Awareness Week in 

Saskatchewan, and I would like to introduce seven victims 

services volunteers who are seated in your gallery. They are 

Fran Murray who in an earlier life sang with a band, Lady and 

the Gentleman; and also Elevera Fraser. They are from the 

Melfort office. This will also give — they are retiring as well — 

this will give Elevera a chance to spend more time with her two 

and a half year old great-grandson. So Elevera, if you want to 

give a wave, you and Fran would like to give a wave. These are 

people that look incredibly young for being retirees. 

 

Bill Rustad is a volunteer and board member in northeast 

victims services; as well Carol Pederson, Dianne Smutt, 

Prudence McKenzie, and Tina Bird are also volunteers that are 

here today. These are the dedicated volunteers who work out of 

the northeast, Parkland, Prince Albert, southeast, and southwest 

victims services programs. They are joined by Pat Thiele and 

Dwight Lawrence from victims services as well as Melvina 

Goulet, the northern program manager. They‟re also seated with 

Linsay Rabyj and Sharon Hassard from Justice, 

communications. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was honoured to join our volunteers for lunch 

today to present each of them with a gift commemorating either 

their 10th or 15th anniversary as a volunteer victim support 

worker or board member. I appreciate and thank them for their 

commitment and ongoing support of victims of crime. We are 

grateful that people such as these are willing to expend their 

time and energy to help victims of crime as they navigate the 

justice system. 

 

I would ask that all members join me in expressing our 

appreciation of the dedication of these individuals and all of the 

nearly 300 victim support workers and 100 board members for 

their years of voluntary service to people of their communities. 

This is a wonderful opportunity to thank people who have made 

a great deal of difference to their communities. We value them. 

We estimate that they spend in excess, on an annual basis, 

11,000 hours to help thousands of victims of crime and tragedy. 

 

We‟ve had many of these volunteers over the years and would 

ask that all members join me in welcoming there to their 

Assembly and thanking them for their good work. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition, I want to join with the minister in 

welcoming the representatives of victims services in the 

Chamber today. You only have to visit once a family or 

community devastated by a particularly horrendous crime, as 

some of us have had the occasion to do in the past few years, to 

realize how important, how invaluable the services provided by 

victim services are, how irreplaceable they would be. In a day 

where we often bemoan the loss of community, these are people 

who are swimming up against the stream and helping their 

friends and neighbours in their community immeasurably, Mr. 

Speaker. So again, I would urge members to welcome them to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I‟d like to welcome my constituency assistant, Kelly 

Merriman. Kelly‟s been with me since the — Kelly, you want 

to stand up and give a wave? — Kelly‟s been with me since the 

by-election, Mr. Speaker, and I‟m sure she‟ll be with me after 

the general election as well. She certainly does a good job 

running the office and keeps me organized, Mr. Speaker, and 

that‟s a job in and of itself. So I would ask my colleagues in the 

legislature to please welcome Kelly to her legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 



7176 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2011 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 

today to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly 30 grade 12 students from F.W. Johnson Collegiate 

in my riding, Mr. Speaker. These are grade 12 students who are 

here to observe question period today and spend a few minutes 

here in their Assembly to observe the proceeding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they‟re accompanied by two teachers: one being 

Brian Merryweather, their teacher; and the second being the 

principal, Mr. Luc Lerminiaux, I guess, Mr. Speaker. French 

name; I just looked at it and, Mr. Speaker, wasn‟t quite sure 

how to say it. But, Mr. Speaker, I wish to welcome these 

students to their Assembly and hope that they have a wonderful 

time observing the proceedings today. And I‟ll have an 

opportunity to meet with you later on this afternoon. Take care. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 

to you to all the members, I would like to introduce several 

people here in your gallery. Two are from my constituency. Ms. 

Sophie Foster, she‟s 90-something years young, has a mind like 

a steel trap, which is more than I can say for my seatmate. 

Anyway Sophie was a teacher for 29 years, and she taught at a 

one-room schoolhouse at the village which no longer exists 

called Louvain near Biggar. At that time when you boarded a 

teacher, you got $15 off your taxes. So she has some interesting 

stories, and I‟d like to welcome her to her Assembly. 

 

While I‟m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, another constituent is here 

as well. His name is Tadesse Eyasu. Tadesse is now a Canadian 

citizen. He emigrated from Eritrea, and as you know, Eritrea 

was formed in ‟91 separating from Ethiopia. He also has some 

very interesting stories. He works at the university and has a 

cleaning business, works seven days a week and is sponsoring 

many of his family to come to Canada because Eritrea is not a 

democracy. They‟ve closed the university. And he tells me that 

when you ask questions, you get shot. And he is very much 

enjoying Canada and the democratic process. And I would like 

us all please to make a special welcome to Tadesse. 

 

Also while on my feet, Mr. Speaker, my CA [constituency 

assistant], Danielle Velazquez, is here. Danielle is a wonderful, 

wonderful woman, does an excellent job. And everybody that 

knows her loves her, and she‟s a good person. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. To you and through you I‟d like to introduce my 

constituency assistant, the CA for Saskatoon Silver Springs, 

Marilyn Kohuch. Marilyn is new to the office. She just 

undertook her responsibilities in the last couple of months. 

She‟s had a productive career at Great-West Life, some 17 

years. I won‟t make any comments on my seatmate, other than 

the fact that he will probably want to be Health minister for 17 

years as well. But to Marilyn, thank you for coming to your 

Legislative Assembly. To all members, please help me 

welcome Marilyn Kohuch to her Legislative Assembly. 

 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan residents who 

have faced surging rent increases that are simply making life in 

Saskatchewan unaffordable. And, Mr. Speaker, the petition also 

speaks to a comparison between the city of Winnipeg and the 

cities of Regina and Saskatoon, that from 2007 to 2009 CMHC 

[Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation] shows that there 

are fewer than 300 rental unit starts in Saskatchewan‟s two 

largest cities combined. And during that same period in 

Winnipeg, which has rent controls, Mr. Speaker, over 1,500 

new rental units were built. 

 

And it also highlights a paper that was produced out of Calgary 

School for Public Policy, increasing the affordability of rental 

housing in Saskatchewan, which calls for both incentives for 

building new rental properties and instituting rent controls. And 

the author says that “The greatest attraction of 

second-generation rent control is the protection it offers sitting 

tenants against the severe deterioration of housing affordability 

caused by high rent increases — in effect . . . economic 

eviction.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, and the prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: to cause the government to immediately 

enact rent control legislation that protects Saskatchewan 

tenants from unreasonable rental increases. 

 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition again from people who are concerned about 

maintaining quality health care services in the province. 

 

The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth that the Government of 

Saskatchewan ought to recognize the need for timely 

access to comprehensive and quality health care services 

for all communities within the province, including Wakaw 

and surrounding areas, and that the disruption of 

emergency services and in-patient services at Wakaw 

Hospital will not serve the needs of the residents in this 

community and surrounding areas; and 

 

That the cuts in access to timely and accurate diagnostic 

and laboratory tests within the community of Wakaw and 

surrounding areas will not serve the needs of the residents; 

and 

 

That the Saskatoon Regional Health Authority budgetary 

reductions ought not to impede the provision of valuable, 

compassionate, and appropriate health care services to all 

citizens within the geographic boundary requiring acute 



April 11, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7177 

care, community and home care, long-term care, and 

public health care. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintain quality health care 

services through the commitment of necessary funding to 

address critical retention and recruitment issues. 

 

And the signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from the 

citizens from Yellow Creek, Watrous, Tisdale, Humboldt, 

Cudworth, Saskatoon, and Wakaw. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. And we know that freedom from poverty is an 

enshrined human right by the United Nations, and all citizens 

are entitled to social and economic security. And we know the 

income gap between the rich and poor continues to grow, and 

now one in five children in Saskatchewan live in deepening 

poverty, and citizens living in poverty have long identified 

affordable solutions. Recent national provincial initiatives 

include the Saskatoon health disparities report and the Canada 

Without Poverty Dignity for All campaign call for a 

comprehensive elimination of poverty strategy. I‟d like to read 

the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

I do so present. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to present a 

petition on behalf of my constituents who live in the 

neighbourhood of Hampton Village in my constituency. 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes including education property taxes; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to 

neighbouring communities to attend schools that are 

typically already reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

constituents of Saskatoon Massey Place. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise yet 

again to read aloud a petition regarding restoring funding equity 

to Regina Catholic schools. Mr. Speaker, Regina Catholic 

schools receive $275 less per pupil than Regina public schools, 

amounting to a funding inequity of $2.7 million in total. The 

funding inequity replaces program delivery and staffing levels 

at risk. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan has denied Catholic school 

boards in the province representation on the 

government-appointed committee mandated to develop a 

long-term funding formula for Saskatchewan school boards. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to address the funding inequity between 

Regina Catholic schools and Regina public schools that 

provides $275 less per pupil funding for Regina Catholic 

school students, totalling $2.7 million, and make known 

that the continuation for another school year of funding 

inequity places program delivery and staffing levels at 

risk in Regina Catholic schools; and in so doing, 

immediately restore funding equity to ensure that every 

student in Saskatchewan, whether enrolled in a Catholic 

or a public school, receives equitable resources to ensure 

every student in Saskatchewan has access to a quality 

education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the residents of 

Moose Jaw and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again 

today to present a petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan 

concerned about the detrimental affect on human rights law that 

the Bill 160 will have if enacted. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

withdraw Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public 

consultations informed by a public policy paper before 

any amendments to the Human Rights Code, the law that 

supersedes all others in our province, are even considered. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Regina, Saskatoon, 

and Prince Albert. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 



7178 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2011 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of their 

finances, our finances, by the Sask Party. They allude 

specifically to the fact that the Sask Party has run deficits and 

increased debt at a period of record highs in revenues, an 

increase of debt of over $1.3 billion over the last three years and 

this year alone, with record highs in revenues, increasing debt 

to the tune of $548 million, Mr. Speaker, recognizing that this 

comes at a consequence now and well into the future. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

White City, Tregarva, Grenfell, and Regina. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Remembering the Battle of Vimy Ridge  

 

Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 

9, 1917 the ground assault began at Vimy Ridge, a strategic 

14-kilometre escarpment in France held by the German soldiers. 

In four days of fighting, 3,600 Canadian soldiers died, 5,000 

were wounded, yet the battle was hailed as the first Allied 

success in the war. 

 

Each and every year, Canadians celebrate April 9th as one of 

the most important military engagements in Canada‟s history, 

yet few Canadians recognize the unique importance of this 

event. Thankfully the Vimy Foundation has been actively 

working with Canada‟s youth to share the story of Vimy Ridge 

with a new generation of Canadians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we look forward to the 100th anniversary of 

Vimy Ridge in 2017, I hope that more and more Canadians 

become engaged with our nation‟s history. Canada suffered 

60,000 fatalities throughout the First World War. Mr. Speaker, 

our victory over the German forces at Vimy Ridge signalled the 

beginning of Canada‟s evolution as a sovereign nation. Mr. 

Speaker, in honour of that sacrifice made by our soldiers, the 

nation of France granted Canada 107 hectares of land at Vimy 

to build and maintain a memorial. It‟s imperative that Canada‟s 

youth preserve the memory of the Battle of Vimy Ridge, and 

the foundation will help ensure that happens. 

 

On behalf of this House, I would like to express heartfelt 

gratitude to those Canadians who fought at Vimy Ridge. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

World Men’s Curling Championship 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to congratulate Team Canada on winning the Ford World 

Men‟s Curling Championship on Sunday night at the Brandt 

Centre here in Regina. Forty-seven-year-old Jeff Stoughton 

completed his most illustrious curling campaign by adding his 

second world title to a glittering list of accomplishments that 

includes three Brier wins and a record nine Manitoba titles. 

 

Stoughton of Winnipeg‟s Charleswood Curling Club skipped 

his team of Jonathan Mead, Reid Carruthers and Steve Gould to 

a second world men‟s championship Sunday night with a 

thrilling 6-5 final victory over Scotland, the Scots ably skipped 

by Tom Brewster of Aberdeen. Sunday evening had a fantastic 

atmosphere as the teams performed in front of a final night 

crowd of 5,854 at the Brandt Centre. Total attendance for the 

nine-day event was 99,445. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Regina knows how to put on an event, and this 

was no exception. Much of the success has to be attributed to 

the volunteers that sacrificed their time and effort for something 

they love very much. There were over 520 volunteers at the 

championship this week. There‟s no way you can put on an 

event like this without volunteer support. 

 

The many volunteers helped with security, selling 50/50s, being 

hosts, providing transportation, working as bartenders, selling 

drink tickets, working on the ice, and cleaning up at the ice 

level. They are the true key to success. You need sponsors and 

ticket sales, but the volunteers are the heart and soul and add the 

warmth and hospitality to the event. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, we would like 

to congratulate Team Canada, the fans, and the volunteers on 

the World Men‟s Curling Championships, a tremendous 

success. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 

 

National Parkinson’s Disease Month 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the words of 

Michael J. Fox, and I quote, “People should know that scientists 

say of all the neurodegenerative diseases, Parkinson‟s is the 

closest to a cure in our lifetime.” That‟s just one reason why 

April, and in particular April 11th, is of such importance to the 

Parkinson‟s community. Parkinson‟s disease affects the nervous 

system and causes people to have less control over their 

muscles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we should all be concerned about Parkinson‟s 

disease because it affects more of us than we think. Over 4,000 

people in Saskatchewan have Parkinson‟s. At this time there is 

no known prevention from Parkinson‟s disease, and treatments 

only help to manage symptoms. There is no cure, but by raising 

awareness we can help raise funds for those searching for a cure 

and for urgently needed support programs. 

 

Parkinson Society Saskatchewan has been the voice of 

Saskatchewan people living with Parkinson‟s since 1972. Its 



April 11, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7179 

purpose is to ease the burden and find a cure through education, 

support, research, and advocacy. Parkinson Society 

Saskatchewan touches every community across the province 

through its partnerships with nine support groups, health care 

professionals, research associations, and volunteers. Mr. 

Speaker, I‟d ask that everyone in this Assembly recognize April 

as National Parkinson‟s Disease Month and April 11th as 

International Parkinson‟s Day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Wolf Willow Cohousing  

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I recently had the 

privilege of attending the groundbreaking ceremony for the 

newest housing project in Saskatoon Riversdale: Wolf Willow 

Cohousing located right on the boundary between the 

communities of King George and Riversdale. Mr. Speaker, 

Wolf Willow is about building community. It‟s a 21-unit condo 

development for those 55 and older with extensive common 

areas so neighbours can gather together when they choose. 

 

Co-housing is a neighbourhood design that combines the 

autonomy of private dwellings with the advantages of shared 

resources and community living. And in keeping with the 

co-housing model that originated in Denmark about 50 years 

ago, the soon-to-be residents of Wolf Willow have actively 

participated in the planning. They have set their goal to create 

an old-fashioned neighbourhood that supports friendly 

co-operation, socializing, mutual support, and environmental 

responsibility. 

 

In the words of one of the residents: 

 

Cohousing is the answer for all “baby boomers” who 

don‟t want to live alone and want to “age in place” with 

kindred spirits. It is ecologically responsible, socially 

beneficial, and hard work, like all things worthwhile. 

 

Another adds: 

 

The workshops, the sauna, the exercise room, and the 

large common areas, both inside and outside, are only a 

few of the things I am looking forward to sharing with my 

new neighbours. How nice it will be to have an in-house 

movie night, or a communal dinner, or to make salsa and 

jam together in the big beautiful kitchen we are planning.  

 

Mr. Speaker, construction will begin soon and the owners 

anticipate moving in in the spring of 2012. As someone who 

lives just a few blocks away, I could not be more thrilled to be 

gaining some great new neighbours. With that I just want to 

say, welcome to the community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

World Men’s Curling Championship 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased to 

stand in this Assembly today and recognize the Jeff Stoughton 

rink for their great performances all week, which culminated 

with a world title on Sunday. 

Stoughton, along with third Jonathan Mead, second Reid 

Carruthers, lead Steve Gould, alternate Garth Smith, and coach 

Norm Gould were the class of the field during the round robin, 

finishing with only one loss. 

 

In the 1-2 page playoff game, the Stoughton rink defeated 

Scotland 5 to 2, and the two teams met again in the final, their 

third meeting of the week. Our Canadian team was down early 

in the championship game, but they remained confident. In the 

8th end, Stoughton scored 2 points with the hammer to assume 

a 6 to 4 lead, and it seemed clear that his powerhouse team 

would not relinquish the advantage. 

 

One of the highlights for the crowd was in the 7th end. Mr. 

Speaker, Stoughton performed his patented spinarama, 

executing a 360-degree turn out of the hack before firing the 

rock through the house to blank the end. The manoeuvre 

brought down the house. “That was pretty cool,” the smiling 

Stoughton said of the spinarama. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, I would like to 

congratulate Team Stoughton on their world championship title. 

I would also like to commend the thousands of volunteers and 

the organizing committee for putting on another successful 

world-class sporting event in Regina. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Taste of Culture 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to offer 

congratulations to the organizers and participants who 

coordinated and carried off the highly successful 4th annual 

Taste of Culture in The Battlefords. 

 

This multicultural event highlights the food, music, and culture 

of the diverse community that exists in and around The 

Battlefords, and at the same time increases public awareness, 

community involvement, and cultural literacy in The 

Battlefords. The event was organized by The Battlefords 

Immigration Resource Centre, coordinated by gateway program 

manager Jennifer Niesink. It attracted vendors featuring food 

from China, Denmark, France, Italy, Korea, The Philippines, 

Norway, South Africa, Ukraine, Saskatchewan First Nations, 

and Saskatchewan‟s early settlers. 

 

The dance and music program featured First Nations drummers, 

the high school jazz band, square dancers, Highland dancers, 

Ukrainian dancers, the Meota Hobby Band, a First Nations 

Michael Jackson impersonator, a Ruthenian children‟s group, 

and an elementary school jazz band. 

 

The Battlefords immigration and multicultural community is 

growing. The Taste of Culture event is growing. This is all good 

news for the region. 

 

I call on all members to join me in congratulating The 

Battlefords Immigration Resource Centre for their hard work on 

this important event and on their daily endeavours helping 

newcomers to our community settle appropriately and 

adequately. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 



7180 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2011 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Increased Business Optimism in Saskatchewan 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Spring has sprung in 

Saskatchewan, and with that there are certain trends we can see. 

One such trend is for a fourth consecutive year the Government 

of Saskatchewan has tabled a balanced budget. 

 

There is another growing trend: our businesses are becoming 

more confident. The opposition members may feel a little down, 

Mr. Speaker, but the barometer of business optimism in 

Saskatchewan jumped up significantly in March to a 

nation-leading 75.2 points. In Saskatchewan the 75.2 barometer 

rating in March represented a 4.6 per cent, point, increase from 

February. 

 

Mr. Speaker, tax cuts announced in the recent provincial 

budget, the general good state of the economy, and high prices 

for agricultural and resource products produced in 

Saskatchewan were mentioned as explanation for the increased 

optimism. “We have a number of things going our way,” said 

Marilyn Braun-Pollon, the vice-president of Saskatchewan 

agribusiness with the CFIB [Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business]. 

 

In addition to being rated high on the overall business 

barometer rating, Saskatchewan business owners were 

optimistic in answers to several specific questions. For 

example, 51 per cent of those surveyed in Saskatchewan said 

the overall state of business is good compared with only 38 per 

cent nationally. Thirty per cent of Saskatchewan businesses said 

they plan to increase full-time employment in the next three to 

four months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that there is more work to do for sure, 

but it is nice to see that business confidence in our province 

continues to grow, and more and more people are realizing that 

our province is the place to be. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Pension Plans and Arrangements for Office Space 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, using 

public pension funds for a private sector investment does put 

the pension funds at an increased level of risk. To the Minister 

of Government Services: does this government believe the 

province‟s hard-working employees and their pension fund 

should be used as pawns in the world of private high-stakes real 

estate? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much for the question, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the pension industry over the last 

number of years has faced some predicaments. We know across 

Canada a number of pension plans have had the need to review 

and to determine whether or not they‟re still in a soluble 

situation, Mr. Speaker. There have been many changes to 

pension plans. So, Mr. Speaker, in terms of whether or not the 

government will be making some additional changes to the 

pension plan, that‟s for further discussion. Thank you very 

much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Not even close, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. 

Speaker, we know that this government is committed to rent 50 

to 60,000 square feet of office space at the highest rates in the 

province. Now we find out that the pension fund of 

Saskatchewan employees is being used to finance the project. 

So government employees will be working in the building and 

their pension fund will be financing it. 

 

My question is for the minister: if public money is part of this 

deal, why won‟t the government be transparent and release the 

details? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I believe the member‟s 

asking about the Saskatchewan Pension Plan based in 

Kindersley, and the SPP [Saskatchewan Pension Plan] plan that 

exists. You know, if the question is related to that plan, Mr. 

Speaker, we‟ve seen some tremendous changes in that plan in 

the last number of months. We looked at the plan, and the 

recommendation from the board of directors was that we 

enhance the $600 contribution to $2,500. There was discussion 

with the federal government, and indeed the changes were 

permitted by the federal government. We‟ve enacted those 

changes. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that change occurred just at the end of the 

calendar year 2010. And we saw tremendous uptake in terms of 

the pension plan. Many people took advantage of enhancing 

their contribution from 600 to 2,500. 

 

It‟s a very good plan, Mr. Speaker. As the discussion occurs 

across Canada for whether or not there should be a pooled plan, 

you know, one of the best kept secrets is the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan. Because it‟s one of the best in Canada, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, this is even more worrisome if 

the minister isn‟t even on the right page. We‟re talking about 

the 50 to 60,000 square feet that this government has committed 

to lease for over 20 years in the new office tower in downtown 

Regina, financed by employee pension plans‟ funds, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, what Saskatchewan people want is 

this government to deal with these issues today and into the 

future. 

 

And this government has claimed time and time again that the 

private sector is best when it‟s left to its own devices, and 

they‟re not going to be picking winners and losers. But here‟s a 

private building that wouldn‟t go ahead if it wasn‟t for a 



April 11, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7181 

guaranteed government lease, if it wasn‟t for the Saskatchewan 

employees‟ pension money financing the project, and if it 

wasn‟t for provincial tax incentives that this government 

initiated. So, Mr. Speaker, what happened to this government‟s 

claim that the private sector is best when left to its own devices, 

and why is this government saying one thing and doing 

something totally opposite? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the member opposite just stated here‟s a situation 

where you have a government saying one thing and doing the 

opposite. We have a member opposite who in fact stated one 

thing and did the opposite. We had a case where the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] was saying one thing, such as they would 

never sign a 20-year lease, and the NDP signed a 20-year lease 

for the Meadow Lake Provincial Office Building in February 

2003. 

 

The NDP sits there, criticizes this government for entering into 

leases, and yet they did the same thing. No matter how the NDP 

try to spin it, Mr. Speaker, it boils down to this — the NDP 

saying one thing, doing another. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟m glad the minister is 

still smiling because I‟d like her to know that the NDP caucus 

has introduced a private member‟s Bill that will make all 

contracts and leases the government enters into available to the 

members of the Legislative Assembly for scrutiny. This will 

ensure that guaranteed leases such as the one on this downtown 

tower, tax credits for private sector jobs, and the financing by 

public employees pension plan would not be hidden from 

Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will this minister do what is right for 

Saskatchewan people and ensure the details of government 

contracts can no longer be hidden? Will she change her current 

policy or support our legislation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I find it 

a little ironic that the member opposite is bringing forward a 

private member‟s Bill when over 11 occasions when she was 

the minister of SPMC [Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation], she refused information for public disclosure. So 

for her to state that is a little ironic. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this office building, it‟s about the Saskatchewan 

moving forward. It‟s about building new buildings. It‟s about 

moving head offices here. It‟s about new employment. It‟s 

about high-level employment, Mr. Speaker. I don‟t know about 

you, but I know that I like this new Saskatchewan, the 

Saskatchewan that‟s moving forward, where people are moving 

here, looking for jobs here, and acquiring employment here — 

not when they packed up and moved away under the old NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — This government ran, and you can look it up in 

their election platform, to be the most transparent and 

accountable government ever. But, Mr. Speaker, we have yet, 

we have yet to see any evidence of that. In fact it is harder to get 

information. Mr. Speaker, the public expects higher 

transparency from public officials and from governments. Mr. 

Speaker, will the minister change her policy and release the 

details or will she support the private member‟s legislation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As the 

member opposite knows, that you don‟t just change things on 

the fly. In fact you do things . . . Everything is done through 

consultation. Mr. Speaker, I‟m more than pleased to meet with 

the industry to discuss whether information should be released. 

The government leases a substantial amount of property 

throughout the province. At the present time, for us to release 

that kind of information would skew the marketplace. So for the 

member opposite to state that they would come forward with a 

private member‟s Bill . . . And who did they consult? Did they 

consult the industry? Did they consult anyone who would have 

an interest in this? I don‟t think so. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Treatment for Multiple Sclerosis 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thirty-five hundred 

Saskatchewan people are living with multiple sclerosis. In fact 

Saskatchewan has the highest rate of MS [multiple sclerosis] in 

the country. Many Saskatchewan people living with MS are 

paying out of their own pockets to go out of country to get the 

liberation therapy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: is he putting together a database to 

track the people that have gone out of the province to get the 

liberation therapy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, of course we understand the devastating effect that 

multiple sclerosis has on people across Canada, but no more 

than they do here in Saskatchewan with the very high 

prevalency rate, Mr. Speaker. That‟s why our government has 

moved forward as a leader in Canada, Mr. Speaker, under the 

leadership of our Premier, Mr. Speaker, the first province to say 

that we are going to fund clinical trials in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there has been one other province that‟s looked at 

setting up a registry. No other provinces have moved in this 

area. It has been one that we‟ve looked at and debated. Part of 

the problem is, Mr. Speaker, if you set up a registry, you‟re not 

guaranteed that you‟re going to have input from all people that 

receive the treatment. In fact what is generally seen is that 

people that have the liberation treatment overseas tend to 



7182 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2011 

register if it‟s been a good result, and people that tend not to 

have good results don‟t register. And I don‟t know, Mr. 

Speaker, how valuable that will be to the research. Clinical 

trials will be conducted here in Canada under the leadership of 

this government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — So for the people, Mr. Speaker, who have gone 

out of the province to have the treatment, the minister is saying 

they‟re going to do nothing, not even any contact. After the 

therapy is done, it‟s important that the patient gets rehab 

assistance and follow-up treatment to assure that the vein 

doesn‟t collapse again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Terri Sleeva who‟s with us today went to Mexico 

in January to get the liberation therapy. She is experiencing 

more movement in her hands and feet and more circulation 

throughout her body. Terri tells us that she is able to stand for 

an hour or more a day. 

 

When Terri got back from Mexico, she called the Wascana 

Rehab Centre to book follow-up rehab. It‟s been almost three 

months, and Terri is still waiting for an appointment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: since the government has sent out 

a call for proposals to conduct research trials in Saskatchewan, 

what is the minister going to do to assure that people who get 

the liberation treatment outside of Saskatchewan get the proper 

follow-up care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly realize that a 

number of people go out of this province, out of the country, go 

overseas and have the liberation treatment. And when they 

come back, Mr. Speaker, we would expect that all of our health 

care professionals would supply the appropriate care, Mr. 

Speaker. I have talked to the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons as well as the SMA [Saskatchewan Medical 

Association] on this very issue. They are of the same mindset, 

that when a person comes back into Saskatchewan, regardless 

of where they‟ve been in the country, regardless of what 

treatment they‟ve received overseas, that they receive the 

appropriate care here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m very curious where the opposition stands on 

the whole piece around clinical trials here in Saskatchewan. 

They‟ve had nothing positive to say, Mr. Speaker, and I would 

ask that member opposite, in her prelude to the question, could 

she please tell us where that party stands on the treatment or on 

the clinical trials here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, that‟s simply not true. I have never 

said anything that wasn‟t positive. The questions I‟m asking 

today are the questions that the people who are in the gallery 

with us today are asking, and they want to hear answers. They 

don‟t want to hear political spin and accusations from that 

minister. 

And, Mr. Speaker, those MS patients who are in the gallery and 

the many thousands who are out in the province have a number 

of questions around the MS trials that will be taking place. The 

deadline for proposals is April 26th of this year, and MS 

patients have no idea who‟ll be allowed to participate in the 

trials or when the trials will actually start. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will MS patients who have gone 

out of the country to get the liberation therapy be included in 

the trials, and how is he going to know who to invite to 

participate if he has nothing in place to track who has had the 

liberation therapy? 

 

The Speaker: — I just want remind our guests, you‟re more 

than welcome to join us in the gallery, but I‟d ask that our 

guests not participate in the debate in any form. I recognize the 

Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the clinical trials . . . 

The money has been granted to the Saskatchewan Health 

Research Foundation that will be conducting the clinical trials 

through research proposals, Mr. Speaker, and we‟ll let them do 

their work. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite just said that they‟ve 

been nothing but positive. Let me quote the Leader of the 

Opposition on August 5th, 2010, when he spoke on the radio, 

and this is what he said. The Opposition Leader said, “Premier 

Wall is blowing smoke and possibly giving false hope to those 

suffering from MS,” Mr. Speaker. That‟s where the opposition 

stands, Mr. Speaker. He goes on to accuse the Premier of 

playing scientist, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, would the opposition say one thing . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Telling the truth. This is exactly what that 

member‟s leader said on the CKRM, Mr. Speaker, that it was 

creating false hope. That‟s where your leader stands, Mr. 

Speaker. If the rest of you stand somewhere else, please stand 

here and tell us. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this 

minister does a disservice to all the people in this province . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. I would ask the member to start over so 

we can hear the question. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This minister does all 

the people in this province a disservice when he says no one can 

ask him a question, no one can bring a concern up, or they‟ll be 

smacked down as being negative. He accused me of not being 

his cheerleader in estimates last week and whining about never 

having anything positive. That is not the job of the opposition. 

People sitting in the audience, people watching from home, 

people coming to our offices, phoning us, they want questions 

asked and they want answers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this minister ever took the time to actually 



April 11, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7183 

answer a question, then he perhaps wouldn‟t feel as if he‟s so 

out of touch and have to go back to the 16 years and drag in 

Lewis Draper as his only ammunition in this House. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this government stands 

behind our commitment of $5 million towards MS clinical 

trials, the first in Canada, Mr. Speaker. That‟s where this 

government stands. In fact, Mr. Speaker, not only have we led 

the way; now the NDP government in Manitoba at least is 

saying where they stand and putting $5 million into clinical 

trials. 

 

I‟m not going to go back 16 years and quote what other people 

have said in the NDP. I just have to go back to August 5th, 

2010, when the Opposition Leader accuses the Premier, oh now 

he‟s playing, now he‟s a scientist and he‟s going to solve MS. 

You want to talk about not helping the debate in MS. It‟s in 

quotes from the Opposition Leader, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government is standing behind clinical trials, and we hope 

that someday we can help find a cure for such a terrible disease. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Reporting Political Donations 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Minister of Justice. Section 250 of The Election Act 

provides that amounts received for membership fees or dues are 

deemed to be contributions. Section 229 of The Election Act 

provides that the fiscal year of a registered political party is the 

calendar year. 

 

To the minister: it has become apparent that Enterprise Club 

donations are not disclosed in the annual report for the 

Saskatchewan Party for the fiscal year in which they are 

received. Will the Minister of Justice co-operate with the Chief 

Electoral Officer in an investigation of whether there has been 

proper disclosure of political donations? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, if the Chief Electoral 

Officer wishes to review any aspect of any election return filed 

by this government or this party, we will absolutely comply and 

give every bit of assistance that we possibly can. Mr. Speaker, 

that has always been the position of the members on this side of 

the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can advise the member opposite, and I can 

advise the members that there is provisions of the Act that 

appear to have some inconsistencies. The Chief Electoral 

Officer has given out what may be, amount to an interpretation 

bulletin so that you have some things where monies are paid by 

individuals. They will be made up of different parts. Part will 

go for meals and part will go for membership fees, part will go 

. . . And you cannot do those, you cannot do an apportionment 

until after you‟ve gone far enough into the year that you can see 

what those expenses are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that appears to have been satisfactory with the 

Chief Electoral Officer in the past. If it‟s not in the future, we 

will certainly have discussions with the Chief Electoral Officer 

to ensure that this party will absolutely fully and completely 

comply at all times, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have heard the minister 

say outside this Chamber that there is an interpretation, by Sask 

Party lawyers perhaps, that gives them some comfort that they 

can deduct fundraising activities and expenses from 

contributions and then claim them in a different fiscal year than 

they were donated, Mr. Speaker. But that is not how the Act 

reads. 

 

And if he is now saying in the Chamber to members here that 

there is an interpretation been provided to the Saskatchewan 

Party and that the Minister of Justice has a copy of it that says 

otherwise from the Chief Electoral Officer, will he table it in 

the Chamber? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we will provide all 

information that we have. We have no problem providing 

information. When you pay money to a political party that goes 

to different purposes — part of it is by way of a contribution, 

part of it is by way of a membership, part of it is by way of a 

banquet and other tickets — you have to get far enough into the 

year that you can properly allocate those things. Mr. Speaker, it 

would be wrong to do something where you would file or give a 

receipt that would not be complete or accurate or would exceed 

the amount that‟s eligible for the receipt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we work with the Chief Electoral Officer. We 

have questions; we put them to the Chief Electoral Officer. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I guarantee you that in every year that there 

has been questions, we have resolved them to the satisfaction of 

the Chief Electoral Officer and we will in fact continue to do so, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, and the Minister of Justice can 

correct me if I‟m wrong, but I asked him if he would table a 

copy of this interpretation that he spoke of in the Chamber that 

he has received from the Chief Electoral Officer or that‟s in his 

possession, if he would table it. I take it his answer was yes, Mr. 

Speaker, and I look forward to seeing it this week. 

 

The minister has also said, minister has also said that he would 

provide any co-operation that the Chief Electoral Officer wants. 

Can the minister advise that the Chief Electoral Officer has 

already requested legal assistance, legal resources from the 

Minister of Justice, and has he denied or provided them? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 



7184 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2011 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we will continue to work 

with the Chief Electoral Officer. He has a very busy year. He‟s 

going to be conducting an election later this year. And in fact, 

Mr. Speaker, that election may well change the seating position 

in this House and possibly in a very good way, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we do not intend to stand in the way of that 

process. 

 

If the Chief Electoral Officer feels it is necessary to conduct 

other investigations during this year, we will ensure that 

adequate resources are supplied, Mr. Speaker. The resources for 

the chief electoral . . . as the member is well aware, are 

provided by the Board of Internal Economy and, Mr. Speaker, 

I‟m unaware of any requests for other investigative costs. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this government is going to continue to 

support the good work done by the Chief Electoral Officer to 

ensure that they are able to conduct an election in a proper, 

satisfactory, and complete manner this year. Mr. Speaker, the 

people on this side of the House will co-operate and do 

whatever is necessary or whatever is requested from the Chief 

Electoral Officer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Planned Highway Improvements 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. In Estevan and the 

surrounding area, they‟ve been calling for the twinning of No. 

Highway 39 for some time now. It‟s a safety issue. It‟s a 

managing growth issue. Why were the needs relating to 

twinning Highway 39, expressed by the people of Estevan, 

ignored in this year‟s provincial budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our 

government has repeatedly stated that our twinning priorities 

are finishing the project, No. 11 from Saskatoon to Prince 

Albert. As that nears completion at an accelerated schedule, Mr. 

Speaker — it will be completed well ahead of when the 

members opposite announced it; it will be completed in the 

2012 construction year — as that nears completion, we will, 

with the most current data at that time, be re-evaluating what 

the next twinning project and/or passing lane program should be 

at that time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister talks 

about when the work is done, they will re-evaluate the dollars 

for twinning, Mr. Speaker. But in a year-end interview with The 

Estevan Mercury, the member from Estevan is quoted as saying 

that she has met with the Minister of Highways who assured her 

that Highway 39 is next on the priority list after the twinning of 

Highway 11. This is reported in The Estevan Mercury. 

 

My question to the Minister of Highways therefore is simple: 

has he in fact assured the member from Estevan that this 

information is correct, that it is the next priority, and has he 

communicated this officially to the community leadership in the 

city of Estevan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 

I just indicated, as Highway 11 as a project is nearing 

completion, we‟ll be re-evaluating where the next major capital 

projects go. Mr. Speaker, this could be a twinning program or 

this could be a combination of twinning and passing lane 

program, Mr. Speaker. There‟s a number of extremely busy 

highways all over the province which are a result of the growth 

agenda of this province, Mr. Speaker. And as those, as the 

project on Highway 11 advances, we‟ll start making those 

decisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has made highways a priority. 

During the election campaign, we committed to spending $1.8 

billion on highways over a four-year term. Mr. Speaker, with 

this budget year we will far exceed that commitment. We will 

have spent $2.2 billion over the four-year term, Mr. Speaker. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We know 

that this is the highest spending budget in the history of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We are not surprised that some of 

that money would find its way into highways, Mr. Speaker. The 

minister . . . The member from Estevan is quoted in The 

Estevan Mercury in January the 5th, the year-end interview, and 

this is her direct quote, Mr. Speaker, “The minister has assured 

me that as soon as the twinning of Highway 11 north of 

Saskatoon is completed, Estevan‟s highway is on the priority 

list.” So, Mr. Speaker, is the Minister of Highways today telling 

us something different in the Chamber and is he communicating 

something different to the community leadership in Estevan 

than he‟s providing to members of his own caucus, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I indicated, 

there is a number of heavily trafficked highways around the 

province that‟ll be reviewed as far as potential for twinning 

and/or a passing lane program: Highway 16 east of Saskatoon 

for example, Highway 7 west of Saskatoon, and the highways 

that the member opposite‟s referring to, 6 and 39 south of 

Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has made spending on highways 

a significant priority. Our capital budget this year, Mr. Speaker, 

will be $100 million in excess of the last budget year of the 

members opposite, which for some reason was substantially 

higher than any of the previous years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, this government makes highways a 

priority, unlike the members opposite who reverted highways to 

gravel or, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, when he 

was in cabinet, told people to go fill their own potholes, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 



April 11, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7185 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answer to questions 1,010 to 1,029. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1,010 through 1,029 are tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 169 — The Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission Amendment Act, 2011. Mr. Speaker, The 

Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Amendment Act, 

2011 will merge the functions performed by the consumer 

protection branch with those carried out by the Saskatchewan 

Financial Services Commission or what is known as SFSC. 

 

Under this legislation, the programming and staff of the 

consumer protection branch or CPB will be transferred to the 

SFSC. The fee revenues and related expenditures of the 

consumer protection branch will be handled through the 

Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Fund. Reference 

to this transition is made at page 109 of the budget Estimates 

document. 

 

Mr. Speaker, consumer protection is an important responsibility 

in modern society. Consumer protection involves providing 

rights and guarantees to consumers in their dealings with 

businesses, regulating businesses and industries that interact 

with consumers. 

 

The consumer protection branch and the Saskatchewan 

Financial Services Commission share many of the same 

objectives. Both SFSC and CPB focus on protecting consumers 

from unlawful and unscrupulous practices in the marketplace, 

whether these occur in the financial services sector or in the 

general marketplace. A greater critical mass and strategic focus 

can be achieved by collocating consumer protection 

programming under one regulatory authority. This will increase 

efficiencies and opportunities for co-operation that will be 

missed if they remain as separate units. This is consistent with 

the goals stated in the budget of improving public services and 

lowering debt within the context of a balanced budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, consumer protection programming will benefit 

from the SFSCs regulatory expertise and strategic focus in areas 

such as consumer education. Consumer education is an 

important area for the SFSC as the commission seeks to ensure 

that consumers identify and avoid financial scams and frauds 

and that they have information they need to make informed 

decisions about financial products and services. Education is a 

significant component of consumer protection. It is all related, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Regarding the amendments themselves, The Saskatchewan 

Financial Services Commission Act was passed in 2002 to bring 

a new structure to the administration of financial services 

programs. It created a commission of independent members 

appointed by government, firstly, to oversee the operation of the 

regulatory functions; second, to act as a sounding board; and 

third, to conduct hearings relating to certain regulatory 

functions. The new legislation adds references to consumer 

protection and consumer protection legislation to the mandate 

of the commission throughout. 

 

In 2009 a fund was created that authorizes the Saskatchewan 

Financial Services Commission to retain revenue from its 

operations for the purpose of funding its statutory operations. 

Revenue is generated primarily by fees charged to the regulated 

entities and is deposited in the SFSC fund. The amendments 

will have the same effect respecting the operation of the 

consumer protection branch and its functions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the legislation will have a new part, specifically 

setting out the powers and responsibilities of the commission 

respecting the consumer protection function. This will highlight 

the importance of consumer protection in our province and 

create clarity concerning the activities for which the 

commission is responsible. 

 

Since the needs of consumers and the consumer protection 

function are continually evolving, if new consumer protection 

legislation is created in the future, the function can be assigned 

to the commission by regulations. The regulations will also 

allow new consumer protection regulators to come under the 

umbrella of the commission. Mr. Speaker, in light of the 

importance of consumer protection to society, this legislation 

will emphasize the government‟s focus on and involvement 

with consumer protection initiatives of all kinds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to now move second reading of 

The Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Act, 2011. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 169, The Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission Amendment Act, 2011. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

pleasure to stand and add comments to the debate on Bill No. 

169, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s a number of areas that the minister touched 

on, but I guess generally overall what it looks like is that there 

is a reorganization happening and a movement of staff and 

services. Mr. Speaker, and it seems to follow along with some 

changes that were made previously, I think, almost a year ago. 

And I guess, Mr. Speaker, what happens is, I guess the big 

question is, will there be sufficient funding for the organization 

to operate and to offer the services that citizens expect? 

 

And I guess there‟s also a question too, Mr. Speaker, about the 

shuffling staff outside of what we would view as government 

proper and the accounting of the government‟s commitment a 



7186 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2011 

couple of years ago to reduce the amount of civil service, 4 per 

cent of each of the four years of their term. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and what we‟ve seen in other areas is quite clearly 

that while there may not be a reduction in staff, there is a 

reduction in numbers. And what has happened is that 

organizations have been moved outside of the body of 

government into outside organizations. So, Mr. Speaker, if the 

government is still funding these operations, if they are funded 

by tax dollars and public resources, just because they are 

outside the area of government proper and not counted on the 

FTEs [full-time equivalent] in the Public Service Commission, 

the government may be believing that they aren‟t counted and 

that therefore they will be able to talk about meeting their 

commitment. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they actually haven‟t streamlined, or they 

haven‟t reduced, or they haven‟t really changed many things. 

They have just shuffled them. So out of sight, out of mind 

seems to be the way this government operates. So we‟re 

wondering if this is going to be just another one of those. And 

again, the question of whether there will be sufficient funding 

for the responsibilities of this organization to carry on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is also a section that talks about a revolving 

fund, the use of funds: 

 

The commission may use moneys in the fund for the 

following purposes: 

 

(a) paying the labour, supervisory and administrative 

costs associated with the following: 

 

The first one: 

 

. . . the exercise of any of the powers of a financial 

services regulator pursuant to any financial services 

legislation that are assigned to the commission by the 

regulations; 

 

(ii) the exercise of any powers given to the commission 

by this Act, the regulations and any financial services 

legislation. 

 

And three, they may use the fund for: 

 

(iv) the doing of any other thing . . . that . . . [the 

commission] considers necessary and in the public 

interest to perform . . . [its] responsibilities. 

 

And also “paying the expenses of administering the fund” and 

“any other purpose prescribed in the regulations”. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with the set-up of a revolving fund and the 

ability for the commission to use the fund, use of funds, for a 

variety of areas and also it looks like pay expenses and what‟s 

needed through the organization. Here again, it looks like we 

may be moving all of . . . any fees that are collected may be put 

into the fund. And this will avoid showing any fees, and I‟m not 

sure about fee increases, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there‟s a number of questions. The minister 

quite quickly flipped through his remarks. It wasn‟t very 

fulsome. And, Mr. Speaker, I know there are a number of my 

colleagues that are interested in this piece of legislation and the 

extent of the explanations that are provided in the explanatory 

notes attached to the changes of the Bill and, Mr. Speaker, I 

know we need to go through this in more detail and give it some 

thought. And I know there are other colleagues that are looking 

forward to having an opportunity to voice their comments on 

the Act, so at this time I would adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 169. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 167 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 167 — The 

Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 
be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s an honour for me to have the privilege to enter into 

this debate in this fine Assembly and to do so on behalf of the 

good folks of Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill that‟s being debated here today is the Bill 

167, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Grain Car 

Corporation Act. And although, Mr. Speaker, it is what is 

normally known as a short Bill — it only has three clauses to 

the Bill — it‟s rather I think quite an important Bill when you 

look at the, first of all of course, the importance of agriculture 

and grain and oil seed production in this province and how long 

and great a history it has and what a significant role it has 

played over the years. And it still does in our economy, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And we know that over time as the times change and things 

change, and we hope that those changes are always progressive 

changes and positive changes . . . And I think the same could be 

said to the movement of grain production from the Prairies here 

over the years. And of course this will date me, Mr. Speaker, 

but I‟m willing to run that risk. I can remember back in the days 

when the only rail transportation for grain was done by wooden 

boxcars, and that was the norm. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, that 

was probably the norm for a lot of years. 

 

And of course we enjoyed at that time . . . The area I came from 

originally was a community of about every 5 or 7 miles along 

the rail line, and each one of these communities would be 

fortified with five or seven different grain companies buying 

grain from the local producers. And this grain of course would 

be purchased and shipped for export purposes, and it would be 



April 11, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7187 

done so primarily with the use of wooden boxcars. And at one 

time, Mr. Speaker, that was a state of the art equipment. That 

was the latest thing going, and it served the times quite well. 

 

But as time progresses, things changed and probably with good 

reason, Mr. Speaker, because I can remember the extra work the 

individuals and managers of the grain companies, grain 

elevators in these towns would have to go through in order to 

fill a boxcar. In those days, Mr. Speaker, the boxcars had two 

large openings, one on either side, for the purpose of emptying 

the grain but also for the purposes of filling it. And in order to 

block off these doors, there was items called grain doors, which 

was a common term used, and they were actually double-ply 

lumber that was used to fill the gap in the grain cars. And thusly 

then they‟re going to be filled overtop to the maximum capacity 

that the boxcar could carry. And that served, Mr. Speaker, quite 

well as the agriculture demands of the day. 

 

But as technology changed, and it changed within the 

agricultural industry, and it created I think greater production 

and therefore greater demand for improved efficiencies within 

our grain system to be able to move grain stocks from A, the 

farm, from the farm gate to the export positions in our ports. 

And that was sped along I think by the demand from importing 

countries who demanded quicker and more efficient and more 

timely delivery of their products. And this all ties in I think with 

the changes within, the technical changes within the food 

industry, and it certainly has an effect right down to the 

producer level. So with that, Mr. Speaker, there came a 

realization that the traditional wooden boxcar was no longer 

fitting the bill and serving the needs of not only the farmers, 

Mr. Speaker, and not only the grain companies but serving the 

needs of exporters and those countries who imported our grain. 

The efficiency wasn‟t there, and the system had to be revisited 

for efficiency purposes. 

 

Now part of that, Mr. Speaker, resulted in a debate over the 

statute that protected freight rate prices that were being charged 

to producers for the cost or the purpose of moving grain to 

export positions. And there was a statute in place that protected 

the, limited the ability of grain companies to charge excessive 

amounts to grain companies and thusly to farmers for the 

movement of their product to an export position. And I believe 

the term was the Crow rate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I can remember back when there was a significant debate 

held in not only in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, but really right 

across the province over the future of the Crow rate and the 

desire by the federal government of the day as well as a desire 

by the grain companies to, and railroad companies to have the 

Crow rate removed and the restriction or cap on the charges 

removed so that they could increase the charges to the producer 

for the movement of grain, and they would suggest then that 

that would provide them the ability, the financial ability to be 

able to modernize the grain car fleet. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we did lose the Crow rate, which 

cost the farmers in this great province hundreds of millions of 

dollars. At the same time it did not, it did not cause the grain 

companies to make significant investments into rolling stock for 

the purposes of transportation of grain. 

 

So the government of the day, and this is back in the ‟80s I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, probably I think it was in the mid-‟80s — 

or perhaps early ‟80s; maybe late ‟70s, early ‟80s — the 

government, provincial government along with the government 

in Alberta and I think with the Canadian Wheat Board sort of 

joined forces and made a significant investment into the 

purchase of modern grain hopper cars that would fill the bill as 

far as being able to meet the needs of the grain companies and 

the needs of the exporters to be able to provide adequate 

product at the port of export in a timely fashion in order to 

make the contract to meet the needs of international 

marketplace and international buyers. 

 

And I believe that by that time, by that point in our history the 

Canadian Wheat Board could very easily point to a lot of 

contracts that they lost, simply lost them because they were 

unable to fill them because they were unable to get the product 

to an export position in a timely fashion that would meet the 

needs of the importers, whereas other countries were stepping 

up to the plate and filling that void and filling that need. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there was a need to certainly make an 

investment into those rolling stocks that would provide the 

ability to move the product from the farm gate to export 

position in a timely fashion, in an efficient way, and so that we 

would be able to continue our . . . maintaining our international 

commitments, be able to maintain our reputation internationally 

for being a country who was able to provide the stocks and 

products necessary to fulfill the contracts the various countries 

certainly demanded as a result of certainly changing times and 

modernizing of the transportation system in a number of fields 

as well as the field of agriculture and the movement of grain 

products. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, then led to a need to take taxpayers‟ dollars, 

whether they be provincial taxpayer dollars, federal taxpayer 

dollars, and producers‟ dollars through the Canadian Wheat 

Board, to purchase these rolling stocks in order to provide the 

adequate supply of cars to be able to move the stocks of grain 

that were being produced in this great province of ours to export 

position. And those stocks of grains, I think as a result of 

technology and as a result of changes to agricultural practices, 

were actually increasing. I think you look to that period of time, 

you‟ve also seen that the practices that farmers used on their 

farm land, the practices as far as production of grain and 

oilseeds is concerned, certainly changed. And we‟ve seen an 

increase in the production per acre of those products across the 

province here. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Now as the world of agriculture has changed, so has the 

products being produced on the farm changed. I can remember 

as a young fellow on the farm with my father that the basic 

crops being produced was, you know, the three. The big three 

primarily was wheat, barley, and canola. And canola was 

introduced to the farming community in Saskatchewan here 

probably in the late ‟50s and early ‟60s. Up till that time, it was 

oats, wheat, and barley was the mainstay. And that was 

certainly the mainstay for many a year. 

 

But when, within probably a decade and a half ago to two 

decades ago, there was introduction of more exotic products 

that were certainly capable of growing in this province along 



7188 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2011 

. . . And I‟ve got to give credit to and take some time to give 

credit to the agriculture scientists who developed various strains 

of different products that would be able to be produced in this 

climate conditions that we enjoy here in Saskatchewan. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, compared to many other provinces 

or countries in the world, we have a shorter growing season, 

and therefore a lot of the crops that were produced in other 

countries simply at that time wouldn‟t be able to be produced 

here in Saskatchewan. But through a lot of hard work and 

certainly . . . [inaudible] . . . by scientists and crop specialists, 

we were able to . . . They were able to develop strains of these 

various commodities that are able to be grown here in 

Saskatchewan, and to be done so in a very efficient and 

effective manner. 

 

So that then, Mr. Speaker, added to the crop mix. No longer 

was it just the big three. No longer was it just wheat, oats, and 

barley and with some canola, as now there was other 

commodities — peas and lentils and so on and so forth — that 

was added to the mix, which even put greater strain on the need 

to be able to move the product to marketplace, put greater strain 

on our transportation system. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, there was a need to ensure that there 

was adequate rolling stock to be able to meet the demands of 

the grain industry internationally, the importers internationally, 

who were looking at the ability to have access to a good supply 

of product, but needed that product to be delivered to the ports, 

thus loaded on the ships, and delivered to their facilities in a 

timely fashion. 

 

And to do that, Mr. Speaker, you have to ensure that the grain 

handling system, the transportation system works as efficiently 

and as effectively as possible. And to assist in doing this, the 

individuals — whether they be through the tax dollars here in 

Saskatchewan or in Alberta or through the producers through 

their dollars through the Canadian Wheat Board — certainly 

made that investment in the grain cars that were required to be 

able to efficiently and effectively move the product from the 

elevator system into the export system.  

 

That, Mr. Speaker, now we‟ve seen it carried to actually one 

step further. As I said earlier, that as a youngster I remember the 

communities in which I grew up in enjoyed the ability of having 

four or five grain companies in each community and each 

community being, you know, five or seven miles apart. And 

that has certainly changed, Mr. Speaker, as we‟ve seen a 

rationalization, I guess you would say, of the grain-handling 

industry in rural Saskatchewan where we‟ve seen the little 

country elevator, which used to be a symbol of Saskatchewan, 

you‟ve seen that little country elevator now disappear. Many 

communities simply don‟t have one anymore, and they have 

been replaced with large inland grain terminals located at great 

distances from these communities.  

 

So as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, certainly there‟s an 

efficiency as far as the grain handling is concerned, having 

much larger volumes of grain collected at one particular hub, 

and cars, a large number of cars that can be located at that 

facility. And in quite quick order, something like 24 or 48 

hours, you can have 100 cars loaded and ready for export 

position, and those 100 cars can make their way straight to the 

export position because they‟re all loaded with basically the 

same commodity. And it certainly does provide efficiencies 

within the system as far as the grain handling is concerned and 

the ability to get a like product to export positions. 

 

But like in anything else, Mr. Speaker, there‟s probably a dark 

side to it. Initially the dark side is that in many of these smaller 

communities are disappearing simply because one of the 

mainstays, which was the elevator system, has now been lost. 

Certainly a large . . . To the community itself a large tax base 

has been lost, and thus for the communities now finding 

themselves more difficult to be able to survive with the loss of 

that revenue. As well as, Mr. Speaker, I think we‟re seeing 

increased pressure on our highway system, increased pressure 

on our road system because of the larger volumes, larger trucks 

now, larger volumes being shipped greater distances to the 

grain inland terminal, putting greater pressure on our 

transportation system, primarily in this province, our road 

system and our highway system. 

 

So there are some dark sides to it, Mr. Speaker, but I suppose 

that‟s true of any time there‟s progress or any time there‟s 

change in an industry of any type. There is sort of all the 

winners and losers, and there‟s always going to be some 

negative fallout from it. But, Mr. Speaker, the idea of the Grain 

Car Corporation was to provide that rolling stock that was 

essential to be able to provide the transportation system, an 

efficient and effective transportation system that would move 

our product from the farm gate to export position. 

 

And I think you‟re seeing — certainly the technology has 

changed — but I think you‟re seeing with those changes and the 

introduction of the grain cars through a grain car corporation 

such as the one we‟re debating here today, certainly supported 

the agricultural industry in Saskatchewan and supported their 

ability to maintain markets abroad by being able to provide 

quality product in a timely fashion in export positions so that 

those international purchasers were able to maintain their flow. 

 

And I think whenever you look at manufacturing industry of 

any type and food products . . . Well maybe we don‟t like to 

look at it that way. It certainly is a product that is manufactured 

and handled as a manufacturing product, that it is often the term 

just in time is applied because a lot of the manufacturing 

industry depends on a proper delivery of raw product to their 

facilities in a timely fashion. They depend upon that so that they 

are able to reduce their storage capacity, able to reduce their 

costs that they require in maintaining a certain level of storage 

just to ensure that they have a product on hand at all times. If 

they can line it up properly — and we‟re seeing that as sort of a 

modern approach to a lot of the capital costs and efficiencies 

that are being developed within the manufacturing system — 

the just in time system allows that product to be delivered to the 

manufacturer just in time for it to be processed. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, certainly I think applies to the product 

of agriculture. I think you are seeing that a lot of importing 

countries who import the raw product from Canada here, from 

Saskatchewan through Canada, do so. And they have their 

deliveries timed, timed in a way so that they are able to take 

that product right from the delivery ship and process it right into 

their processing system, and to do so without having a 

significant investment in storage facilities to ensure that they 



April 11, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7189 

have that product on hand. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it becomes then even more important to the 

importing countries to have a reliable system that they can rely 

on having that product delivered. So that when they sign a 

contract with Canada that they‟re going to purchase X number 

of tonnes of, say, no. 2 red wheat, that they know that Canada 

will deliver that in a timely fashion so that they are able to use 

that system, just in time system, to have that product delivered 

from the farm gate in Saskatchewan through the entire system 

to an export position in one of our ports, shipped abroad, and 

delivered to the importing port just in time to be able to be used 

in their manufacturing system. 

 

So it is very important, Mr. Speaker, that we are able to 

maintain those international contracts by having in place a 

system that is efficient and will provide the ability for the 

product to be moved in a timely fashion from the farm gate 

through our elevator system and into the export system and then 

delivered to the importing country. 

 

And that‟s why, Mr. Speaker, at the beginning when we 

realized there was a need to modernize the delivery system, the 

transport system of grain in this great province of ours, that the 

Grain Car Corporation and the government of the day stepped 

up and recognized that that need was there and that the world 

was changing and that the investment needed to be made in 

order to ensure that Saskatchewan farmers would be able to take 

advantage of international markets, would be able to take 

advantage of international markets because we‟re able to 

maintain our reputation for being able to deliver a quality 

product in a timely fashion so that the importing countries 

would certainly maintain the commitments to Canada and to 

Saskatchewan and to Saskatchewan producers by coming back, 

year in and year out, and purchasing their much-needed 

product. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s certainly a lot to be said, although like I 

said earlier that this is a short Bill — it only has three clauses 

— but there is a lot to be said for this Bill because it‟s such an 

important part of the agricultural system that we enjoy in this 

country and this province, and it is such an important part to 

maintaining that industry in a strong fashion and a positive light 

in as far as importing countries is concerned. We need to be 

able to maintain a reputation of being a country that, when we 

make a commitment by signing a contract, that we fulfill that 

commitment and we do so in a timely fashion. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, like I said, there‟s a lot of questions 

to be asked about this Bill. And I‟m sure a lot of my colleagues 

will want to take the opportunity to ask those questions and to 

further quiz the government and further review the 

government‟s Bill here as to what is really the impact of the 

proposed changes. 

 

As we‟ve seen in the past, Mr. Speaker, the government may 

say one thing but often does another. So we want to be, we want 

to have the ability and reserve the ability to clearly and quite 

closely scrutinize the various amendments that the 

government‟s proposing here. And to do that, Mr. Speaker, 

we‟ll simply need more time. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like 

to move adjournment of debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Northeast has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 167. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 168 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 168 — The 

Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment 

Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

pleasure today to rise and speak to Bill 168, The Act to amend 

The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can‟t help but reflect with what‟s going on in the 

education system right now that there are close to roughly 

12,000 teachers in Saskatchewan. So no matter how large or 

how small we see the changes this Bill has to their disability 

and their superannuation plan, the very fact of the matter is this 

Bill is affecting 12,000, roughly, teachers in the province and 

their families and, you know, by virtue through all of that, their 

students and the very essence of what our education system is 

all about. 

 

So it makes any changes that we might wish to make to 

teachers‟ superannuation and disability plan very important 

changes. It makes the changes worth scrutiny. It makes us 

legitimately question what‟s causing this. 

 

And I reflect right now that there‟s 12,000, roughly, teachers 

across the province. I understand that in recent days they‟ve 

been holding meetings around the province, and part of that is 

to find out how strongly they feel about the potential or the 

proposed new contract. And as I understand, negotiations have 

broken off. They‟re not taking place right now. I know that this 

Bill 168 is dealing with a previous set of negotiations and this 

Bill is trying to — I don‟t want to overstate it — trying to make 

legal what‟s been the practice for some years, since 2007 is 

what I believe, and that is that the appropriate deductions have 

been made and the appropriate monies have been forwarded to 

the superannuation and the disability plan to in fact support 

those plans for the 12,000 teachers. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And I can‟t help but appreciate how important that is, because 

what teachers have to offer is a phenomenal wealth of 

knowledge, but what they have to sell is that knowledge and 

their time, their ability. So they‟ve set a contract, and the 

agreement is that the teachers will do the best they can with 

their students in imparting the knowledge and the tools that 

students will need to not only survive, but to thrive well into the 

future. And in exchange the teachers will be remunerated at a 

certain level of pay, and of course every teacher worth their salt 

will want that remuneration to be fair, Mr. Speaker, would of 



7190 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2011 

course want it to be fair. 

 

And that‟s sort of where we‟re at. That was part of what led to 

these changes in the superannuation and disability payments 

from previously. And I have little doubt that that‟s what‟s 

behind the current negotiation is the ability to or the desire to be 

fair, not only to teachers but to ratepayers, and certainly fair to 

students. I know teachers have not got a long history of taking 

action against their employer, but I also know that teachers, like 

any other group, will deliver their services a lot better when 

they‟re satisfied and when they‟re happy and when they know 

they‟re being valued. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the very fact that we deal with superannuation 

and disability benefits in 168 are some of the very basic things 

that teachers have to deal with on an ongoing basis. It‟s the very 

things that provide a way for school boards and governments 

whether it‟s the local school board or . . . provincial government 

has a role to play too. But it‟s how we can collectively say to 

teachers collectively that, we value the job you‟re doing. We 

value your importance to not only students but to the future. 

What you‟re doing is important. You‟re working with the very 

essence of our future, that is, young people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we‟re dealing with the future, part of that is, 

what is it that students might wish to do with their future? And 

it would be my hope that, well into the future, Saskatchewan 

will continue to produce the top-rated teachers in Canada. And 

that‟s the reality of where we‟re at right now. Teachers who 

graduate from the U of R [University of Regina] or U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan] are highly sought after 

throughout Canada. Do well at either of those two universities 

in the College of Education and you‟ll do well as a teacher, 

whether it‟s in Saskatchewan or beyond. 

 

But that‟s why, part of why it is so important that we have 

contracts in Saskatchewan that say, we value you and you can 

in fact make as good a living in Saskatchewan as you could in 

any other province or any other port of call throughout the 

world. So that‟s why it is important that any chance we get to 

discuss superannuation or disability benefits or contracts with 

teachers, that we really should take the sober second and third 

and fourth look at it and make sure that we‟re doing things that 

are in the best interests of the 12,000 teachers of Saskatchewan, 

the students of Saskatchewan, and the ratepayers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, intertwined in all of this of course is a 

responsibility of government to make sure that the legislation is 

properly maintained. And one of the questions that we have 

around Bill 168, An Act to amend The Teachers Superannuation 

and Disability Benefits Act, is how on earth could changes have 

been negotiated in 2007 and not picked up until 2011 where we 

have this Bill now enabling the legitimate, the legal distribution 

of the monies — this just legitimizes it? And what on earth 

happened for the four years up until now? How could it take so 

long to realize that The Teachers Superannuation and Disability 

Benefits Act was not current, was not properly authorizing what 

was negotiated properly, and what had been taking place? 

 

You know, we see little signs of problems as days go on. We 

see an Act that was four years in the making. We see an 

economy that has some signs of trouble, quite frankly. We see 

that new capital investment in February . . . The February report 

says new capital investment is going to be private investment 

up 3 per cent while public is up 21.9 per cent or nearly 22 per 

cent. So new capital investment driven by public, by taxpayers. 

 

We see things on the flip side of that, like mining capital 

investment down 7 per cent. That doesn‟t bode well for the 

mining industry in the future. Transportation and warehousing 

down 7.2 per cent, finance and real estate down 3.6, all others 

down 2.6. So we see signs of trouble, in this case with the 

economy. 

 

In the case of this Bill, we see trouble with The Teachers 

Superannuation and Disability Benefits Act in that it was three 

or four years behind the times in simply bringing the Act up to 

speed. And none of this leads to great confidence in the 

government‟s ability to govern. 

 

So, you know, it is small wonder that teachers are wondering 

how they‟re valued. It‟s small wonder that teachers are out 

holding mandate votes or whatever you wish to call them, 

action votes. Some would call it a strike vote. I think the 

teachers are not classifying it as a strike vote but trying to make 

it clear, Mr. Speaker, that they want to support their bargaining 

unit and they want to get a collective agreement that in fact 

honours the work that those 12,000 teachers are doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said at the beginning, this Bill is important 

because it affects so many people and it affects the confidence 

that we should have in our government, in our . . . I call it 

department. I know the new term that is used is the Ministry of 

Education, Ministry of Justice that should bring the legislation 

forward. There are questions around how it is that we‟re at this 

point, you know, whoops moment, because that‟s really what 

this Bill is is a whoops moment. Whoops, the government 

missed bringing the legislation forward. Whoops, they didn‟t 

see the . . . or many people would argue they didn‟t see the 

value of The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits 

Act. 

 

And I know that any teacher that is superannuated or nearing 

superannuation or is using the disability benefits would think 

that it‟s a very important part of their collective agreement. It‟s 

a very important part of their contract. It‟s a very important part 

of the benefits that, or some of the benefits that would have led 

them into teaching as a career in the first place. 

 

I know, I know, I‟m confident that virtually every teacher 

would go into teaching because they wanted to impart 

knowledge and they thought they could do a good job of 

helping students improve themselves. But teachers are bright 

people. Teachers would have also looked at, well what‟s the 

pay scale? What‟s the long term? What‟s the superannuation? 

Because you know, Mr. Speaker, teaching is not a job that you 

tend to go into thinking, well it‟s going to be a six-year span or 

a twelve-year span and then I‟ll go off and I‟ll do something 

else. 

 

Teachers see themselves clearly as educators, by and large, and 

they see themselves as staying in the education system basically 

for a career. There‟s no guarantees in the world that you start as 

a teacher and you‟ll end as a teacher, but educators see 

themselves as somewhere in the education system right 



April 11, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7191 

throughout. 

 

So simply to summarize what I‟ve been saying on Bill 168, 

we‟ve got some questions. The questions clearly come from, 

why did it take three to four years to bring the legislation 

forward that simply seems to be enabling what has been the 

practice for three years now since a collective agreement in 

2007? So why did it take so long to get The Teachers 

Superannuation and Disability Benefits Act updated? 

 

And I guess a secondary question on that, Mr. Speaker, would 

be how can we be sure that when the current set of negotiations 

draws to its conclusion, as most assuredly it will . . . I‟m not 

predicting how or when. It‟s just that‟s the nature of collective 

agreements, collective bargaining, is ultimately things draw to a 

conclusion and that both sides can live with. How can we have 

confidence that the government won‟t fumble again? 

 

How can we have confidence that the changes in the collective 

agreement — any that might require changes in education Bill, 

or the teachers superannuation or the disability benefits Act or 

some other Act — how can we be sure that those will be 

brought forward in a timely fashion instead of us having a oops 

moment? Oops, it‟s three or four years late. Oops; we‟re sorry 

it‟s late, but here it is. Oops, we goofed. And that just isn‟t a 

situation that enhances the government‟s image in any sense, 

Mr. Speaker. It is a position of, quite frankly, of poor 

governance, of weakness, and we‟re not very thrilled about that. 

 

How do we recoup from this? How does the government recoup 

from this? How do they again say to teachers, the 12,000 

teachers around the province that, we value the work you‟re 

doing? We think that it‟s important that you‟re dealing with our 

very future — all of the students of Saskatchewan — imparting 

on them the very best of values that you can, the very best 

education that you can, giving these students the tools to go on 

to become teachers in their own right or doctors, lawyers, 

serving the public in some capacity, or going on to become 

farmers, business people, scientists, nurses, whatever. How can 

they take their place in our society and just bring things 

forward? 

 

[15:15] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think I‟ve pretty much outlined the concerns 

I have on the Bill 168, the Act to amend, The Teachers 

Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act of 

2011, but I am positive as I‟m standing here that I have 

colleagues that will very much wish to speak to this. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I thank you for hearing my comments here on this Bill. 

Mr. Speaker, thank you. I‟ve checked my signals, and to enable 

colleagues to speak to this, as I know they want to, I move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Coronation Park 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 168. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

 

Bill No. 153 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 153 — The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to speak to 

The Provincial Court Amendment Act, Bill 153. First I want to 

deal with three housekeeping provisions of the Bill with which 

the opposition does not have any difficulty, I don‟t think. 

 

First is that the Bill allows for the government to appoint 

temporary judges currently serving on the bench in other 

provinces where there‟s a conflict of interest, and that seems to 

be an appropriate, if rarely needed, provision. We don‟t have 

any difficulty with that. 

 

We support the provision to bring eligibility for disability 

benefits to the same standard, three months, as provided other 

provincial government employees — again of a housekeeping 

nature and not posing any controversy whatsoever. 

 

And we also support the changes to the nature of the Law 

Society representation on the Judicial Council to allow for more 

flexibility in who the Law Society appoints to the Judicial 

Council. We understand that this is being done because the 

president the Law Society, who currently sits on the Judicial 

Council, tends to change. That person changes on an annual 

basis. And I believe that‟s partly the case, Mr. Speaker, because 

nobody can afford to do that job for more than a year. It‟s I 

think a rather onerous imposition on any practising lawyer in 

the province of Saskatchewan to serve in that capacity for a 

longer period of time. So you‟re going to expect to have that 

kind of turnover on an annual basis. And so that‟s a provision, 

allowing the Law Society to provide a different bencher and 

maybe somebody who can sit for more than a year in the 

position on the Judicial Council for the sake of continuity. And 

that again is a provision that we support. 

 

Three other provisions raise questions, I think it‟s fair to say, 

Mr. Speaker. And questions is perhaps the best way to put it, as 

uneasy with the argument for these provisions. All we get in 

opposition, of course, from the minister before we get into 

committee is one second reading speech, and then we don‟t hear 

from the members opposite. That‟s the way things go. And so 

no particular defence of these particular provisions, and they all 

raise at least questions. 

 

The one provision that raises some questions is the repealing of 

the civil division of Provincial Court. Now I expect the 

Provincial Court did not ask for this, Mr. Speaker, because the 

Provincial Court had asked for a civil division. And the civil 

division was brought in along with the increasing amount that 

could be included in small claims court. 

 

During the time I was minister of Justice, the maximum for a 

claim in small claims went from $5,000 to $25,000. And I 

believe that was a good thing to do. We were only constrained 

really by the resources of the Provincial Court to deal with all 



7192 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2011 

those cases. And there‟s no question that small claims court was 

seen as more informal and accessible than even the simplified 

procedure in the Court of Queen‟s Bench to deal with claims 

under a certain size. And there‟s no magic number to $25,000. 

It‟s just, as I said, constraint imposed by the resources of the 

court to deal with that many civil cases. 

 

Well when we increased the provision for small claims and 

therefore the number of claims that could be brought into small 

claims court, the court saw the value of having expertise. The 

Provincial Court deals primarily with criminal cases, Mr. 

Speaker, and it‟s been estimated that 90 per cent of criminal 

cases are actually dealt with by the Provincial Court: guilty 

pleas, sentencing, trials for any number of matters are or can be 

conducted in Provincial Court. And it is largely a criminal 

court, but it does have these responsibilities for small claims 

and some other matters of a civil nature. And in any court that 

has a lot of work in an area such as the work that Court of 

Queen‟s Bench does in family law, it often makes sense to have 

a group of judges who work in that area a great deal and 

develop an expertise in that area. 

 

And now if there‟s settlement discussions of civil matters in 

Provincial Court and provided for in legislation and in The 

Provincial Court Act, again it would be the lawyers from the 

civil division who would be conducting these mediations and 

developing an expertise in those mediations, Mr. Speaker. So 

moving, repealing the civil division raises some questions in 

our minds. Why toss these civil cases randomly out to a group 

of judges whose expertise of course in their day-to-day work is 

criminal? Why do that, Mr. Speaker? And the reason seems to 

be that, well we‟ll have these small claims cases dealt with by 

justices of the peace. 

 

So on the one hand we have a government that wants to, it says 

— that‟s a bit of a red herring; it‟s not a bit of a red herring, Mr. 

Speaker, it is a red herring — elevate human rights adjudication 

from tribunals that have expertise to the Court of Queen‟s 

Bench. Now I say it‟s a red herring because in fact the effect of 

Bill 160 is not to have cases heard at all. That‟s the true effect 

of Bill 160. But the elevation argument that‟s been made to the 

public that, well these matters are too serious to be dealt with by 

anyone but judges, so we‟re going to elevate these to the Court 

of Queen‟s Bench. 

 

But if you have a small claims matter — and now it can be of 

significant monetary amount, $25,000 — well that can be done 

by a Justice of the Peace, and so we don‟t need a civil division 

of Provincial Court any more, Mr. Speaker. So on human rights 

cases, it‟s elevation, but on your small claims action, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s, well a Justice of the Peace can do it. Doesn‟t 

necessarily have to be a lawyer, although one would hope that 

the justices of the peace that deal with these matters would be 

lawyers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not an issue of great principle, I suppose, 

but the trend under previous administrations was to elevate the 

practice in the Provincial Court. And the raising of the 

monetary limits for small claims and the creation of the civil 

division — all that was of a piece. And that does not seem to be 

the motivation of this government and certainly not the 

motivation in this Bill in respect to that provision of this Bill. 

 

The second, I guess, of the two provisions that raise some 

questions for me, Mr. Speaker, is the allowing for greater public 

disclosure if it results in investigations into the conduct of 

judges by the Judicial Council. In principle and on the face of it, 

well who‟s not in favour of transparency and accountability? 

The government says that it is, Mr. Speaker. But it‟s one thing 

to use that as a slogan or a motto, and it‟s another thing to 

actually do it in practice. 

 

And the question is whether a greater transparency and 

accountability and conducting investigations of judges in 

public, transparency in investigations is being imposed on the 

judicial branch of government than the executive branch is 

willing to impose on itself through legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

And I could make or try to make political points about that, talk 

about accountability and transparency and this government and 

wander off from the Bill a little bit, Mr. Speaker, and I‟m sure 

you‟d let me go a little ways, but I‟m not going to even bother 

doing that. 

 

There is a point, Mr. Speaker, that there‟s a trade-off. The 

government and everybody‟s in favour of more accountability 

and transparency if somebody else has to do it, and in this case 

it‟s judges and the Judicial Council. But the trade-off 

potentially is judicial independence. And there is at some point 

where pieces like this can have the effect of executive 

government through legislation, this legislature and this 

government treating the court like it is an agency of the 

Minister of Justice. 

 

Now whether this crosses the line or not, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t 

know. Whether anybody will ask the question on the part of the 

judiciary about it crossing the line, I don‟t know. But it‟s a 

question that I find, as I find the, attack might be too strong a 

word, but certainly the trend to lower the status of and the 

expertise of the Provincial Court in respect to civil matters, I 

find this as well troubling, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now some of these questions I think have been raised by my 

colleagues in the Assembly. I raise them again today. We will 

be raising them in committee. Particularly I will be asking about 

whether anyone has looked at the issue of judicial independence 

in making these rules about how the Judicial Council should 

conduct itself, and what is the government‟s overall view of the 

value and the purpose of the Provincial Court and particularly 

in respect to the changes that are being made to the civil 

division and the powers that are being provided to justices of 

the peace. 

 

And so that that discussion can take place in committee, Mr. 

Speaker, I move that the Bill now go there. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 153, The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



April 11, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7193 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental and Justice.  

 

Bill No. 165 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 165 — The Adult 

Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2011 
be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to address the 

issues, or at least some of them, contained in Bill 165, The 

Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is one of those circumstances in the law where 

society and what we expect from individuals in certain 

situations advances faster perhaps than the legislation allows 

for. And although the whole area of guardianship and 

co-decision making was probably addressed a decade or so ago, 

and some outmoded methods of dealing with these issues 

changed, I think we find ourselves again in a situation where 

lawyers who practise in the area a great deal and judges who 

deal with these kind of issues on a regular basis know how it‟s 

done. But a young lawyer, somebody through years of legal 

training, coming, being confronted with their first or second or 

third even case that involves issues of guardianship and 

co-decision making should be able to go to the Act and find out 

what you do. And that‟s not necessarily the case, and I think 

that‟s why we have this Bill in front of us. Practices have been 

developed, and they‟re there and people make use of them, but 

can‟t find the support or authority for some of what‟s done 

within the legislation. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And so this is a case I think, Mr. Speaker . . . And we 

sometimes have the reverse case where legislation pushes a 

little bit. We, society, don‟t get a lot of that kind of legislation 

from this government, Mr. Speaker, but we do get legislation 

like that. This is the reverse and maybe a little more common 

case where changes have taken place in how we deal with these 

issues of, particularly, caring for elders and others who can‟t 

any longer take care of themselves, and how we make sure that 

the powers that are provided to those people who make the 

decisions for others are not abused. And this is an area, of 

course, that‟s rife with the opportunity for abuse, Mr. Speaker. 

And it is appropriate that the legislature come back to this type 

of legislation, to this legislation fairly often, Mr. Speaker, and 

make sure that it is up-to-date and it provides all the protections 

that it can be provided. 

So the Act sets out criteria for people who can apply for 

guardianship or, as the Act provides, for the recognition of 

foreign guardianship orders. The Act attempts to clarify 

inventory and accounting provisions that make it clear when 

they should be provided and to actually ensure they are 

provided and in what form they‟re going to be provided. 

There‟s a suggested form but not a required form and that is, I 

think, a welcome change. 

 

Some of these provisions we will want to discuss in some detail 

as to whether they‟ll have the desired effect. But the principle 

behind them, Mr. Speaker, is not contentious: that there be 

annual accountings; that there be final accountings following an 

adult‟s death; that there be a filing of a bond, and some 

discretion on the part of the court in that respect; and detail 

about what payments can be made in support of an adult‟s 

family. And as I said, this is for an example, the case where in 

the absence of expressed legal provisions, I‟m sure courts on 

lawyer‟s applications are making provisions which are proper 

and appropriate and commonsensical and maybe even necessary 

but don‟t have the legal empowerment and support that you 

would hope that they would have. 

 

The Act, as the minister said in his second reading speech is 

presently silent with respect to gifts. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 

anybody can understand where that is an area that needs to be 

regulated and closely monitored, that that is potentially a 

loophole through which a great deal of abuse could be excused. 

 

So the principles in the Bill I don‟t think are particularly 

contentious. The objects of the Bill I don‟t think are particularly 

contentious. I think they‟re well intended, Mr. Speaker, and 

there‟s not much to debate there. 

 

The devil is in the details, and there probably needs to be more 

discussion about whether the Bill meets its objects, then there 

needs to be debate about the objects of the Bill in the House. 

And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that the Bill 

move on to committee. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill 165, The Adult 

Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2011 

be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — To the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 



7194 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2011 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 161 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 161 — The 

Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s with 

importance, recognizing the importance of speaking at this 

point in time that I rise to speak on this Bill, concerned by the 

Bill that‟s put forward. Certainly I‟ve spoken already to this 

Bill, and certainly I rise again with strong opposition to the Bill 

that‟s been put forward by the Sask Party, specifically Bill No. 

161, An Act to amend The Election Act, 1996. 

 

It‟s interesting and disappointing, Mr. Speaker, to see the Sask 

Party make so many regressive steps in just the past year or two 

by way of legislation and by way of changes, Mr. Speaker. This 

is certainly one of those examples where the Sask Party is 

removing the ability to vote for so many across this province, 

the ability for so many to participate in their democratic right, 

Mr. Speaker, and to have a say in decisions that affect almost 

every aspect of their daily lives, Mr. Speaker. So we see that 

with great disappointment. 

 

Unfortunately this isn‟t a single case of its own. We see 

regressive steps and changes in legislation from this 

government on so many other fronts, Mr. Speaker. And I can 

highlight specifically the elimination of an independent external 

voice for individuals who are afflicted by poverty or 

disenfranchised, Mr. Speaker, the elimination of a body that 

was external to government to advocate and to raise the matters 

important to those individuals that are barely getting by, Mr. 

Speaker, and that are marginalized in many aspects of life and 

that are hurting, and that without those voices, don‟t have the 

concerns being raised, and that we as policy-makers, we as a 

society aren‟t able to make changes to resolve ourselves to 

addressing their circumstance. In fact, Mr. Speaker, in some 

ways we don‟t even hear those stories, those pleas, and those 

circumstances, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that‟s one example of a regressive move by this government. 

Certainly removing the right of, an ability, the ability of many 

young people and seniors and individuals across this province 

from voting is another example. 

 

I would highlight . . . And I spoke just last week on Bill No. 160 

as well, Mr. Speaker. It certainly comes in the same vein, Mr. 

Speaker, of regressive legislation, Mr. Speaker, that Bill itself 

providing . . . or receiving an international spotlight and a 

shameful perspective on this Sask Party government and on our 

province, Mr. Speaker. A Bill that in fact attacks the human 

rights within this province, legislation within this province, 

protection within this province, and by impact and by plan 

eliminates the voice, Mr. Speaker, of victims across this 

province, victims that have been abused or harassed or had their 

human rights breached in some fashion, Mr. Speaker, and 

removing and silencing those individuals, removing those 

voices from the public sphere, Mr. Speaker. Removing the 

potential for court decisions, Mr. Speaker, that are sometimes 

required to better us as a society, Mr. Speaker. So another 

example of regressive legislation, Mr. Speaker, that is taking 

Saskatchewan dramatically in the wrong direction. 

 

It‟s highlighting Bill 160 in its attack on human rights and the 

fact that Amnesty International, Mr. Speaker, a Nobel Peace 

Prize winning organization that leads from an international 

perspective, is actually weighing in on and scathing this 

Premier and this government for its legislation and its attack on 

human rights — an organization that doesn‟t weigh in 

politically in a historical fashion, Mr. Speaker, or by practice. 

So this is sort of a rare circumstance and one that the people of 

this province are ashamed of, Mr. Speaker, because in fact here 

in Saskatchewan we‟ve been leaders from a social justice 

perspective on so many fronts, Mr. Speaker, and certainly from 

a human rights perspective. 

 

But we see on many other fronts this government as well, this 

Sask Party government make regressive decisions, make 

regressive choices, and with negative impacts for Saskatchewan 

people. We‟ve seen other pieces of legislation that are 

disappointing, where we see Bill 43 for example, Mr. Speaker, 

that takes away the ability for individuals to come together and 

organize and to speak out and to have their say, their democratic 

right, Mr. Speaker. Civil society, Mr. Speaker, playing the 

function that it should in leading positive change and 

recognizing and advocating and highlighting injustices, Mr. 

Speaker, and pushing us all to hear the matter for which they‟re 

speaking. It‟s disappointing to see this Sask Party government 

take and disable that function, to take away the ability for 

individuals to organize and to rally, and to take away that right 

of civil society, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So on many fronts, whether it‟s the elimination of the voices of 

those afflicted by poverty, by those most marginalized in this 

province, whether we see it through Bill 160 with the attack on 

human rights that has brought us this shameful international 

spotlight, Mr. Speaker, whether we see it through Bill 43 that 

specifically prevents groups and individuals from across this 

province from organizing in the fashion that they should be able 

to in a just and civil society, Mr. Speaker, we see a regressive 

government. 

 

And certainly we see it in this Bill here, Mr. Speaker, that I‟m 

speaking to, specifically in Bill No. 161, An Act to amend The 

Election Act, a Bill that we strongly oppose, Mr. Speaker. When 

I say we, I speak certainly as we as the official opposition New 

Democrats, but I also speak we in a more global sense, Mr. 

Speaker, because I speak for the people of this province — 

many, many, Mr. Speaker, in fact countless individuals who 

have raised their concerns, Mr. Speaker, with both myself, but 

also members of the opposition and also organizations, Mr. 

Speaker, that oppose this Bill and oppose the actions of this 

government that will prevent many from casting a ballot in the 

next election, Mr. Speaker — a regressive move. 

 

And when we put this in context, here we are in Saskatchewan, 

a once proud province as it relates to human rights and social 

justice and enabling voters and addressing and hearing 

circumstances of the marginalized, Mr. Speaker. Here we are at 

a time when we‟re sweeping those voices under the carpet, 



April 11, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7195 

whether that be individuals who are marginalized or afflicted by 

poverty, by individuals who have been harassed and abused and 

had their human rights breached, Mr. Speaker, and certainly in a 

circumstance where individuals should have the ability to 

participate fully in their democratic process, have a say in the 

fundamental decisions that affect their daily lives, Mr. Speaker. 

And when we look at this context, we see this right wing 

government with these right wing actions, these right wing 

pieces of legislation that hurt both Saskatchewan people and our 

province as a whole, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We recognize that from a global perspective and from an 

international perspective that we have other nations and people 

from all over the world that are grappling and pushing and 

fighting for the very democratic rights that we had grown 

accustomed to in Saskatchewan, that we once fought for and 

once put forward with great principle, Mr. Speaker, and held up 

as a model to the world. We witness the unrest and the conflict 

and the chaos and the fighting in the Middle East, Mr. Speaker, 

and through North Africa, Mr. Speaker, where individuals are 

fighting and in fact losing their lives, Mr. Speaker, for a say in a 

democratic process, for democratic rights that we are afforded 

here in this province and in this great nation. To see this 

government at the same very time simultaneously removing 

those rights and freedoms that we have, too, put out with 

leadership and fought for in this province and country, Mr. 

Speaker, is unfortunate. 

 

So as we see individuals, whether it be, Mr. Speaker, in Libya 

as we turn on the TVs tonight or recent unrest and activity 

through Egypt or whether it‟s through Jordan or through 

Yemen, Mr. Speaker, and we see the lives being lost to plea for 

a democratic process, to have a say in the decisions that impact 

those people‟s lives, we should recognize how shameful, Mr. 

Speaker, it is that we‟re regressing as a province and going 

backwards on this front under this right wing Sask Party 

Premier and government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it‟s not without . . . It‟s not lost, Mr. Speaker, on 

Saskatchewan people what we‟re forfeiting in these sorts of 

decisions by giving up democratic rights such as participating in 

an election and casting a vote, Mr. Speaker. These are 

fundamental aspects that are the backbone of a democratic 

society, Mr. Speaker. And we‟re at our best, it is certainly our 

belief and the belief of the vast majority of Saskatchewan 

people, that we‟re at our best when more people participate. 

And we should be looking at ways to continue to enable more 

people to participate. 

 

[15:45] 

 

But we recognize that so many individual men and women are 

currently serving our proud nation and serving from our 

province, Mr. Speaker, in an Armed Forces capacity, fighting 

for democratic freedoms around the world. We thank them for 

that service. But we should not forget the important role of 

continuing the leadership on our home front here, Mr. Speaker, 

making sure that at the same time while individuals are away, 

that we‟re not having reduced or by the regressive actions of a 

right wing government reducing the very democratic freedoms 

that we have as province. 

 

And that‟s exactly what‟s happening, Mr. Speaker, at this point 

in time. While many young men and women are serving our 

nation and serving from Saskatchewan away from home to 

protect peoples around the world and protect and promote 

democratic freedoms, Mr. Speaker, we‟re witnessing right 

within our own province a regression under this government, a 

direct regression and a purposeful regression of those freedoms 

that we have been so privileged with, Mr. Speaker, and that 

we‟ve planned for, that we‟ve taken the leadership required, and 

certainly fought for, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it‟s not just individuals, Mr. Speaker, that are serving 

overseas right now that are fighting for those freedoms. But I 

think of the many seniors and veterans, Mr. Speaker, across this 

province that have served our nation in various conflicts and 

providing various securities, Mr. Speaker, done so honourably 

from this province and all across Canada, that should be so 

ashamed and are so disappointed to see this right wing Premier 

and Sask Party government take away the freedoms and 

principles for which they put their life on the line, Mr. Speaker, 

and in many ways and in many cases lost their lives, Mr. 

Speaker. And in that sense, it‟s the loved ones that recognize 

those circumstances. 

 

The veterans that we have, Mr. Speaker, still many living from 

conflicts such as the Second World War, Mr. Speaker, that are 

going to be impeded — in a very unfortunate fashion by direct 

plan of this Premier — from voting in the next election is 

something that we should simply be ashamed of as a province, 

that people are ashamed of, Mr. Speaker, something we 

adamantly oppose as Saskatchewan New Democrats, something 

that I adamantly oppose, and something that we‟ll certainly 

continue to fight, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To take away, whether it‟s from a veteran or from a senior, Mr. 

Speaker, the individuals who have been builders of our proud 

province and the institutions of our province that have served us 

so well, to take away that vote, Mr. Speaker, is something that 

we should all be embarrassed of that is occurring in this 

province and a regression that we must stand up and oppose, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I haven‟t heard an individual, a constituent, or anyone that 

I‟ve sat down and talked about this Bill with or individuals who 

have raised with myself, I haven‟t heard of a supporter of this 

Bill individually as it relates to a meeting, Mr. Speaker. In fact, 

individuals, when we sit down and they have questions about 

this Bill, they oppose it in a huge way. They are surprised in 

fact, Mr. Speaker, that it‟s not being talked about from a 

broader perspective. Because it‟s egregious acts that we see by 

this government, Mr. Speaker, taking away that ability to 

participate in one‟s democracy and one‟s society and one‟s 

making decisions as it relates to the many different institutions 

and services and programs that impact individuals‟ lives and 

communities‟ well-being, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so I highlight specifically how shameful it is to be doing 

this directly to the seniors and to veterans and the builders of 

this province. But it‟s wrong to be doing it to anyone, Mr. 

Speaker, any citizen of this province. And particularly 

highlighting, as well, young people, Mr. Speaker, who I would 

argue are more equipped and ready to participate in democracy 

than ever before, Mr. Speaker, that are by way of their 

education and their mindset, we should be looking at every 



7196 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2011 

mechanism, tool, to get these young people out to vote, to have 

their say, to take leadership roles, Mr. Speaker, in our 

communities, in our structures, and to be casting that ballot and 

shaping their future, Mr. Speaker. I‟m absolutely confident that 

these young people are ready to do so. 

 

I hear members opposite sort of ridicule what they see as apathy 

in young people, and this does nothing, Mr. Speaker, to invoke 

the sort of participation that we should with young people, 

young people who we‟d be, that we‟d be well served by having 

them fully involved in the decisions of the day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now we may not always agree with everything that‟s 

brought forward by any demographic, Mr. Speaker, by any 

individual, but that‟s sort of the fundamental principle of 

democracy, Mr. Speaker. And I think, and I‟m an adamant 

believer that this is the wrong-headed direction to be going, to 

be disenabling individuals from casting their vote — young 

people, seniors, veterans — we should be looking at 

mechanisms and processes, Mr. Speaker, that enable more 

people to vote, to turn up voter turnout, Mr. Speaker, to engage 

young people and individuals across this province in a fashion 

for which they take purpose in their democracy. 

 

And the decisions that are being made today, Mr. Speaker, on 

so many different fronts, impact us a generation down the road 

or two generations down the road. And the young people of 

today, our First Nations and Métis people, Mr. Speaker, have a 

vested interest in those decisions and the well-being of their 

communities not only today, Mr. Speaker, but also 10 years 

from now and not only 10 years from now, Mr. Speaker, but 20 

years from now. Many of these young people, Mr. Speaker, are 

looking well beyond that as well, and they‟re looking 30 and 40 

and 50 years. They‟re looking at their own lives and how they 

fit into Saskatchewan, how they fit into our communities, and 

what kind of policies and what sort of government serves them, 

Mr. Speaker. But they‟re also looking in a broader context, and 

they‟re looking at what sort of Saskatchewan serves all 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And individuals have their different issues that are most 

important to them, and we should be, we should be reaching 

out, Mr. Speaker, to empower, to involve, and to provide the 

opportunities for young people and all individuals across this 

province to be fully engaged from a democratic perspective. 

And we see that that‟s not the case. 

 

The unfortunate reality of why this Bill is even before us here 

today, Mr. Speaker, is the shrewd political direction of this 

government to exclude many individuals, Mr. Speaker, for 

whom have been failed by this Premier and by this right wing 

government, Mr. Speaker. And it‟s an unfortunate 

circumstance, Mr. Speaker, to see a government that has had so 

many failings, whether it be with First Nations and Métis 

people, Mr. Speaker, or with seniors across this province, rural 

and urban, or with young people, Mr. Speaker, who recognize 

that this government‟s failing to plan for tomorrow, Mr. 

Speaker, but not only for tomorrow but the generation down the 

road, and to have the prudent planning and the vision that 

ensures that we have the kind of prosperity and well-being that 

we must have and deserve to have here in this province many, 

many years down the road, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we see this Premier decide to intervene in that political 

process by removing the ability for many of those young people 

for whom have been failed, the seniors that have been failed 

from casting a ballot in the next election. We simply say that 

that‟s wrong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the list of, the list of failings, Mr. Speaker, of course is 

long, and that‟s not where I intend to take my speech today, Mr. 

Speaker. But of course we get the countless calls and emails 

and phone calls on so many different fronts. And I hear about it 

in our communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But specifically if we‟re talking about the many seniors in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, who have worked to build this province, 

who are now being let down by this government on the front of 

health care, basic health services, both rural and from an urban 

perspective, Mr. Speaker, and we see now this government try 

to exclude them from coming out and casting their ballot . . . 

Unfortunate when we see a government that‟s closed down 

long-term care facilities that have served a community and been 

built by communities, Mr. Speaker, and closed down beds, Mr. 

Speaker, and now preventing those very individuals who 

fundraised and built those structures, that made sure those sort 

of protections and securities were in place that are now being 

closed down, are going to be prevented, Mr. Speaker, from the 

voting in the next election, is simply wrong. 

 

And people see through it and they see this is a shrewd move 

and they don‟t support it. And it‟s against the democratic 

freedoms that we support as a province. They‟re against the 

democratic freedoms that we fought for as a nation and that 

individuals in this province have fought for, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we certainly, from a shrewd perspective, recognize why this 

government I suspect is preventing many seniors from voting in 

the next election. The failures in health services, the failures in 

long-term care, Mr. Speaker, the failures in many ways to 

ensure that individuals are protected against the inflationary 

pressures, the massive cost-of-living pressures that can be 

directly attributed, many of them, directly to this Premier and 

this government, Mr. Speaker. Pressures that in fact, in costs of 

living, that have put a burden on seniors across this province, 

Mr. Speaker, in a way that they simply can‟t manage and have 

put many either under water or burdened the well-being and 

quality of life that they‟ve worked so hard to put forward, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I see it all the time, Mr. Speaker, seniors that simply can‟t 

afford rent anymore, Mr. Speaker, and in fact don‟t have an 

adequate place to move to, displaced from their homes. And, 

Mr. Speaker, when you get those calls, whether it‟s a young 

mother or a senior, it doesn‟t make it easier on either 

circumstance, Mr. Speaker, as an MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] — and the calls are common from within 

to our offices — as far as what sort of advice and what sort of 

solution you can offer to these individuals. Because there‟s not 

much that we can offer as an individual opposition MLA when 

you take that call, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This takes priorities of government. It takes a vision. It takes a 

plan, and people recognize when they‟ve been failed, Mr. 

Speaker. And watching seniors in these circumstances and 

individuals across the province of all demographics and their 



April 11, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7197 

level of frustration and hurt and lack of dignity, Mr. Speaker, 

that many are feeling — and that‟s their words put to us, Mr. 

Speaker — is unsettling, is something that we simply shouldn‟t 

sit by idly and observe. It should go well beyond just a question 

period discussion in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I can say it‟s something that we‟ll certainly be continuing 

to fight, individuals that will be continuing to fight for and put 

forward positive solutions that address, address those 

circumstances within their lives. And I think it‟s just simply 

wrong, Mr. Speaker, that we have a government that‟s 

advancing legislation, recognizing that they failed so many in 

this province, that‟s going to prevent those individuals from 

going out and casting a ballot. 

 

Now many of those individuals, Mr. Speaker, don‟t realize that 

right now. Many of those seniors, whether it‟s in Wawota 

where they‟ve had the beds closed down on them, Mr. Speaker, 

and they‟re frustrated on those, they‟re aware of that, but many 

of those individuals aren‟t aware that they‟re . . . of what the 

new provisions are for voting, what the changes are that this 

regressive Sask Party has put forward. And unfortunately, Mr. 

Speaker, many of them aren‟t going to realize that until they go 

to cast their ballot on election day, Mr. Speaker. Now it‟s going 

to be a sad day, Mr. Speaker, on election day to see many 

individuals that are going to cast their ballot, for whatever 

party, Mr. Speaker, for whatever party and for whatever issues 

are important to them, when they‟re turned away from the polls. 

 

It‟s going to be a sad story, Mr. Speaker, one that we‟ve talked 

about in this Assembly from the moment that this piece of 

legislation was put forward — a piece of legislation that‟s not 

supported by research, it‟s not supported by objective 

information, it‟s not supported by a Chief Electoral Officer, as I 

understand, Mr. Speaker, and a piece of legislation that has a 

direct impact on Saskatchewan people. And indeed it‟s going to 

be a sad day on November 7th, Mr. Speaker, if this government 

continues to bull ahead in this regressive fashion to have many 

seniors, Mr. Speaker, many young people or First Nations and 

Métis people show up at the polls, Mr. Speaker, with purpose, 

with purpose and looking to the future and looking to their own 

lives, Mr. Speaker, looking at their communities, all the 

different aspects that individuals factor in when they cast their 

vote. And when they go to cast that vote, they‟re going to 

realize that this right wing Premier has taken away that 

democratic right from them, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a shame, Mr. 

Speaker, and we shouldn‟t tolerate it in this province, and we 

should be ashamed. 

 

And as we have young men and women serving us abroad, Mr. 

Speaker, serving our international community abroad and their 

families are left here right now and they‟re standing up for 

democratic freedoms a world away, Mr. Speaker, fighting for 

the well-being of and democratic freedoms that we have taken 

for granted in some cases here, Mr. Speaker, at the same time, 

it‟s slipping away in their own home jurisdiction. 

 

And those very individuals are going to be back here and 

recognize . . . Now it may not impact them. Maybe they have 

the adequate legislation but I guarantee, Mr. Speaker, that 

individuals will see this as an egregious act, a Bill that takes us 

in the wrong direction, one that unfortunately is in line with the 

many other regressive Bills we‟ve seen from this government, 

Mr. Speaker. And there‟s been many of them and many actions 

that are of that regressive direction, Mr. Speaker, of taking us in 

the wrong direction. I‟ve referenced a few before, but certainly 

the attack on human rights by way of Bill 160 in silencing of 

individuals that have had their human rights breached, Mr. 

Speaker, that have been harassed, that are victims, is wrong. We 

need those voices, Mr. Speaker, to better us as a community, as 

a province, to resolve ourselves and to put forward laws and 

resources to improve us as a province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:00] 

 

The Bill is wrong. It‟s in the wrong direction. It‟s regressive. 

We see it in Bill 43 that individuals, when you explain this to 

them, that the democratic right to assemble in a free and civil 

society as we would have come to expect, certainly in 

Saskatchewan, is being taken away and undermined by this 

government and has been taken away. That Bill has already 

been moved, Mr. Speaker, taking away the ability for the public 

to come together and have their say and raise injustices or 

perceived injustices, Mr. Speaker — at the very least being able 

to have the ability to put issues and matters into the public 

sphere, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The removal of that discussion and public discourse is the 

wrong direction to go, Mr. Speaker. We should be embarrassed 

as a province that this once proud province from a perspective 

of social justice and human rights and having our say, not only 

in Saskatchewan but influence across our great nation and 

across North America, our continent, Mr. Speaker . . . It‟s 

disappointing and it‟s wrong. We have individuals . . . The fact 

that we‟re removing the ability for these young individuals or 

for any segment of society or any individual, Mr. Speaker, to 

rally and to raise their concern is wrong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We might not always like what we hear, Mr. Speaker, and we 

might not always agree with the grievances we hear or the 

matters of the day, but then that‟s our job, Mr. Speaker, as 

policy makers, to listen to that public discourse, to level with 

Saskatchewan people, and to engage in that discussion. To 

stymie and stifle and drive those discussions underground is 

simply wrong, just as it is wrong, Mr. Speaker, to remove the 

voice of victims of human rights breaches, Mr. Speaker, of 

harassments and abuses, those that have been wronged. 

 

And those stories can be ugly, Mr. Speaker. They‟re simply 

wrong. And not only does it serve us well to have an ability to 

have those stories public for us to resolve ourselves to a better 

day, to resource and to plan to ensure that we protect. Also 

there‟s a net benefit to the public, Mr. Speaker, in 

understanding some of the ills of society, recognizing how they 

can play a role within their own community, within their own 

family, and within their own lives, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that 

the actions that are egregious and wrong are not continued, Mr. 

Speaker. And we‟re not well served. And what we see is in that 

piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, the impact is that voices 

won‟t be heard, and that cases, Mr. Speaker, or judicial 

decisions simply won‟t occur. Removal of the tribunals and . . . 

Quite simply, Mr. Speaker, it‟s fair to say that those decisions 

are quite simply required sometimes, and that those too shape 

society, just as do the Bills of today and the decisions in an 

individual‟s daily life. 

 



7198 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2011 

But we shouldn‟t be hiding the ills of our society. We should be 

dealing with them head-on and improving the circumstance for 

individuals and people across this province. And certainly we 

see this sort of brushing of voices under the carpet. As well 

right here in Regina, where at a time where individuals and 

families are under profound challenge by the rising costs of 

living, by poverty, by barely able to kind of make ends meet 

and the strain that that provides across families, Mr. Speaker, 

we see this government remove the independent and external 

voice of advocacy for those individuals, the voice that carries 

that not only to government but also to the public, Mr. Speaker. 

And that of course being the removal of the Welfare Rights 

Centre and removing that mechanism that must be independent 

and external to government to serve those that are so 

marginalized, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the sad circumstance is that individuals don‟t hear those 

voices otherwise. It‟s not as though these individuals that are in 

near-crisis circumstances or crisis circumstances have the 

ability in many circumstances or recognize the processes to 

raise their voices otherwise, to have their say. But it‟s important 

for us to have those voices as part of our public discourse and 

certainly as part of our political decisions and policy decisions, 

Mr. Speaker. So we see regressive actions across the piece, Mr. 

Speaker, by way of decisions, but also by way of legislation 

from this Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we see it continue in the Bill we‟re fighting here today and 

opposing here today, Mr. Speaker, and that most of 

Saskatchewan is opposed to, Mr. Speaker, that being Bill 161, 

the Act that eliminates the ability for many to participate in the 

next election, the Act, Mr. Speaker, that proves once again that 

the Sask Party‟s more than willing to intervene in our 

democratic process. This is offside with Saskatchewan values. 

This is offside with Canadian values, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We shouldn‟t just be ashamed that we have an international 

spotlight that‟s on the human rights legislation put forward by 

this government. We should be ashamed, Mr. Speaker, of the 

fact that as Saskatchewan people we have a set of values and 

that this Bill and these other Bills are counter to those values, 

Mr. Speaker — ones of inclusion, ones that recognize that 

we‟re better served when all individuals have a say in the 

decisions that impact their daily lives, Mr. Speaker, now and 

well into the future. 

 

So we talk about the shrewd decision of this Premier again to 

intervene in the democratic process by way of reducing many 

from voting or eliminating many from voting in the next 

election, Mr. Speaker. And we see it, of course, as a direct 

consequence of this Premier and this government‟s failings of 

responding to those needs of those individuals. Democracy 

should trump shrewd political decisions any day of the week, 

Mr. Speaker, and we are disappointed that that‟s not the case 

with this Premier and this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I talked about the failings. I highlighted the many for seniors 

across the piece and I highlight the many for young people, 

whether it be students who are struggling or can‟t access the 

child care they are requiring, Mr. Speaker, or the students that 

can‟t access the education that they desire to, Mr. Speaker. 

That‟s the case for many now, Mr. Speaker. It‟s not a matter of 

whether or not you have the ability and simply want to go to 

school. Under this Premier and under the direction that we‟re 

taking, far more, more and more students are simply not able to 

attend whether it be post-secondary, Mr. Speaker, university 

and college, not only because their tuition is increasing, Mr. 

Speaker, in such a significant way, but because of the 

skyrocketing costs of housing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And those students, Mr. Speaker, those students, Mr. Speaker, 

are opposed to the direction of this government. They question 

all the time, Mr. Speaker. They hear from this Premier talking 

about the riches of government, all the money that government 

has, but then they‟re sharing how that doesn‟t connect in any 

way to the circumstances that they‟re dealing with, the fact they 

can‟t find adequate housing, Mr. Speaker, the fact that they 

can‟t afford the tuition increases. Or you bundle all those 

increases together, Mr. Speaker. Many individuals are not able 

to advance their life here in Saskatchewan the way that they 

deserve and the way that they‟re accustomed to. 

 

Now I‟m getting heckled by one of the, a couple of the 

members opposite, Mr. Speaker, who in fact are supporters of 

this Bill. And they‟re asking, specifically they‟re asking, what 

Bill are we speaking to? And it‟s Bill 161, the Bill put forward 

by this government, Mr. Speaker, that is eliminating many 

people from, eliminating many people from voting in the next 

election. And what we recognize is that it‟s a shrewd move by 

this Premier and this government, Mr. Speaker, to prevent many 

from voting in the next election that have been failed by the 

government. I was highlighting about the circumstances of 

students, Mr. Speaker. I‟ve talked too about the circumstances 

of seniors. Many have been, so many have been failed, Mr. 

Speaker; so many feel that the burden of cost of living, Mr. 

Speaker, across this province. 

 

And we have a Minister of Social Services who chooses to 

heckle here in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, instead of taking 

leadership from a perspective and recognizing that we‟d be 

better off from a social services perspective, Mr. Speaker, if all 

individuals had a say in their democratic process and the 

decisions that impact their lives, that we‟re better off, Mr. 

Speaker, if that very minister hadn‟t intervened and taken away 

the voice, Mr. Speaker, of individuals who are impacted by 

poverty, Mr. Speaker, impacted by cost of living, by way of 

removing the independent and external advocate, Mr. Speaker, 

who speaks for the individuals who are impacted by poverty, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we have all these individuals and groups across this province 

that have been, demographics that have been failed by this 

government. Now we see the piece of legislation that‟s put out 

and intended to take away their ability to participate on 

November 7th, 2011. And it‟s sad, Mr. Speaker, because 

individuals across this province, many of them have no 

awareness that this debate is going on in this Assembly. Many 

of them have no understanding that this Bill‟s been put forward 

and that we have this right wing move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we have all the time in the world to repeal this Bill or to 

remove this Bill from consideration and to do the right thing, 

Mr. Speaker. But shamefully we see this Premier forge ahead. 

 

And the circumstance is going to be that, whether it‟s the 

member from Martensville, Mr. Speaker, is going to have some 



April 11, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7199 

young people in her constituency if this government continues 

to forge ahead, Mr. Speaker, on November 7th, some young 

people that are going to show up at the polls, Mr. Speaker, that 

day. And I don‟t know who they‟ll vote for, Mr. Speaker, 

because that‟s their right, and they will make that decision out 

of a whole host of matters that are important to them. But when 

those individuals, Mr. Speaker — and maybe voting for the 

very first time in their life, Mr. Speaker — and they get to the 

polls to cast their ballot for whomever, and maybe they‟d 

actually vote for the member from Martensville. Maybe they 

wouldn‟t. That doesn‟t matter to any one of us. The fact is that 

the democratic process and principles are more important than 

any shrewd decision of the day. 

 

But when that individual and those young people that show up 

at those polls for the very first time and are turned away 

because they don‟t have the adequate identification, that‟s a 

wrong day in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That‟s a sad day in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And it‟s one that we‟re going to 

continue to fight as New Democrats and that I‟m going to 

continue to fight to make sure it doesn‟t occur. And we have 

opportunity; this Bill hasn‟t passed yet, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we haven‟t seen a signal from government that they‟re 

willing to pull this Bill, Mr. Speaker, but it‟s shameful that 

they‟re not willing. It‟s not consistent with any sort of a study 

that says this is the way to go. It doesn‟t address a problem, Mr. 

Speaker, that has been highlighted, simply a move to intervene 

in the political process. And certainly it‟s not foreign to this 

Premier and this government to intervene in democracy, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Of course we always hear the continued allegations and 

concerns of the PC [Progressive Conservative] trust fund 

dollars, Mr. Speaker, where we have a Premier and this 

government sitting on dollars that are preventing a party from 

having their say, Mr. Speaker, from participating in both the last 

election and this election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it‟s not the first time that this Premier and this government 

have intervened in the well-being of our democracy. Just a short 

while ago, we had the big debate in this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, where we had this circumstance that was so troubling 

and that has continued, Mr. Speaker, where they intervened in 

the hiring of a Chief Electoral Officer, Mr. Speaker, an 

individual who‟s there to uphold and ensure the well-being of 

our democratic process. A sad day once again, Mr. Speaker, as 

we watched this Premier and this government intervene in that 

process, Mr. Speaker, vetoed a position from a bipartisan 

committee, Mr. Speaker, a decision for which the Attorney 

General of this province had been fully involved in, Mr. 

Speaker, to veto that decision, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we see case after case, Mr. Speaker, of intervening in our 

democratic process, which is a sad circumstance for the people 

of this province, something that the people of this province are 

opposed to, Mr. Speaker. And we recognize it in the context of 

all of this turmoil in many nations worldwide, through the 

Middle East and through northern Africa, fighting for the 

democratic freedoms and protections and ability to vote that we 

have been so proud to have here in this province. 

 

The member from Moose Jaw North, Mr. Speaker, heckles 

from his feet, however we never hear that member give a 

speech from the floor, Mr. Speaker. In fact he‟s a silent 

member, Mr. Speaker. We haven‟t heard . . . I think we heard 

him say a member‟s statement once, Mr. Speaker, but we don‟t 

see him stand up and to stand up for individuals in his 

constituency, Mr. Speaker. What we do see that individual 

doing is removing the ability for individuals in his constituency 

to vote. What we do see, Mr. Speaker, is we see many 

individuals in his constituency who are failed, and we‟re all 

failed by the attack on human rights legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

So on so many fronts we see the member from Moose Jaw 

North, who likes to heckle from this seat, but isn‟t willing to 

have the integrity to take the floor and state his . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would caution the member not to 

impugn the . . . [inaudible] . . . of any member. I would ask him 

to withdraw that last remark. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — I will withdraw the statement with 

respect to integrity and continue on with your permission, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But certainly that member from Moose Jaw North, who heckles 

while we speak about egregious and regressive Acts, Mr. 

Speaker, has the ability, if he has beliefs, if he is representing 

his constituents, to take the floor of this Assembly to speak to 

legislation, to represent their views. And we seen none of that 

happen with that member, Mr. Speaker, yet he heckles from his 

seat And I see him over there now; he‟s back into his solitaire 

game I suspect, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the member not to reflect 

on a member either being in the House or being outside the 

House and not to make assumptions about any member in the 

House. I would ask the member to continue on the Bill that is 

up here for debate, 161. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. But what we 

recognize is just that the many concerns with this piece of 

legislation, how offside it is with the very principles and values 

of Saskatchewan people, we recognize that it‟s not solving any 

problem that‟s been laid out, Mr. Speaker. In fact it‟s simply a 

shrewd political move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we see this, of course, being the government and the 

Premier that have been more than willing to intervene in our 

democratic process over the past few years, Mr. Speaker, to the 

detriment of Saskatchewan people and to the province as a 

whole. Because I‟m an adamant believer that we‟re best served 

by all Saskatchewan people having their best opportunity to 

participate in democracy. 

 

It‟s a sad circumstance that we‟re spending the resources and 

time in this Assembly to debate this Bill that should simply be 

pulled, Mr. Speaker, instead of having a debate about how do 

we enable more individuals and empower more individuals to 

participate in our democracy. There‟s many different aspects we 

could look at there, Mr. Speaker, a broad discussion. And 

instead of looking at ways to improve voter turnout, to engage 

young people, to make sure that seniors, the builders of this 

province can cast their ballot and be a part of decisions that 



7200 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2011 

impact them today and well into the future, we‟re seeing this 

government move in an opposite direction of removing many, 

eliminating many from voting in the next election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We should be looking at the opposite conversation. The positive 

one, Mr. Speaker, about how do we increase engagement from 

whether it‟s youth or whether it‟s First Nations and Métis or 

whether we make sure that seniors continue to have the ability 

to participate and shape the province for which they‟ve had this 

proud history of building, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it‟s interesting to recognize that this government advances 

this piece of legislation at the same very time that we see a 

challenge, a Supreme Court challenge in British Columbia, Mr. 

Speaker — something that‟s going on as we speak — of the 

federal law that‟s very similar to this one, Mr. Speaker. And we 

see that legal challenge, and we see that that challenge is being 

led, Mr. Speaker, by a group of organizations including 

individuals representing people with disabilities, Mr. Speaker, 

seniors, renters, people who are homeless, but not just those 

individuals but the broad public, Mr. Speaker, who recognize 

that it‟s wrong to take away the vote of individuals who should 

have a say in the decisions that affect their lives, Mr. Speaker. 

And that‟s a broad group of individuals, a broad coalition, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We recognize that we have a government that‟s making it 

harder for people to vote, instead of looking at ways to make it 

easier for people to vote. We have a government who‟s looking 

to reduce participation in the decisions of today, instead of 

increase that participation, Mr. Speaker, and it‟s a wrong 

direction all the way across the board. 

 

And I‟ve highlighted the many other circumstances, Mr. 

Speaker, of who is impacted by this legislation, but it‟s 

individuals in all of our constituencies, Mr. Speaker — seniors, 

individuals of all demographics and ages, First Nations and 

Métis in a significant way, young people in a significant way, 

Mr. Speaker — and it‟s disappointing and wrong to see this 

government continue to put this forward. 

 

And it‟s shame, Mr. Speaker, that if this Bill isn‟t pulled, Mr. 

Speaker, and it‟s pushed ahead by this aggressive Premier, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s going to be a shame to come to November 7th, Mr. 

Speaker, and to see a young Métis individual, first-time voter 

get turned away because they don‟t have the identification that 

this Premier has put in place, Mr. Speaker. Or, Mr. Speaker, the 

senior who‟s been a builder of the province, Mr. Speaker, an 

individual who maybe lives in Wawota, Mr. Speaker, who‟s 

been impacted by decisions of this government, who comes out 

to cast their vote, and yet they‟re prevented from casting that 

vote, Mr. Speaker, or the young people for whom I get calls 

from all the time, young mothers and young fathers for whom 

are being displaced from their home on a regular basis, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And the member from Regina South can joke about this all he 

wants. But it‟s a sad phone call to take, Mr. Speaker, and we 

take them from his constituency as well. And it‟s young 

mothers, young fathers, and parents who are being displaced 

from their homes. And that member who can heckle from his 

seat all he wants, but the fact is this is the harsh reality for 

many, Mr. Speaker, in our province right now. 

And we‟ve seen nothing but inaction for the last four years, and 

we‟ve seen nothing but inaction now. And then those 

individuals who are going to have a say in the next election are 

going to go out for whomever they want to vote for may get 

turned away, Mr. Speaker, from that ability to do so. And that‟s 

wrong, Mr. Speaker. Because, Mr. Speaker, there‟s nothing 

more sad than witnessing some of the circumstances that we‟re 

seeing within this province for some of these young families. 

And if we take away that ability for them to have a say in their 

community, here and well into the future, that‟s simply wrong. 

It‟s fundamentally wrong, and it‟s not in line with 

Saskatchewan values. It‟s not in line with democratic values. 

It‟s not in line with democratic freedoms that we have upheld in 

an international perspective, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have many veterans, Mr. Speaker, that have fought for these 

democratic freedoms from a global perspective in international 

communities and fought against the anti-democratic forces of 

other nations. And here we‟re slipping away here in 

Saskatchewan. We‟re moving in the wrong direction. 

 

Saskatchewan people oppose that, Mr. Speaker. It‟s wrong. 

We‟ve been a model for many years from a perspective of 

social justice, from a perspective from legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

that protects Saskatchewan people in communities. And we 

have a right wing, regressive Premier and government that are 

taking us in the wrong direction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have many things I could say. I‟m disappointed 

that we‟re spending this much time talking about this Bill that 

should simply be pulled because what we should do is, we 

should have this Bill pulled right now, Mr. Speaker. And we 

should have the immediate discussion about how, Mr. Speaker, 

how we ensure that more people participate in the decisions that 

impact their lives, their communities‟ lives, and the well-being 

of our province. How do we engage more people, Mr. Speaker, 

across Saskatchewan, of all demographics — not just seniors, 

not just First Nations and Métis, not just young people, but all 

people, Mr. Speaker? And we see that we‟re going in the wrong 

direction. 

 

But at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, and with many more 

things to say to this Bill, many more questions to have, and with 

great concerns and great opposition to this wrong-headed 

legislation, wrong-headed direction by this regressive Premier, 

Mr. Speaker, I conclude my remarks at this point in time and 

cede the floor to my colleague who has certainly more to say on 

this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to get in and speak a bit about Bill 

No. 161, An Act to amend the Election Act. And I just want to 

thank the previous speaker, my colleague from Regina 

Rosemont. I think he gave a very thoughtful, well-balanced 

speech about the issues around Bill 161. 

 

It is ironic at this time, when we watch the news about what‟s 

happening in Libya, what happened in Egypt, and we think 

about how important it is, the democratic rights to participate. 

To participate is the issue, to participate. And my colleague 



April 11, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7201 

spoke very eloquently about the issues about what‟s really 

important here, what‟s really important here. 

 

And I think about, a year ago, what happened in Poland with 

the plane crash where so many of the leadership of the Polish 

government died, and we reflect about what happened in 

Eastern Europe over the many, just recent past decades, about 

the battle, the battle to get democracy into Poland and the 

several countries that had lost that after World War II. And I‟m 

sure in these shipyards of Poland they weren‟t saying, they were 

not saying, what we need is photo ID [identification]. We need 

photo ID, that‟s what‟ll make the difference. What they were 

saying, what they were demanding is the right to participate, the 

right to participate. And they‟re not saying, we need photo ID. 

 

This is really wrong-headed, and we need to really rethink this. 

And I think that if people are thinking that we‟re wasting the 

time this afternoon, I would agree with the member from 

Regina Rosemont. Let‟s pull this Bill. Let‟s just get rid of it, 

start over again. Talk to the stakeholders, talk to the people 

about what‟s important. 

 

And I have to tell you, you know, I think it is ironic that this 

government, this government when we see them dealing with 

one of the major, if not the most pressing issues that families, 

especially young families and seniors are facing in 

Saskatchewan — housing — they‟re having a summit. And 

they‟re saying, come to the summit but pay $150. Pay $150 

because that‟s what this summit‟s going to cost. I cannot 

believe that when we‟re dealing with issues that affect people, 

and this government collects taxes to facilitate the kind of 

discussions, and yet they‟re charging people to come to this 

summit $150. And they‟re probably going to have photo ID. I 

wonder if they‟re going to have photo ID at that housing 

summit. We want 150 bucks, but we also want to see your ID. 

Incredible. Incredible. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, as I was reading through this, 

preparing for this, and I was looking back at some of the news 

stories. And this is one by Angela Hall of Leader-Post, 

December 1st, 2010. The title of the news story is “Rule to 

require ID for voting.” And I found it passing strange here that 

some of the comments that were made by the Justice minister, 

and I‟ll quote. I quote, “Justice Minister Don Morgan said 

federal elections and provincial elections in British Columbia, 

Ontario, and Quebec already require voters to show approved 

ID.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, these are the provinces that have rent 

control. How can it be? You like the photo ID but you don‟t 

like the rent control. How can that be? You pick and choose 

what you like and how to answer the question. How is it that 

when you talk about British Columbia, Ontario, Quebec with 

the ID, that‟s good? That‟s good. But when it comes to talk 

about rent control that 80 per cent of Canadians have, that‟s not 

good; that‟s not relevant. We do it our own way here in 

Saskatchewan. We think about what‟s best for Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, you can‟t have it both ways. Either 

you like what these other provinces are doing and you take a 

look and say, hey that‟s a valid point. Here‟s the Justice 

minister in the public press saying it‟s a valid point. But when it 

comes to other issues — and I‟ve got to tell you, rent control‟s a 

very important issue — they dismiss it right away. So which is 

it? It‟s either relevant or is it irrelevant? What is it? You can‟t 

have it both ways. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say, he goes on to say, and I 

quote, “Saskatchewan is not taking the step in response to any 

specific incident, but . . . [and he quotes] „enhance the integrity‟ 

of the system, he said.” And of . . . Well I‟ll continue. He goes 

on and he says, “Morgan said he doesn‟t think the move will 

disenfranchise voters.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I find that very interesting that because . . . 

And I have to say so many of our members on this side have 

said this so well around the whole issue of what really is the 

problem facing democracy today. It‟s participation. We‟re in 

the midst, we‟re in the midst of yet another federal election. 

Another federal election and here we have a federal government 

that‟s been found in contempt of parliament, in contempt of 

parliament and because of that here we are in the midst of an 

election. And I think one of the biggest issues that we can all 

agree on is, what will be the participation rates here in Canada? 

Here in Canada we see people moving away because they‟re 

seeing whether it‟s the federal parliament or this provincial 

legislature act in such a way as to discount what really is 

important to people in this province, and we know people in 

this province want to vote. 

 

But you know, on Saturday I was talking to a young woman 

about voting and saying, you should get out and vote. You 

should vote. It doesn‟t matter, and I think the member from 

Rosemont even said this, it doesn‟t matter how you vote. You 

have the right to choose. You have the right to choose, but 

please do vote. Please do vote. And she‟s saying, it doesn‟t 

matter. And she‟s looking at the federal government and she‟s 

looking at a provincial government and saying, it really doesn‟t 

matter, does it? It really doesn‟t matter because when she thinks 

about the rent she‟s paying, it really doesn‟t matter because this 

government . . . Well they can use the language like 

unacceptable or rogue landlords. Nothing‟s going to change. 

And that‟s her words. She says, nothing‟s going to change. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, as a member of this legislature I 

am very proud of the work that we do. And we try to do the best 

for people in Saskatchewan. But the problem is sometimes we 

have our priorities wrong. And this government clearly has its 

priority wrong when it comes to this because if he‟s saying we 

just want to enhance the integrity of the system, the minister 

wants to enhance the integrity of the system, I‟ve got to tell you 

I don‟t know where he was, where he‟s been thinking about the 

last several elections. We see the participation rate go down, 

and we see young people moving away from voting and 

thinking it‟s important to exercise their franchise. They‟re 

moving away. They‟re saying it really doesn‟t matter because 

you see governments, whether it‟s the provincial level or the 

federal level, just not really caring, just not really caring. They 

see it‟s more important to be talking to the stakeholders and 

getting caught up in its integrity. Of course we all want to see 

integrity. 

 

And I have to tell you as a sidebar to this, Mr. Speaker, that we 

were all surprised. I understand it‟s been the common practice 



7202 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2011 

up to this piece of legislation that all the political parties would 

have a chance to be involved in the discussion of any changes 

to The Election Act or the municipal elections Act, and I kind of 

feel like this is a step backwards. It‟s got to be a step backward 

when one side can say, hey listen, we‟ve got the majority. 

We‟re just going to do what we feel is the thing we need to do, 

the thing we need to do. And we see this happen too often 

where the government, you know, the past two or three years 

have just decided that they‟re going to do whatever they want. 

And they may get a few days of bad press, a few angry people. 

 

But, you know, it‟s growing. It‟s growing. It‟s growing, and 

more and more people are realizing that this is a problem. And 

whether it‟s Bill 161 or the human rights Bill, and I believe 

that‟s 160, people are going to see when they go to the election 

day that they thought they could go and exercise their franchise 

and it‟s just not the case. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, there is a few specific concerns, and 

I‟m going to talk about them now because I do have some more 

issues about the whole process. But I do want to raise a couple 

of specific points, and it‟s under section 4. It‟s the section 71 

amended, and it‟s section 4(1): 

 

(b) by repealing subclause (b)(i) and substituting the 

following: 

 

“(i) confirm the voter‟s identity and place of ordinary 

residence by having another voter who meets the 

requirements of subsection (1.1) vouch for the identity and 

residence of the voter by completing the prescribed 

forms”. 

 

And it goes on, section 2: 

 

(2) The following subsection is added after subsection 

71(1): 

 

“(1.1) For the purposes of subclause 1(b)(i): 

 

(a) a voter who intends to vouch for another voter must 

provide the poll clerk with the satisfactory evidence of 

the voter‟s identity and ordinary residence required 

pursuant to section 72.1 before vouching for another 

voter . . . 

 

Now I‟ll just take a minute and explain what the issue is here. 

And it‟s a big issue in my riding because I have many shelters, 

and many of the folks will be going to vote. In fact I wouldn‟t 

be surprised if I have three or four or five shelters in my riding. 

The biggest one of course is the Salvation hostel or shelter on 

the corner of Avenue B and 19th. 

 

And the issue there is having these folks go to vote. And I know 

in the last election, they did raise this issue about what 

happened when they went to vote. And there was one driver, 

one employee who had the proper registration. He took two or 

three, or I think three or four people down to the voting station 

to vote, and he was going to vouch for the other people that he 

took down. 

 

When he got there, he was told no, you can only vouch for one 

person. The others are out of luck. So it‟s a one-to-one 

relationship in the shelter. And I think that‟s unfair. These 

people are down on their luck. They‟re in the shelter. They‟re 

staying there, and they‟ve developed a relationship with the 

staff. But it‟s impossible to have a one-to-one ratio of people 

going down to vote down at the voting station. And in this case 

it‟d be pretty reasonable to say, you know, I think the employee 

who is vouching for the others could vouch for several people. I 

think that‟s really reasonable. 

 

But as I say, and it goes on to continue, 4(2)(1.1)(b) “no voter 

shall vouch for more than one other voter at an election”. So my 

question is, why is that? Why is that? I mean is it set up? I can 

see maybe a limit of something but gee, here you have clearly, 

why is it one? 

 

Even within a family, even if you were taking your children 

down and for some reason they don‟t have their ID with them. 

Maybe they‟re in another city; they‟ve come back. In my case 

they‟d be coming back maybe from Regina up to Saskatoon. 

And you‟ve got two or three kids with you and they‟re all the 

right age and they‟re on the voter list, but they don‟t have any 

ID. The parent can only vouch for one child — have to pick a 

favourite. I mean, why is it one? Why? Why did they pick one? 

Why did they pick one? So we have . . . 

 

Now here are two examples that I‟ve thought of why this 

section doesn‟t make any sense. Why one? When you‟ve got a 

family circumstance, and I think there‟d probably be a situation 

where you might have more than one, you might . . . I think this 

is something that really needs to be revisited but it is a problem. 

And you know the odd thing is, Mr. Speaker, if there was 

consultation beforehand, this was identified to me, so it‟s no 

speaker, it‟s no secret. If I know about it, how can it be that 

others didn‟t know about it? How can it be that others didn‟t 

know about it? So, Mr. Speaker, I think this is problematic. 

 

Now I have to say that when I go on and read this new section 

72 and 72(1), the title is, and I quote, “When individual not 

entitled to ballot paper or to vote.” It goes on: 

 

72(1) No individual is entitled to ballet paper or to vote if 

the individual: 

 

(a) does not provide to the deputy returning officer and 

poll clerk the satisfactory evidence of his or her identity 

and ordinary residence required pursuant to section 

72.1; or 

 

(b) if required to do so, refuses to make the voter‟s 

declaration. 

 

Goes on: 

 

(2) No deputy returning officer shall give a ballot paper to 

an individual described in subsection (1). 

 

And I‟m saying this for the folks at home because they may be 

curious. They don‟t have this information in front. But here is 

the salient point. This is the point that I want to get across, 72: 

 

(3) The poll clerk shall note the following in the poll book: 

 

(a) if a voter who is required to do so fails to provide the 



April 11, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7203 

satisfactory evidence of the voter‟s identity and ordinary 

residence required pursuant to section 72.1; 

 

(b) if a voter who is required to do so refuses to make a 

voter‟s declaration. 

 

So there you go. So when that happens and they don‟t do that, 

all right, and it goes on to say that it will be recorded in the poll 

book. And I‟m just curious about why and how will it be 

recorded in the poll book. Now I have to find that specific 

legislation because I find that very interesting that that will be 

recorded in the poll book. And how will that be recorded? Is it 

part of the spoiled ballots? Or will we see a new increase in the 

number of spoiled . . . Yes. 

 

“The poll clerk shall note the following in the poll book:” that 

they refuse to make the voter‟s declaration or they don‟t have 

the ID. So what are we going to see? Will that be as part of the 

spoiled ballot category or is there going to be a new category of 

people disenfranchised? Will we see how people‟s votes are 

marked? I mean they don‟t even get to spoil a ballot, so they 

didn‟t even get the paper. So will this be a new category? Will 

we know how many people will be turned away from voting in 

Saskatchewan because of this new piece of legislation? I‟m 

going to be very curious to see if that‟s going to be an increase. 

 

And what‟s unacceptable? Last week we heard the Premier use 

the word unacceptable about the rent increases. Well I‟m 

curious to know: will he put out a benchmark about what is 

unacceptable for the number of people who will be turned away 

in the November 7th election because they didn‟t have the ID? 

Will we be able to see this number? Will this government be 

transparent and show and share this with people here in the 

province? 

 

I think we‟re seeing a time bomb just ticking away. And it will 

be interesting. I‟m going to be looking for this. I‟m going to be 

looking for how many people were turned away and recorded. It 

sounds like it will be recorded in the poll book according to this 

legislation. So very interesting to see if that will happen. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, this is such a troubling piece of 

legislation. I do have to . . . And I go back, and I will keep 

going back to this to say that the previous speaker from Regina 

Rosemont — I was listening intently — made some really good 

points. But the best one he said is, this should be just pulled. 

And I would say pull it and shred it. Let‟s move on to 

something that is very important to people in Saskatchewan, 

very important. 

 

And I will just continue with that story. I have to say, the 

Justice minister when he was reflecting on the rules required to 

vote, this is that story, Leader-Post, December 1st. And here 

he‟s saying, and I quote. And this is a direct quote from him. I 

quote: 

 

If you plan your affairs, you should have no difficulty 

voting. But if you think you‟re going to be going out at 

five minutes before election time without anything, 

you‟re not likely going to be able to vote. 

 

Well what a lecture. What a lecture to young people, to seniors, 

to people who are trying to put their ID in order. And I can‟t 

believe the kind of attitude. It‟s simply when he has, when he 

can say that kind of thing in the public press and say, get your 

life together in five minutes, I think he‟s a little bit out of touch. 

 

People are dealing with many issues in Saskatchewan. And one 

of them, I was surprised and amazed about the whole challenges 

about identification. Many of us take it for granted, but for 

many it is a real, real challenge. And I know within my own 

riding there is a special project and it was funded actually by 

the Saskatoon Foundation, and I think the Community Initiative 

Funds even gave them some money — Project ID — that 

worked with several people. In fact it was 2 or 300 people who 

came in and asked about how can they get, how can they get 

their ID together? 

 

And it takes weeks. It doesn‟t take five minutes. If this minister 

thinks it takes five minutes to get your ID together, that‟s 

outrageous. That‟s outrageous. Now several members from the 

opposite will harp in and chirp in and say oh no, not five. 

Maybe it‟s 10 minutes. It takes weeks. It takes months. It takes 

months to get their ID together, to get their ID together. Not at 7 

o‟clock, not at 7 o‟clock, I‟ve got to be at the voting station by 

8 o‟clock, not quarter to five. So this Justice minister, totally 

out of touch when he‟s talking about this kind of thing that it 

just takes five or six minutes or seven minutes. No, it takes 

more than seven minutes, more than seven minutes. More than 

seven minutes to do this kind of thing. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And of course, with that kind of attitude, and of course we see 

that attitude right across the government, particularly when I 

think about last spring when we were dealing with The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act, that kind of, we know best. We know 

best. Trust us. Trust us. We are consulted with everybody. We 

know what‟s going on. And we found that was not the case. 

That was not the case at all. 

 

And here we have an issue around elections and how could they 

be better. Of course we‟re always being vigilant, always being 

vigilant about how we can make things better. But if there was 

ever a case of taking two steps back, this may be it. Now it may 

be tied with the human rights amendment Act because the 

human rights commission amendment Act, because I believe 

that one is four or five steps back. And I have to agree with the 

op-ed piece in The StarPhoenix a few weeks ago. And I‟ve 

quoted from that, but where the president of Amnesty 

International talked about how you have to talk to people first 

and then put the Bill in, not the other way around. And I think 

this is a prime example, prime example of where we should 

have been talking to people. We should have been out talking to 

people, and not charging them 150 bucks either. But talking to 

people and saying, how can we make sure you get out to the 

polls? How can we do this better? How can we do this better? 

You know, how can we engage every person in this country 

who is a citizen? I think this is critical. 

 

Talking to students, how can we make it more easily done for 

them? How can it make it, how can we make it easier for them, 

keeping the integrity in mind? We‟re not saying that 

everything‟s out the window, but we are saying we see a real 

problem with young people voting less and less and less, 

because they see the relevance and the actions of governments. 



7204 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2011 

And whether it‟s the federal government, provincial 

government, we‟re all lumped in together and this is a real 

problem. This is a real problem. And so we need to talk to 

young people. 

 

We need to talk to seniors. We need to very much talk to 

seniors about the whole issue around ID because we were 

seeing seniors . . . And you know the interesting thing, and I 

keep going back to the issue I believe is the biggest issue in 

Saskatchewan, people moving about. Because the answer from 

too many people, especially the government, if you don‟t like 

the rent, then move. And then what do you have for an address? 

What do you have for an address? Well don‟t move in the fall 

because that‟s election time. But they kind of would like to 

move in October because then your address would be all 

screwed up. Then you‟d be back to square one, back to square 

one. 

 

But with seniors this is a real issue. ID is something that 

they‟ve, have grown accustomed to having ID, a pretty minimal 

amount of ID. Now we did some work around making sure 

seniors were able to get free ID, but that was an important 

thing. But you know, we could do better, so we need to consult 

with seniors. 

 

And I got to tell you, we need to consult with young people and 

be bold about this. And how do we engage young people and 

not, not take this get your life together in five minutes approach, 

in five minutes and you‟ll have your life together. You know, I 

think that‟s like, what‟s that Minute Rice recipe? I think that 

you just get people or rice . . . We know there‟s a better way of 

doing it. We know there‟s a better way of doing it. And if ID is 

the issue, then we‟ve got to make sure we address that as a 

separate issue because too many people are disenfranchised. 

 

And we know for example, and I see from my notes that for 

example, homeless people, we may have as many as 2,200 of 

people who are homeless in Regina. And here we go with an 

issue that what is your fixed address? What is your fixed 

address? And this is a real problem, you know. 

 

And we know that Métis and First Nations people were 

particularly disappointed about the consultations of this 

government. And we just, as I said earlier, talked about The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act and not really talking to them 

and all of a sudden having this sprung on them. This is a real, 

real problem. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I want to conclude my remarks in a few 

minutes, but I do want to just reiterate some of the issues that I 

think are critical, that are critical. And I think that in 

Saskatchewan we have a system that we are very proud of, but 

we do think this is a step backwards. It‟s a system where you 

can have change in governments without the kind of things that 

we see in Africa, the issue over the weekend with Ivory Coast 

where you‟ve had an election and essentially the president 

would not move on. And from what I understand from the 

news, he actually lost the election five years ago, but then lost 

again and wouldn‟t give up. And we can‟t have that kind of 

stuff happen. 

 

I mean, we think that‟s far away and that can‟t happen here. But 

I tell you some of the things that we‟re seeing in the United 

States makes us worried about how do you have a democratic 

process where you can allow change, but you can also allow 

reasonableness and not extreme swings from one side to the 

other where one government, where a government will take 

advantage of its majority and really step all over the rights of 

the minorities. 

 

And this is what I worry about, is here we have a government 

that has a majority, truly will have its will because it is the 

majority. But really there is a responsibility when you have a 

majority to be sensitive to all, all members of society, to all 

members of society and to make sure that everyone is listened 

to. Not everyone will be happy. Not everyone will be happy, 

but everybody deserves the right to be heard and to be 

considered. It‟s important that they be considered. 

 

And in this kind of format where we see Bills come forward 

like this that clearly have glaring concerns, glaring concerns, 

but we have some real challenges. And we have a minister who 

I say is out of touch with the challenges of people that . . . here 

in Saskatchewan and hasn‟t taken the opportunity, really, in a 

flippant way, a flippant way, dismiss many of their concerns 

whether it be about ID . . . I would rather be concerned about 

the integrity. Integrity‟s hugely important. I want to make sure 

that we all appreciate that. 

 

But if there‟s one concern we all should have is the lack of 

participation in the democratic process. And you know, and I 

think back about the member‟s statement today about Vimy 

Ridge and of how important . . . We think about the battles, 

World War II, and I talked earlier about the Polish 

circumstance. And they weren‟t fighting over ID. They were 

fighting about the principle, the principle of democracy and 

making sure we‟re doing the right thing. 

 

And we‟ll worry about the details. The details are critical. I‟m 

not saying that we dismiss details. Very important that we have 

the details right. But we have to make sure we focus on the 

principles of democracy, and that is that everyone has the right 

to vote, no matter their circumstance. And this obsession about 

a fixed address . . . If there‟s a way that we can make things 

work a little smoother, like I said, about the issues about the 

shelter is one that‟s important to me, where you could have 

somebody vouching for more than one person. 

 

Of course it‟s not just shelters, as I said. It could be families. It 

could be families who find themselves in that odd position that 

all of a sudden on Monday, November 7th, somebody‟s come 

home for the weekend, thought they‟d vote. Maybe on the 

weekend, go to the advance poll and they find out, no you‟re 

out of luck because you forgot your ID back in Regina or 

Moose Jaw, where ever you‟re at, you know. And so I think that 

. . . and that‟s how people get discouraged, grow cynical is 

because they say, do I, do I really matter? Well I think in 

democracy everyone matters. Each, each citizen matters. 

 

Collectively we make the decision, and there are no wrong 

decisions by individuals because we need to have everybody‟s 

input. And I find too many times young people are feeling that 

way, that they‟ve been discounted and they don‟t want to make 

the wrong decision. They just say, I‟d rather, I‟d just rather 

pass. I‟d just rather pass. And I think that‟s a failure on all our 

part. 



April 11, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7205 

And as I say, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll be looking forward to the results 

next year, of course, on one level. I know the Minister of Justice 

said that there may be changes coming when he answered in 

question period. There may be changes. We look forward to big 

changes in this Chamber next year. But the one result I‟ll be 

looking forward to is, in the poll books, will they be marking 

how many people were turned away? How many people 

showed up to vote, but how many people will be turned away? 

 

So we‟ll have those questions for sure next spring because we‟ll 

be looking to see when the Chief Electoral Officer files his 

report, because it‟s in the Act. And I think this is critical. How 

many people were turned away? And we‟ll be looking at that 

seriously because we‟ll be looking at the voter participation 

rate. Has it gone down? And is that an unacceptable number? 

 

We want to see that number turn around. We want to see it go 

up. We want to see it go up because we know when people turn 

out to vote — and this is a reflection of our communities — we 

know when the numbers go down, we all kind of like to think 

it‟s a reflection that we‟re all doing a good job, but you know I 

don‟t think we can all rest easy on our laurels. We have to 

gauge . . . we have to talk to people. We have to talk to 

everybody. And sometimes we have to talk to people we don‟t 

really want to talk to, but we have to hear people. And we may 

not agree. We may not agree, but we all learn from everyone. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I do think that, as I said earlier, I think it 

would be just easier to pull this and start over again. I know the 

minister has said the Chief Electoral Officer will be busy. Why 

add something that really isn‟t necessary at this point? I mean, I 

don‟t even know why we‟re talking about this because I don‟t 

know where the issue was that said we have to do this, we have 

to do this. If there was anything we had to do, if there was 

anything we have to do, it is to get the voter participation rate 

up among young people. That is a crisis. That is the crisis of the 

day. 

 

And I can talk about other issues I have about the election 

process, but now it‟s the time . . . And I was able to talk on the 

other Bill that is parallel to this. But at this point, I think that I 

have made my case today and I know the member from Regina 

Rosemont has made his case. And we think that the best case 

scenario is just to pull this. Pull it. Pull it now. And then when 

you get on to other issues like amending The Residential 

Tenancies Act so we can have something else that Ontario, 

Quebec, and BC [British Columbia] have . . . I know they have 

photo ID, but it‟s important to have some other things. So with 

that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn this debate. Thank 

you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 161, The Election 

Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

adjourn the House so that we can go to committees this 

evening. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn to facilitate the working of 

committees. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 

until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:58.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7175 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7175 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7175 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7175 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7175 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7176 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7176 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7176 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7176 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7176 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7177 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7177 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7177 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7177 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7178 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Remembering the Battle of Vimy Ridge  

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7178 

 World Men’s Curling Championship 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7178 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7179 

 National Parkinson’s Disease Month 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7178 

 Wolf Willow Cohousing  

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7179 

 Taste of Culture 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7179 

 Increased Business Optimism in Saskatchewan 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7180 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Pension Plans and Arrangements for Office Space 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7180 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7180 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7181 

 Treatment for Multiple Sclerosis 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7181 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7181 

 Reporting Political Donations 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7183 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7183 

 Planned Highway Improvements 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7184 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7184 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7185 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 169 — The Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7185 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7185 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 167 — The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7186 

 Bill No. 168 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7189 

 Bill No. 153 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7191 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 7193 



 

 Bill No. 165 — The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2011 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7193 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 7193 

 Bill No. 161 — The Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7194 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7200 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


