




















































Hansard: March 29, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 39A  TUESDAY, MARCH 29, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6969 

 March 29, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Dewdney on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — To make a personal statement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

Apology to the Speaker 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 

today and rise to apologize for a statement I made yesterday in 

the House, Mr. Speaker. In the heat of the moment yesterday, I 

made a statement that impugned yourself, Mr. Speaker, and 

suggested that you were biased. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to apologize to you personally and to the 

House. I previously apologized to you personally, Mr. Speaker. 

I consider you a friend. I’m sorry for the comments yesterday. 

In the heat of the moment we all say things we shouldn’t, but it 

is the responsible thing to do to take responsibility for having 

made a statement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you have my respect and I sincerely apologize for 

having yesterday called into question your integrity. And most 

importantly, I hope we remain friends and I’m sure we will. 

And we will work together in the future, I’m sure, with a great 

deal of respect and credibility. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I thank the member for his very welcome 

comments. I greatly appreciate it. And also I’d thank the 

member for catching me by surprise and coming earlier. That’s 

truly appreciated. It’s been the endeavour of the Speaker to try 

and work with all members of the Assembly. And I know we 

have difficulties and challenges at the time as a result of just the 

works on the floor, but thank you so much to the member from 

Regina Dewdney. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to 

make a special introduction of folks that are seated in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. They were here earlier today for the 

signing of an MOU [memorandum of understanding] between 

SaskPower and the brand new First Nations Power Authority, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

As you know, under our government SaskPower has said quite 

publicly they don’t have to build and operate all of the 

generation in the province; rather they can purchase it from 

others. And First Nations businesses are interested in this 

province and providing that electricity for a growing economy. 

 

And joining us today now here in the legislature, to help mark 

the event and sign the MOU — and maybe I’ll ask them all to 

give a wave as I read their name, Mr. Speaker — is Chief Eric 

Sylvestre from the Meadow Lake Tribal Council; the vice-chief 

from MLTC, Dwayne Lasas; Chief Carol Bernard from 

Waterhen First Nation, Mr. Speaker; Ben Voss who will be the 

Chair of the First Nations Power Authority board. I think Jason 

Pollock is . . . There he is. Jason Pollock will be the executive 

director for the First Nations Power Authority. Doug 

Richardson I believe has joined us; he’s the legal counsel for 

the authority. And Wayne Rude, the manager of Aboriginal 

relations in SaskPower. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was an historic day here at the legislature. We 

thank these individuals for coming down to help sign the MOU, 

to make it happen, and we welcome them to their Legislative 

Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 

of the official opposition, I want to join the Premier in 

welcoming the guests in our legislature today. I will have more 

to say about the specific memorandum of understanding later 

today. I believe the Minister of Justice will have, or the 

Minister for SaskPower will have a few words to say later. But 

I just want to ensure that the members of the authority who are 

here today know that all members of the legislature welcome 

them to the Assembly, grateful to see the work that they’re 

doing both for their home communities and for the province at 

large. Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the opposition, we join with the 

Premier in welcoming them to their Chamber today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 

great pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the 

Assembly several visitors today. They are law students who 

will be completing their articles with the Ministry of Justice and 

the courts this year in Regina. 

 

They are Elizabeth Addabor and Andrew Reeson. They will be 

articling with the ministry. Elizabeth comes to us from the 

University of Calgary. She has also studied law at the 

University of Michigan and in her native Ghana. Andrew 

Reeson studied at the University of Saskatchewan. His 

volunteer activity includes working with the Legal Advice 

Clinic in Saskatoon and assisting legal aid lawyers in Pelican 

Narrows. 

 

Andrew Davis will article with the Provincial Court. Andrew 

studied law at Dalhousie University after majoring in French 

and economics at the University of Regina. Andrew has been 

working as a clerk providing research to the Provincial Court. 

As a summer student he worked for francophone affairs branch 

with the provincial government. 

 

Erin Hawes will article with the Court of Queen’s Bench. Erin 

studied law at the University of Saskatchewan, and before that 

received her Bachelor of Commerce from the University of 



6970 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

Saskatchewan. Megan Vuksic will article with the Court of 

Appeal. Megan studied at the University of Toronto law school 

where she was an active volunteer, particularly with the 

Downtown Legal Services clinic. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m always proud that we have a diverse group of 

articling students. We want to wish them all the best in their 

coming year and hope that most of them are willing to stay with 

the province of Saskatchewan, with government services. And I 

would ask that all members join me in welcoming them to their 

Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure on 

behalf of the opposition to welcome the articling students to 

their new roles within two of the branches of Saskatchewan 

government, the executive branch and the courts branch. 

 

And clearly I know as a former attorney general that it’s always 

an interesting time of year when the new students come because 

there are a lot of tough questions that are asked and there’s lots 

of interesting questions that give you the ability to defend what 

we do now, but also learn how to change things. So I know the 

present Minister of Justice will be quite happy to respond to any 

ideas that you come up with, and I can send you a few if you 

need them. Thanks. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great honour for 

me to introduce to you and through you to all members of this 

honourable Assembly, Mr. David Chow, seated in the west 

gallery. David is a prominent Moose Jaw lawyer and a member 

of a very prominent Moose Jaw family. And I hope that all 

members will extend a very warm welcome to Mr. David 

Chow. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I’d 

like to join with the Premier and the member from The 

Battlefords in welcoming the First Nations group that is here, 

the leadership. 

 

And I guess the MOU that was signed today, I got to go to it 

and witness it and I commend that to the leadership of the First 

Nations communities. Your struggles have been great but your 

strength, your wisdom from your elders, the wisdom in your 

leadership, I just want to commend the fight you have and the 

success you are achieving. You are truly achieving success and 

I just want to acknowledge you and welcome you to your 

Legislative Assembly. And I ask all members to join me 

welcome them here as they continue to fight the battle that 

needs to be fight on behalf of your people. Teneki. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to the House, I’d like to introduce two constituents of mine 

that are seated in your gallery, Mr. Barry Firby and Steven 

Prpich. They’re both constituents and neighbours of mine and 

also friends. They were up earlier today with the Prime Minister 

for his announcement, and I was glad that they were able to 

come by the House and see the proceedings. So I want to 

welcome them here, and I hope they will enjoy their time in 

their House and to watch proceedings here. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome my intern, 

Lance Hammell. Wave, Lance. He’s been in the legislature off 

and on in the gallery watching, but I just want to officially 

welcome him to the legislature today. He’s doing very valuable 

research for me, and I have thoroughly enjoyed always 

participating in this program. Thanks again, Lance, and 

welcome today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to, in your 

gallery I’d like to welcome Chris Hudyma. Chris, give us a 

wave. Chris is the CEO [chief executive officer] of the Oasis 

Centre in Nipawin, which does a very good job on helping 

underprivileged people and mentally challenged people. Also 

works with Social Services, and they do a great job. I’d like to 

welcome him to his Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through to all 

members of the legislature, I too would like to welcome Doug 

Richardson to your gallery today. Doug’s familiar to many of 

you. He’s one of my law partners, and I must say that Doug and 

the rest of my firm have been very, very supportive of me 

during my political career since I joined city council and the 

school board before that. So I’m very, very appreciative of all 

the support that they’ve given me over the years. So, Mr. 

Speaker, if all the members would welcome Doug to his 

legislature. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition of citizens concerned with the maintaining quality 

health care services in the province. And the petition, the 

government . . . They want the government to know: 

 

That there is a need for timely access to comprehensive 

and quality health care services for all communities within 

the province, including Wakaw and surrounding areas; 

 

And that the disruption of emergency services and 

in-patient services at the Wakaw Hospital will not serve 

the needs of the residents in this community and 

surrounding areas; 

 

And that the cuts in access to timely and accurate 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6971 

diagnostic and laboratory services within the community 

of Wakaw and surrounding areas will not serve the needs 

of the residents; 

 

And that the Saskatoon Regional Health Authority 

budgetary reductions ought not to impede the provision of 

valuable, compassionate, and appropriate health care 

services to all citizens within their geographic boundary 

that require acute care, community and home care, 

long-term care, and public health care; 

 

Wherefore the petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintain quality health 

services through the commitment of necessary funding to 

address critical retention and recruitment issues. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The many, many signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are 

from Regina and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of my constituents who live in the 

neighbourhood of Hampton Village. And the petition is about 

the need for a new school for this growing area of the city: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes including education property taxes; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to neighbouring 

communities to attend schools that are typically already 

reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

residents of Hampton Village. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 

rise and present a petition in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. The petitioners note that freedom from poverty 

is an enshrined human right by the United Nations and that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security. Mr. 

Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Respectfully request that the Government of 

Saskatchewan act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of the city of 

North Battleford and the town of Paynton. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of residents from across 

Saskatchewan, concerned residents, as it relates to the 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to a record that includes the tabling of deficits at times of 

unprecedented highs in revenues and at a time of growing debt 

in this province — all at a time when we have these high levels 

of revenue. Over the last three years alone, debt has increased 

by $1.3 billion and this year, in this fiscal year, $548 million. 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, this comes at a consequence to 

Saskatchewan people now and into the future. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents of North 

Battleford, Prince Albert, Candle Lake, Maple Creek, and 

Christopher Lake. I so submit. 

 

[13:45] 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

2011 Wall of Fame Inductees 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to inform the 

members of the Legislative Assembly that four deserving 

citizens have recently been inducted into The Battlefords’ 

Frontier Mall Wall of Fame for 2011. 

 

At a ceremony on March 19th, the inductees included North 

Battleford City Councillor Ray Fox, whose work over the years 

has helped to bridge the gap between Aboriginal and 

non-Aboriginal cultures in our community; Edwin Wells, 

whose volunteer accomplishments and donations have greatly 

benefited The Battlefords Western Development Museum; Dr. 

Gordon Johnson, whose ongoing commitment in the field of 

dentistry has brought respect to The Battlefords on the 

provincial and national stage; and the late Al Gotto, whose 

ongoing commitment and volunteer work particularly with the 

Battlefords Union Hospital Foundation, has benefited many 

throughout our community. 

 



6972 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

The Frontier Mall Wall of Fame was established in the year 

2000 as a vehicle to engage the community in honouring its 

own citizens by recognizing residents who have made 

significant contributions to The Battlefords and area in the 

fields of art, business, community service, education, 

entertainment, government, philanthropy, or sports. 

 

I ask all members to join me today in offering our collective 

congratulations and thanks to the 2011 Wall of Fame inductees 

whose efforts give us all reason to be proud of our community 

and our province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Ambulance Firm Recognized 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’m 

proud to stand in this Assembly and honour Parkland 

Ambulance Care, Prince Albert. The Canadian Forces Liaison 

Council, CFLC, was very pleased to recognize Parkland 

Ambulance Care for their support to the reserve forces. 

 

“We are very pleased to have been recognized by the Canadian 

Forces for our continued support of our military reserve 

members,” said Trevor Dutchak, general manager of Parkland 

Ambulance. “Our support demonstrates our continued caring 

commitment to our forces. “We applaud all the good work they 

do to safeguard our country and protect others overseas,” 

echoed Lyle Karasiuk, director of public affairs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the award was presented in Regina at a luncheon 

co-hosted by the Rotary Club of Regina. Parkland Ambulance 

Care is a large supporter of the Canadian Forces since one of 

their paramedics, Ramsay Bellisle, recently returned from a 

tour with task force Afghanistan. Having Ramsay away did 

create a void, but allowed Parkland staff to be more connected 

to the situations overseas since they knew someone in the 

middle of the action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we often think of things overseas as terrible 

situations, but knowing someone actually in the centre of it all 

brings the reality and gravity of the situation to the forefront. 

Every day in many ways, members of the Canadian Forces 

work to protect every one of us. It is that great organization in 

Prince Albert whose mission is to care, is being honoured for 

supporting others who care in times of conflict. 

 

On behalf of all government MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly], I would like to extend congratulations to all 

Parkland Ambulance Care staff. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

St. John Ambulance Celebrates Anniversary 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, for a century, St. John Ambulance 

has been dedicated to a single mission: to enable Canadians to 

improve their health, safety, and quality of life by providing 

community services and first aid training. 

 

St. John Ambulance has been active in Saskatchewan since 

1911 when volunteers first formed local branches in our major 

cities. One hundred years later, St. John has become an integral 

part of the first aid and safety fields by providing services 

through eight training centres, 11 community service groups, 

and 482 first aid instructors located in 146 Saskatchewan 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these instructors and another 24 employees offer a 

level of dedication and service that is measured in the 

thousands of lives impacted each year and the thousands of 

volunteer hours devoted in communities and to events 

throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

St. John Ambulance is one of Saskatchewan’s leading charities, 

with approximately 250 volunteers across the province. Events 

will be occurring throughout the year to mark the anniversary. 

Each training centre will be hosting celebrations and activities 

to which the public will be invited to participate. To celebrate 

this centennial for St. John Ambulance is to celebrate the 

history of Canada. I ask all members to join me in honouring 

this proud organization. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Colorectal Cancer Awareness Month 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there’s 

nothing more tragic than a family losing a member to a disease 

that is ultimately treatable when detected early. Mr. Speaker, 

March is Colorectal Cancer Awareness Month in Canada. 

 

People across the country work to promote awareness about this 

deadly but curable disease. In Saskatchewan, colorectal cancer 

is the second most common cancer in men and women. Our 

government has provided $1.1 million in funding for a pilot 

project colorectal cancer screening program in the Five Hills 

Health Region. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are already seeing positive results from the 

screening program for people in Five Hills. Seventy-four 

individuals have had a precancerous polyp removed which 

means that they will not have to undergo invasive cancer 

treatment or surgery. Our next step is expanding the program to 

Kelsey Trail, Regina Qu’Appelle, and several northern health 

regions this spring and summer and to Prairie North and Sun 

Country this fall. With the addition of the five regions in the 

North, Saskatchewan will lead the country in providing 62 per 

cent of the province with access to population-based screening 

for colorectal cancer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, only by raising awareness along with increased 

screening will we be able to beat this treatable disease. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Saskatchewan Curlers Win Silver Medal 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our proud 

province and nation was riveted to the world curling action on 

Sunday morning, in fact so much so that it paralyzed our 

party’s convention as delegates from across Saskatchewan 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6973 

cheered for our team as Team Canada, led by Saskatchewan’s 

Amber Holland, faced the Swedish national team in the gold 

medal game of the women’s world curling championship. 

 

The gold medal game capped an incredible run for Team 

Holland who became Team Canada by winning the Scotties. 

Team Canada began the Worlds with a bit of a slow start. But 

not to be deterred, the team dug deep, put their heads down, 

employed their world-class skills, and put together an 

inspirational run. Their proud run as Team Canada, exceptional 

tournament, and silver medal finish will not be forgotten. This 

story in itself has already become part of Saskatchewan and 

Canadian sports history and an absolute point of pride. 

 

The Kronau Curling Club, with a proud history of its own, was 

showcased on the world stage. This team of community-minded 

Saskatchewan women are world champions in the hearts of 

Saskatchewan people. To Amber Holland, Heather Kalenchuk, 

Tammy Schneider, Kim Schneider, and coach Merv Fonger, I 

simply say thank you. Your province and your nation could not 

be more proud. I ask all members of this Assembly to join with 

me in extending our sincerest thanks to Team Holland. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Support for Housing Programs 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday our 

government announced an aggressive housing strategy that 

would benefit Saskatchewan families tremendously. Without 

having considered how these programs would positively 

address the needs of Saskatchewan families, the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] immediately adopted the bunker mentality of 

back to the Dark Ages of the 1970s. Thankfully, Mr. Speaker, 

more enlightened minds have weighed in on our government’s 

approach to the challenge of housing in this province. 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, this morning’s editorial in the 

Saskatoon StarPhoenix applauded our government’s 252 

million initiative to address the housing issues in this province. 

However, Mr. Speaker, that same editorial spent considerable 

ink on the NDP’s proposals. They described the NDP’s position 

as that “1970s’ solution,” which is fitting given their choice of 

leadership and their propensity to orange shag rugs and 

platform shoes. The editorial went on to state that legislated 

rent controls will only exacerbate an already serious problem. 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, government control or ownership, that’s the 

NDP solution to everything. Whether it’s rent control or royalty 

rates, the NDP takes a serious challenge and attempts to muck it 

all up. 

 

The same editorial continued its attacks on the reckless NDP by 

pointing out that even economic realities aren’t enough to 

convince the opposition. Mr. Speaker, the opposition has it 

wrong. I believe we got it right. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Housing News Release 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for a 

50th anniversary we give gold, for a 15th we give crystal. But 

the traditional gift for a first anniversary, Mr. Speaker, is paper. 

So it’s fitting that the Minister of Social Services marked the 

first anniversary of her Headstart on a Home announcement by 

faxing out the same piece of paper she issued one year ago. It 

was a gesture that sums up nicely what this government has 

done for affordable housing in this province over the last four 

years — precious little. 

 

To gloss over their inaction, Mr. Speaker, they’ve just spent 

thousands of taxpayer dollars on a sleek brochure sent to homes 

across Saskatchewan with misleading claims about the budget. 

The brochure claims the budget will build as many as 650 rental 

units, while the budget itself says only 300 in 2011-2012. To 

paper over the contradictions, Mr. Speaker, the minister hastily 

threw together a cut-and-paste job of recycled news releases 

and program promises with no firm dollar figures attached, and 

called it a five-point plan. 

 

If people in Saskatchewan are doubting this news release will 

create any more affordable housing than the previous ones, they 

have good reason. This government’s promises on housing 

aren’t worth the paper they’re reprinted on. 

 

A home, Mr. Speaker, is made of four walls and a roof, not two 

news releases and a brochure. As we mark an anniversary of 

inaction by the government, we see more than ever that this 

province needs a real housing strategy, not something the 

minister scratched down in a hurry on the back of an envelope. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Financial Management of Crown Corporations 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people have 

been subjected to an unprecedented and unsustainable raid on 

the funds of our Crown corporations by this government. This 

government has stripped more than $1.7 billion from our 

Crowns to cover off budgetary deficits, despite record revenues. 

This government stripped an average of $533 million annually 

over three years from the Crowns. 

 

By contrast, between 2003 and 2007, during much leaner years, 

the NDP transferred an average of $211 million from our 

Crowns. This unsustainable cash grab and Crown borrowing 

has left our Crowns weakened and has offered a direct impact 

to ratepayers and taxpayers that are on the hook. Why is this 

minister wilfully damaging the Crown corporations which the 

people of Saskatchewan cherish and take great pride in? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Very 

interesting, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite wants to talk 

about Crown corporations today. We’re one week from the 

budget; there’s only been two questions on the budget. I think 

they’re trying to change the channel. But this would not be the 

appropriate thing, Mr. Speaker. 

 



6974 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

In the budget just seven days ago, Mr. Speaker, we announced 

that there will be a $110 million dividend from the Crown 

corporations this year. That is the equivalent of a 30 per cent of 

profits, Mr. Speaker. That is one of the lowest equity profits 

coming from the Crown corporations to the GRF [General 

Revenue Fund] we’ve seen in history, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That is in stark contrast to the years that that member has just 

referenced. It’s in stark contrast certainly to the 100 per cent 

dividend they took in 1993, the 114 per cent they took in ’98, 

the 181 per cent they took in 2001, Mr. Speaker. If, Mr. 

Speaker, if they’re worried about the Crowns, I think that they 

better look at their record, not ours. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we have seen this 

government use the Crown corporations to pay for budget areas 

such as health care and to try to cover off deficits. Yesterday 

this government showcased another example of off-loading 

spending and debt to our Crowns. So when this minister 

represents and says that he’s only taking $110 million, it’s not 

accurate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The government is adding $200 million to our public debt so 

this province can be the moneylender of choice for private 

home developers across the province to provide housing that 

doesn’t even address the problem facing families. This minister 

is guaranteeing a loan program that wasn’t guaranteed before, 

meaning Saskatchewan people are now on the hook, meaning 

it’s debt, specifically the federal investor loan program and 

off-loading spending and debt to the Crowns. Exactly the same 

reckless practice that the Don Gass report exposed of Grant 

Devine. 

 

Why is this minister damaging the fiscal future of 

Saskatchewan people by paying for government programs out 

of the Crowns and adding to our public debt? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments Corp. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, this is very shocking 

coming from that opposition, Mr. Speaker. When they were in 

government, Mr. Speaker, the federal, in 1999, the federal 

government had the immigrant investor program, Mr. Speaker. 

It could have been hundreds of millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, 

flowing from immigrant investors to the Saskatchewan coffers 

to build houses, Mr. Speaker, for low-income people, to have a 

program such as we announced yesterday, Mr. Speaker, where 

. . . Headstart on a Home. Those people, Mr. Speaker, chose not 

to take advantage of Immigrant Investor Fund, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our government has taken a far different approach, Mr. 

Speaker. We are tapping into what was a great program, Mr. 

Speaker — 400,000 from immigrant investors, 7 per cent return 

over five years to what was a recently revamped $800,000, Mr. 

Speaker, from immigrant investors and a 5 per cent return — an 

excellent program that fits our needs very well. The federal 

government has been very easy to work with on this program, 

and it’s going to allow us to put 1,000 new units on the market 

in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — I suspect the federal government would 

have been easy to work with. What this government has done 

by way of OC [order in council] has created a new Crown 

corporation to borrow $230 million to fund this project, and 

they’ve guaranteed the debt of this program, something that 

was never the case even when Grant Devine had this program 

in place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So let’s look at some of the real facts, Mr. Speaker. His own 

budget documents show they project a $3 billion debt increase 

in our Crowns by 2015. This year alone, the minister is hiking 

up Crown total debt by $810 million. Through this term, we 

have witnessed a massive off-loading of spending and debt to 

the Crowns to try to cover off its deficits, adding to our total 

public debt, the same very stuff we saw under the last group of 

Tories, Mr. Speaker. The $200 million to developers here today 

is but another example. It’s deceptive and it’s unacceptable, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

When is the minister going to do what’s right for Saskatchewan 

people and stop off-loading to the Crowns and putting massive, 

long-term public debt on the shoulders of Saskatchewan 

people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That 

member is right. Their government would have never done a 

program like this, Mr. Speaker. They would rather talk about 

the problems in housing, Mr. Speaker. They don’t want to solve 

the problems in housing, Mr. Speaker. That’s the difference 

between them and us. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if they want to talk about investments in 

Saskatchewan, investments in the Crown, over 16 years they 

didn’t build a new power plant, Mr. Speaker. We inherited an 

infrastructure that had seen nothing but decay, Mr. Speaker. In 

the short time we’ve been government, Mr. Speaker, we have 

invested heavily, building new power plants, new pipelines at 

SaskEnergy; SaskTel, Mr. Speaker, Wi-Fi networks, the G 3 

plus, now G 4, Mr. Speaker, 55 new cellular towers went up, 

Mr. Speaker. All of these are investments in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now if the members opposite have a different plan, one that 

doesn’t involve investment in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that’s doable. And what it would take, Mr. Speaker, 

would be for a government — possibly theirs if they become it 

after the next election — that raises taxes, that drives out 

investment, Mr. Speaker. That is the solution they’re putting 

forward. 

 

Our government, Mr. Speaker, believes in investment in our 

future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6975 

Agreement with Saskatchewan Medical Association 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On February 23rd, 

2011, a StarPhoenix article lists the costs of the new 

Saskatchewan Medical Association contract to be 55 million for 

fee increases and a further 33 million for special programs for a 

total of $88 million. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: is the total 

cost of the SMA [Saskatchewan Medical Association] contract 

$88 million, and where is the money being accounted for in the 

2011 budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we have obviously 

reached an agreement with the SMA. It took a number of 

months, Mr. Speaker, longer than we wanted to. But what I 

would say, Mr. Speaker, is that agreement has been reached. It 

has been ratified through its membership at about a 95 per cent 

agreement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this will be a great tool as we move forward, not 

only to recruit physicians but to retain the physicians that we 

have, Mr. Speaker. We’re competitive with Western Canada, 

Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan is the place to be for many 

occupations, including physicians. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — The question is about public disclosure. Mr. 

Speaker, I have a copy of the SMA agreement highlights, and 

there are a number of items that don’t have costs attached to 

them. In the agreement highlights it states that doctors will 

receive retroactive payments. It states, “Health regions will 

receive a retroactive payment for both 2009-10 and 2010-11 

prior to March 31st [which is Thursday] 2011.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what is the total cost of the 

retroactive pay and where is it located in the provincial budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the member is correct 

that retroactive pay was part of the negotiation process. As I 

said, Mr. Speaker, it took a while to get to that final agreement. 

But part of the final agreement was to compensate because the 

agreement did take longer than what we wanted, Mr. Speaker, 

and longer than what the SMA wanted. So, Mr. Speaker, it was 

only appropriate that pay for retroactive work, Mr. Speaker, 

done a year and a half or two years ago would be brought up to 

the proper standards. 

 

The minister . . . the former minister, I guess, associate minister 

would know that any contract with the SMA has a number of 

variables, a number of parts, Mr. Speaker. One is simply the fee 

for service. But there are other pools of money, Mr. Speaker, 

that are used for premium time, Mr. Speaker, are used for 

on-call in rural communities, Mr. Speaker. This contract 

addresses many of those concerns that were raised by rural 

physicians, Mr. Speaker. I think most importantly it’s going to 

retain physicians in rural Saskatchewan as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — [Inaudible] . . . Mr. Speaker, the questions relate 

to public disclosure — not about recruitment and retention — 

about how much this contract is going to cost. Mr. Speaker, this 

is not a finished contract. Some even suggest it has a reopener 

clause. There are a number of committee-related items that 

have no cost attached to them and will change the total cost of 

the contract. Mr. Speaker, there’s $33 million earmarked for 

special programs. The highlight agreement outlines eight 

special programs. 

 

To the minister: the total cost of the contract is not transparent 

for the public to see. Why is the minister hiding the total cost of 

the SMA contract? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when the agreement was 

reached by the SMA and ratified by its members at a 95 per 

cent ratification rate, Mr. Speaker, a press release was issued 

that itemized where the monies were going: some for fee for 

service, some for programs. I don’t have that press release in 

front of me, Mr. Speaker, as far as the exact numbers. But what 

I will say is that, Mr. Speaker, this contract is a contract that 

puts us in a competitive position with every province in 

Western Canada. 

 

She’s asking questions like she wouldn’t have, that member 

wouldn’t have offered a contract like this. She’s questioning the 

contract, Mr. Speaker. I think it sends a clear signal to the 

health care professionals, not only the nurses which they 

absolutely ignored for 16 years, if they ever get back into 

government, they’ll soon ignore the physicians as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — The minister ignored them for two years. But 

the question still, Mr. Speaker, is, even though the minister’s 

dancing all over the place, it’s about public disclosure. Page 90 

of the Estimates book for the 2011 budget, Sask Party’s budget, 

Sask Party’s book, shows a $69 million increase for medical 

services. The minister tells us that the cost of the SMA contract 

is 88 million, but that doesn’t seem to include the many items 

going to committees. There doesn’t appear to be enough money 

allocated in this budget to cover the open-ended costs of the 

contract. The contract is being paid for with public money, and 

Saskatchewan people have a right to know exactly what they’re 

paying and what they’re getting for their money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what exactly is this contract 

costing the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this contract is 

structured similar to many of the other previous contracts that 

the SMA has entered into with provincial governments, whether 

it was our provincial government this contract or previous 

contracts entered into by the NDP, Mr. Speaker. There are 

pools of money; some go for fee-for-service, some go for other 

programs. It goes into a pool that the SMA can also look at 



6976 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

fee-for-service and different fee codes, Mr. Speaker. There are 

many variables. It’s very complex, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I will tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the contract, which again 

was ratified by 95 per cent of the physicians as a good contract, 

Mr. Speaker, will do volumes for this province as we move 

forward, as we graduate more medical students from this 

province than we’ve ever seen before. This will attract them 

and retain them to this very province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Support for Emergency Shelters 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, three more 

sleeps on a soft cot in a warm building is all that the homeless 

in North Battleford have left. On Friday morning when these 

men and women wake up, they will have a good breakfast and 

be sent back onto the streets to find their own bed for the night. 

As of March 31st, the Battlefords Indian and Métis Friendship 

Centre’s emergency shelter for the homeless will close, and in 

the words of the centre’s executive director, we don’t know 

where they will go next. 

 

Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the Minister Responsible for Housing 

announced a new loan program for builders who will provide 

housing for those willing to pay 180,000 to 300,000 for their 

new home. Will the minister today announce adequate core 

funding to ensure that those who will never be able to afford a 

new home have a warm, safe, and secure place for the night? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m well aware that there is 

an issue in North Battleford at this time, and all of us know that 

everybody needs a roof over their head. Mr. Speaker, we have 

made sure that there are contingency plans to pay for, to help 

for temporary access to hotels during that time, and we’ve 

raised emergency rates by 80 per cent. We’ve increased rates to 

actually expand the number of shelters as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And our announcement yesterday, we talked about making sure 

that we had more, not only more homes for people but actually 

had more rental units as well. We have to make sure that people 

can move from a rental space into their own home and make 

room for other people as the province grows. 

 

Mr. Speaker, everybody knows that homes for people is an 

important issue in our province, and we’re working hard with 

everybody across the province, with municipalities and with 

developers to make sure that there are places for people in our 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The North Battleford 

emergency shelter has not received any provincial funding. And 

yet since it opened in December to fill a desperate need in the 

community, it has supported more than 300 stays and dealt with 

a multiple of issues that would have benefited from professional 

social workers and addictions counsellors. Mr. Speaker, the 

emergency shelter has built up a great deal of expertise and 

experience during the short period of time that it’s been open 

this winter. 

 

While the minister is thinking about her responsibilities to 

affordable housing for Saskatchewan citizens, will she make 

sure she does not forget those who are working hard to ensure 

the very vulnerable and homeless amongst us are given the 

financial support tools they need to provide the help that keeps 

these people alive? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I do commend the very 

valuable work that’s been done by the people in North 

Battleford and right across the province when you have people 

that are in need and people that are vulnerable. We know that 

Sask Housing has 623 affordable units in North Battleford, and 

we know that there is a need for more. But we also know that 

the vacancy rate has increased from 1.2 per cent to 3.7 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the budget that we just brought down meant that 

we removed 114,000 people off the tax roll. Mr. Speaker, 

people now have more money in their own pocket and an 

opportunity to be working and being part of our province. Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve also done things like lower the utility rate, 

double the low-income tax credit. And we know that on the 

road of work that has to be done — the very huge deficit that 

those members opposite left when they never increased shelter 

rates, when they never did anything for our seniors over a 

number of years — we’re working on those issues. We’ve got 

more to do, Mr. Speaker, we know that. But everybody in this 

province is important to us. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. It’s interesting to note 

that even the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] 

consider the emergency shelter in North Battleford a valuable 

asset. In fact this winter, local RCMP officers transported 

homeless people from the streets to the shelter because there 

was nowhere else for them to go. 

 

Working with limited resources, staff members who’ve 

volunteered their time, and community support that helped 

provide cots and bedding and good food, the Friendship Centre 

saved lives this winter. The shelter will close on Friday, but 

they hope to open next fall. Mr. Speaker, in order to open next 

fall, they will require financial support from the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Can the minister assure us today, even though there does not 

appear to be any additional funding or financial support 

available in this year’s provincial budget, the largest spending 

budget in the history of Saskatchewan, can she assure us that 

core financial support will be available to emergency shelters 

like the one in North Battleford in the coming year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure the member 

opposite and the people of this province that we are looking at 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6977 

every area that we can to ensure that people have a home and 

they have a shelter. We actually know that increasing the 

emergency shelter rate by 80 per cent was an important part of 

expanding the number of shelter spaces we have. We also know 

that the people in North Battleford have been working hard 

with the RCMP and with Social Services to ensure that there is 

spaces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite: the issue in North 

Battleford is being looked at by my ministry at this time. And 

it’s something that I assure you, that money is important, but 

also is making sure that we have a place for people in the 

province. And we will be talking to them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Monitoring of Government Website Content 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Saskjobs.ca 

is the government’s website that gives Saskatchewan people a 

place to look for new job opportunities. But today a job title 

appeared on the website that proves this government is opening 

saskjobs.ca up to professions that they should not be promoting. 

The one-word job title on the opening was very clear — escort. 

Why is the government allowing a website to be used to draw 

young Saskatchewan women into the sex trade? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education and Employment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

When this came to our attention, this has been removed 

immediately, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Quite frankly, as a citizen, as a father, and I know we share this 

across the aisles, this is completely unacceptable. We are taking 

immediate steps to ensure that this employer is delisted, and 

we’re taking steps to ensure that we understand what happened 

as far as the posting on this. And I promise the people of this 

province, we will be taking steps to ensure there is far greater 

security and checks on this. 

 

What I can say, Mr. Speaker, is I understand the same thing 

happened to the members opposite where they were in power, 

and I’m sure they share the same sense of disbelief and spirit of 

unacceptable performance by any potential employer for 

something this bad. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 

indicated, this was a very serious breach of and utilization of 

this website, Mr. Speaker, and it potentially puts the young 

people of our province at risk. 

 

Mr. Speaker, immediate steps need to be taken to protect the 

young people of our province to ensure that young women are 

not lured into the sex trade in our province, and they’re not 

lured into the sex trade in particular by a government website, 

Mr. Speaker. Can the minister indicate to this House the 

immediate steps that will be taken to ensure that no, no 

opportunity presents in the future for our young people to be 

lured into the sex trade through a government website? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education and Employment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: —Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as I’ve said, like members opposite and certainly on 

the government side, we are sickened by this. It is unacceptable. 

We have taken steps (a) to remove this, (b) we are making 

contact with the employer. The employer is going to be 

delisted. We’re going through the checks and protocols that are 

in place today. We’re going to be making those far more robust. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to make it crystal clear that we 

appreciate and respect people right across this province. This 

was a breach of protocol. It should not have happened and we 

are acting immediately to ensure that this unacceptable situation 

is resolved. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, after the serious situation we all 

saw in British Columbia with craigslist and the public outcry 

across the nation about the advertising on websites for the illicit 

use of women, Mr. Speaker, there was a great public outcry. At 

that point, Mr. Speaker, we should have, as should have other 

suppliers of websites, put in place checks and balances to 

ensure that we wouldn’t have these types of ads appear on our 

website, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard the minister say that they will take 

steps to ensure that in the future we are not faced with such a 

challenge. Mr. Speaker. Could he tell the House what types of 

filters are going to be put in place to ensure that the young 

people of Saskatchewan are protected? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education and Employment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to reiterate obviously this is unacceptable. 

What we’ve done is taken this down. We’re delinking the 

employer, Mr. Speaker. We’re also going through a thorough 

review and we are going to be bolstering the protocols that are 

in place, Mr. Speaker. We know that this has happened. It’s 

happened to the previous administration in this province. It’s 

happened certainly, Mr. Speaker, across the country. This is 

about being vigilant. This is about making sure that we have the 

best technology possible, Mr. Speaker, because what we want 

in Saskatchewan is we want to make sure that every person is 

able to meet their full potential. Mr. Speaker, this has been a 

breach. It’s serious. We’re taking it seriously and we’re taking 

immediate steps to ensure it doesn’t happen again. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A few 

months ago, the Minister of Justice for the province of 



6978 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

Saskatchewan made very strong and bold statements about his 

very strong opinions about craigslist and the implications on the 

people of Canada and the young people of British Columbia, 

Mr. Speaker, strong statements. Now we have the minister 

telling us that they’re going to take strong statements. We’ve 

heard before as we’ve raised issues, assurances things were 

going to be done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will this minister undertake to report back to this 

Assembly exactly what steps are being taken and what steps 

have been taken to ensure that young people in our province are 

not, are not through our public websites involved or elicited to 

be involved in the sex trade in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, quite simply, yes. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Power Generation Partnership 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to offer my ministerial statement. It pertains to 

the event this morning that took place here within the 

legislature. And if I could, I would just like to reinforce that we 

had the honour of being joined by our Premier, by Chief Guy 

Lonechild, a number of other First Nations leaders from across 

the province, as well as representatives from SaskPower and 

importantly, representatives from the newly established First 

Nations Power Authority. And this morning we announced a 

new memorandum of understanding to help Saskatchewan’s 

First Nations share the economic opportunities that new power 

generation projects create. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is more than just an agreement. This is a 

once-in-a-generation chance to create new jobs and 

opportunities for First Nations peoples and communities right 

across the province. Saskatchewan’s demand for electricity is 

expected to increase by about 2.4 per cent annually over the 

course of the next decade. This stands in contrast, over the 

course of the last decade it increased by about 1 per cent per 

annum. To meet this growing demand, as well as to help ensure 

that we can continue to focus on the rebuilding of the 

infrastructure deficit that we inherited from the members 

opposite, as well as focusing on new, greener, cleaner 

technologies, Mr. Speaker, we were very pleased to move 

forward with this partnership. In fact we know quite frankly 

that SaskPower needs new generation projects. That’s why 

SaskPower is making a multi-year, multi-billion dollar 

investment into renewing the province’s electrical system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today’s agreement opens the door to significant 

opportunities for Saskatchewan First Nations to partner in, 

contribute to, and benefit from power generation projects. 

Many Saskatchewan First Nations are already pursuing 

opportunities through potentially owning and operating power 

generation projects, but there is a broad range of other activities 

that they may wish to consider, Mr. Speaker. 

Today’s agreement sets out a framework for a more streamlined 

process to help First Nations move their projects forward in 

partnership with SaskPower through competitive processes. But 

this, Mr. Speaker, this agreement is more than simply about 

processes. This is about people and communities. It’s about 

making it easier for First Nations people, communities, and 

businesses to benefit from the economic development 

opportunities that go with reinvestments in our power 

generation projects. These are real opportunities regarding jobs, 

infrastructure, new business opportunities, and potentially even 

profit-sharing. We expect each power project that is successful 

within the new First Nations Power Authority process that it 

will benefit in its respective communities and in many ways for 

people right across the province. 

 

I’d like to reiterate, Mr. Speaker, that SaskPower has already 

partnered with a couple of First Nations to explore the 

development of hydroelectric power projects in Saskatchewan. 

And we fully anticipate, Mr. Speaker, that the formation of the 

First Nations Power Authority will result in even more viable, 

long-term, sustainable First Nations power projects to help 

SaskPower meet the province’s growing electrical needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I conclude I want to thank the members of 

our First Nations, as well as SaskPower, who took the initiative 

to work with us to form the First Nations Power Authority. I 

certainly commend all for their leadership and, most especially, 

our Premier and others for the vision in helping to ensure that 

we can move forward. We are proud of the partnership that has 

been signed today, and we know that working together we will 

ensure that there are many bright days ahead for everyone in 

Saskatchewan. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

respond to the minister on his statement today about the 

creation of the First Nations Power Authority and the signing of 

the memorandum of understanding. I thank the minister for 

supplying the opposition with a copy of his written remarks, 

Mr. Speaker. It is much appreciated. 

 

That having been said, Mr. Speaker, today is indeed an 

important day for First Nations people and for others in our 

community, Mr. Speaker, others who relish the idea of 

community-delivered power, of power agreements that are 

collectively based with individuals and primarily with 

communities throughout our great province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of the New Democratic Party, myself 

included, Mr. Speaker, were part of the Crown and Central 

Agencies study of future energy needs for Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, this committee met with communities, individuals, 

and energy representatives, Mr. Speaker, across Saskatchewan 

throughout about a six-month period of time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Anyone who attended those hearings of the committee, anyone 

who read the interim or final report, anyone who had the benefit 

of receiving information from that committee, Mr. Speaker, 

knows that First Nations communities, as well as Métis 

communities, northern and southern communities, Mr. Speaker, 

had expressed a desire for SaskPower to work closely with 

communities for the development and delivery of power, Mr. 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6979 

Speaker, particularly new power generation, whether those are 

renewables like wind or run-of-the-mill water or geothermal, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Many communities have already worked with technology 

companies from around the world who are helping them to 

develop their understanding and ultimately partnerships, Mr. 

Speaker, to develop and deliver power at a local level, Mr. 

Speaker. We also learned that power generated closer to the 

source of its use will be the least expensive power because 

transmission, Mr. Speaker, is always a considerable expense. 

And that transmission, Mr. Speaker, is an expense of the public 

in the province, Mr. Speaker, where power generation becomes 

an expense of the beneficiary or the user. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the statement of the minister today, the signing of 

the memorandum of understanding, shows us that 

Saskatchewan Power has accepted that there are communities 

of people out there, in this case the First Nations communities, 

Mr. Speaker, who have an economic interest as well as an 

environmental interest in ensuring that our lights are on in our 

communities, Mr. Speaker, no matter where we live in the 

province of Saskatchewan, and there are opportunities for 

economic growth outside the large urban centres. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I rise to congratulate the First Nations involved in 

the development of the First Nations Power Authority, and to 

thank SaskPower for developing and working to help develop 

the memorandum of understanding that ultimately will make 

this a better province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Private Bills. 

 

Standing Committee on Private Bills 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Standing 

Committee on Private Bills met earlier today and considered 

compliance of the rules for the petition of Private Bill No. 906 

by Bethany College, praying for an Act to amend The Bethany 

College Incorporation Act, 1993. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing Committee on 

Private Bills to present its 10th report. Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That the 10th report of the Standing Committee on Private 

Bills be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Standing Committee on Private Bills: 

 

That the 10th report of the Standing Committee on Private 

Bills be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. The motion is carried and pursuant to 

rule 98, the Private Bill No. 906, An Act to amend The Bethany 

College Incorporation Act, 1993 is deemed to be read the first 

time and is ordered for second reading on the next private 

members’ day. 

 

[14:30] 

 

STATEMENTS BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: — Members, yesterday over significant debate in 

the Assembly and a point of order that was raised, I indicated 

that I would get back to the House after looking carefully at the 

point of order with a statement, and I’m prepared to present my 

statement at this time. 

 

On Monday, March 28th, 2011, the Opposition House Leader 

raised a point of order regarding the ministerial statement made 

by the Minister of Social Services. The Opposition House 

Leader indicated that the minister had announced a Headstart 

program over a year earlier, on March 24th, 2010. The 

Government House Leader responded to the point of order by 

stating that the minister was announcing a new housing 

strategy. The strategy included a similarly named program that 

had been previously announced but contained new details, new 

projects, and new programs. 

 

Following the intervention by the Opposition House Leader, I 

advised the Assembly that the minister should have the 

opportunity to make her ministerial statement. This is in line 

with previous rulings where Speakers have ruled that it is 

difficult to determine the appropriateness of a ministerial 

statement as it is being delivered, and the Speaker must also 

balance this with the need to ensure fairness by allowing the 

opposition an equal opportunity to respond to the statement. 

 

I committed to review the details and specifics of the 

ministerial statement. I have done this and am now prepared to 

rule on this matter. 

 

The ministerial statement made by the Minister of Social 

Services can be found on page 6919 of Hansard. The minister 

discussed the five-point housing plan. The ministerial statement 

details Headstart on a Home, affordable home ownership plan, 

rental construction, rental housing, and renewing and expanding 

the partnership with Habitat for Humanity. 

 

The Opposition House Leader is correct that the Headstart on a 

Home program was previously announced in a news release on 

March 24th, 2010. The ministerial statement presented 

yesterday does provide further specific details on this program. 

However, reviewing the record, the Habitat for Humanity 

program and incentives for investment in rental housing have 

both been previously announced. On the other hand, the 

housing plan announced in the ministerial statement does 

contain new information pertaining to affordable home 

ownership and rental construction, plus additional dollars for 

Habitat for Humanity. 

 

I find that some of the information contained in the ministerial 

statement was previously announced, but there was also new 

information relating to housing. This creates a dilemma for the 

Speaker in determining whether or not the statement is in order. 



6980 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

I’ve reminded ministers that ministerial statements must focus 

on announcing new programs. 

 

The question is, was there anything in the statement that might 

constitute a new initiative for a program previously announced? 

Although not a new program, should updates and new 

initiatives be permitted? This is a very difficult question for the 

Speaker. In the case of motions, if any part of a motion is 

irregular, that renders the whole motion irregular. It is the 

Speaker’s point of view that in the absence of clear guidelines 

for ministerial statements, this principle should be applied. 

Because a portion of the statement contained matters from 

previous announcements, I must find the point of order well 

taken. 

 

This is the fourth time I’ve had to rule on the appropriateness of 

ministerial statements. Our Assembly does not have a rule that 

details what constitutes a proper ministerial statement. We do 

have rules that govern the content of member statements. I 

think it is time that this Assembly clear up the evident 

uncertainty about what properly constitutes a ministerial 

statement. I have called on the Standing Committee on House 

Services to review the rules for ministerial statements. I can 

understand that there is confusion and that this event only 

underscores the need for members to consider and properly 

define allowable ministerial statements for all members and 

ministers. 

 

On another note, on March 24th, 2010, I ruled that the response 

to a ministerial statement should not exceed the time taken by 

the minister. This is consistent with our practice and previous 

rulings by other Speakers. Speaker Rolfes interrupted a member 

due to the length of a response on June 15th, 1993. And on 

April the 10th, 1997, and April the 8th, 1998, Speaker Hagel 

interrupted a member when the response to a ministerial 

statement was longer than the minister’s statement, and went on 

to recognize another member. 

 

Members should be mindful of this practice. 

 

Privilege 

 

The Speaker: — I also have another statement. Earlier today I 

received notice from the Government House Leader that he 

intends to raise a question of privilege on orders of the day. The 

notice arrived at 11:30 a.m. in accordance with rule 12(1) and a 

copy was distributed by my office to the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

The Government House Leader claims that the member for 

Regina Dewdney made the comment, and I quote, “We have a 

biased Speaker.” He argues that the claim is substantiated by a 

reference to the video record of the Assembly proceedings from 

March 28th, 2011 at the hour, one-hour, 13-minute, and 

58-second mark. 

 

The Government House Leader argues that the statement 

constitutes a breach of privilege by citing cases from the 

Northwest Territories and by quoting Maingot’s Parliamentary 

Privilege in Canada, Second Edition, at page 253. 

 

To begin, I want to advise members of the applicable rules and 

practices of this Assembly. 

Rule 50(d) states that, and I quote: 

 

[Members should not] . . . reflect on the conduct of the 

Speaker or other presiding officer except by way of a 

substantive motion . . . 

 

The House of Commons Procedure and Practice, Second 

Edition, 2009, states on page 313, and I quote: 

 

Reflections on the character or actions of the Speaker — 

an allegation of bias, for example — could be taken by the 

House as breaches of privilege and punished accordingly. 

 

As cited by the Government House Leader, Maingot’s 

Parliamentary Privilege in Canada, Second Edition, page 253 

states, and I quote: 

 

Any suggestion of partiality or bias on the part of a 

presiding officer such as the Speaker, a chairman of a 

Committee of the Whole, or chairman of a standing or 

special committee automatically shows disrespect and 

amounts to contempt. 

 

On three occasions, November 17th, 1977, April the 11th, 

1980, and April 24th, 1980, privilege cases were brought before 

this Assembly based on allegations of bias or impartiality of the 

Speaker. In all those cases, the Assembly found that contempt 

had been committed. 

 

As Speaker it is my duty to decide whether a prima facie case 

of privilege, breach of privilege has been established. In doing 

so, the Speaker must be satisfied that the allegation is properly 

a matter of privilege and a sufficient case has been established 

to justify giving precedence over orders of the day. 

 

It is my conclusion that the remark was indeed stated by the 

member from Regina Dewdney. Upon review of my own rules 

and practices, past cases, and our parliamentary authorities, 

comments reflecting on the impartiality of the Speaker are 

properly matters of privilege. For this reason, I find that the 

comments constitute a prima facie case of breach of privilege. 

 

However, in light of the admission earlier today by the member 

from Regina Dewdney for having made the remark and for his 

full and ample apology to the Speaker and the Assembly, I find 

that the matter is sufficiently resolved. I remind members that 

page 267 of Maingot’s Parliamentary Privilege in Canada, 

Second Edition, in the section “Where a member is a subject of 

a question of privilege,” it is stated, “An apology by the 

offending Member will invariably close the matter without the 

necessity of putting the motion to a vote.” I thank the member 

for Regina Dewdney for taking responsibility for his actions. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers to questions 951 through 961. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 951 through 961 are ordered. I 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6981 

recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answers to 

questions 962 to 969. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 962 through 969 are tabled. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It is indeed a pleasure to join into the debate on the 

2011-2012 budget. It is a privilege to be a member in this 

Assembly as we are in a historic time in our history as a 

province, a period of unprecedented growth, Mr. Speaker. And 

it is indeed a pleasure to be a member of this fine Assembly. 

 

As many members have done and all members I’m sure, I 

would like to thank my family for affording me the opportunity 

to be a member of the legislature and a minister of the Crown. I 

want to thank my wife, Trish. She’s a great wife and mother. 

My family includes Carter and Paige, a son and daughter. The 

years seem to fly by, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t seem that long ago 

that I first became a member in 2003, and I remember the kids 

sitting there and doing the wave when we had our swearing-in 

ceremony. Well they were five and three at the time, and 

they’re probably embarrassed if they hear me say that. But now 

they’re 13 and 11. Carter’s 13, Paige is 11, and they’re growing 

up to be a fine young man and woman. Also I’d like to thank 

my mom who’s always a loyal follower of the proceedings 

here, and I know that she is indeed watching today. 

 

I wouldn’t be able to do this job without the help that we all 

receive from members of our staff, my constituency assistant, 

Marilyn. Thank you, Marilyn, for joining my staff. And those 

that have served in that capacity before — Travis and Brie and 

Beth — thank you. To those that work here in Regina in my 

office, again thank you for all that you do each and every day to 

ensure that we’re able to undertake the responsibilities that 

we’ve been given. To Marlin, Jacquie, Jared, Marlene, and 

Annie, thank you for all that you do. 

 

To the ministries and corporations that we have the pleasure of 

being responsible for, the First Nations and Métis Relations to 

Northern Affairs to Gaming Corporation, thank you to the 

management, to staff, the board members for all the work that 

they do. And they should take pride in this budget as well 

because everyone had an opportunity to participate in this fine 

budget and to make it what it is today, an historic budget for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

Having an interest in politics at a young age, I had an 

opportunity to sit and to listen to many speeches from many 

Finance ministers. I remember the speeches from Tchorzewski 

and from Robbins and from Andrew and from Lane and from 

MacKinnon and Thomson. And I remember the speeches 

certainly from the member from Melfort who had an 

opportunity to serve as Finance minister and serve very well. 

 

I had an opportunity at a young age to listen to the radio back 

then. They’d put the broadcasts of the speeches on the radio in 

the evening. And I must admit, Mr. Speaker, if there was a P.A. 

[Prince Albert] Raiders game or a Blades game, that took 

precedent. But I did have the opportunity to listen to many 

speeches over the course of my lifetime. And I think it would 

be fair to say that any one of those Finance ministers would be 

envious of what they’ve heard this year in this budget from the 

member from Canora-Pelly, the Finance minister, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now members will know that when you come into this 

Legislative Assembly, you look for mentors. You want to do 

well. You want to do your best. And you look in both sides of 

the House, and you try to emulate those that you really respect. 

Mr. Speaker, today I want, through you, to tell all members of 

the Assembly that the Minister of Finance, the member from 

Canora-Pelly, is indeed a mentor of mine. He brings his passion 

to this Assembly each and every day. You know, oftentimes 

they talk about budgets as being boring and just about numbers. 

But as we saw in the presentation this year, Mr. Speaker, we 

indeed had the opportunity to see his passion, not only about 

the numbers because I think there are few that would be able to 

challenge that member on any number in any of the budgets, 

those that he’s presented or those past, but he also brought the 

passion that was very evident here. 

 

And it’s all about making Saskatchewan a better place, making 

it more welcoming to people to come back to Saskatchewan, 

and that’s indeed what the member from Canora-Pelly was able 

to do. He had a Roughrider loonie in his pocket and he took 

pride in that, in saying that Saskatchewan residents would have 

more loonies left in their pocket at the end of the day. Well that 

is indeed true. They have more loonies, more toonies, more 

bills left in their pockets, more dollar bills of all denominations 

because, as we’ve seen, this budget puts more money back in 

the pockets of Saskatchewan residents. It is indeed a budget that 

has done many, many things. 

 

I think most important to me and to many members of this 

Assembly, we’re seeing debt reduction, GRF debt reduction by 

some $325 million. That is an undisputable fact. Members 

opposite will try to cloud the issue. They’ll try to bring in 

Crown corporation debt, Crown corporation debt that is funding 

growing, thriving Crown corporations that are stronger than 

ever, Mr. Speaker, under a Sask Party government. And that’s 

what they will continue to be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, taking that debt down from $6.8 billion — that 

was the debt left by the members opposite — to under $3 

billion, a reduction, Mr. Speaker, that I think we can all be 

proud of, that’s something that we can say we have made a 

difference, Mr. Speaker, and that indeed we sure have. 

 

[14:45] 

 



6982 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

Mr. Speaker, there are also tax cuts, tax cuts in the 

neighbourhood of $200 million, Mr. Speaker. That sounds like 

it’s a lot of money, and sometimes people gloss over on the 

numbers. But one fact that I think each and every family 

understands and knows and is proud of is that they will not be 

paying a dollar of tax, they will not be paying a dollar of tax 

until they earn over $45,500 . . . [inaudible] . . . tax-free, the 

best in the country, Mr. Speaker, the best in the country, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I know that we want people in Saskatchewan to share in this 

budget and that’s why we say, and the member from 

Canora-Pelly has said, it’s the people’s budget. It wasn’t long 

ago that we were in this Assembly and we heard NDP ministers 

of Finance stand in their place and say, it’s my budget. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, we are proud, we are proud that this is indeed a 

budget for and with the people of Saskatchewan. It’s something 

that we take great pride in. 

 

At a time when other governments are running large deficits, 

cutting services, our growing economy and population means 

that we can lower taxes, reduce debt, and improve public 

services within a balanced and a surplus budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I just had the opportunity to go back to my constituency on the 

weekend and talk to some people who had the opportunity to 

spend the winter in southern climes, to be snowbirds. And they 

said, time and time again people would come up to them from 

other jurisdictions in North America and say, how’s your 

jurisdiction doing? And they have the opportunity to say, well 

we are from Saskatchewan. We have amongst the strongest 

economies not only in Canada but in North America, and we’re 

very proud of the job that the government is doing, but more 

importantly, the job that small business and large business and 

business owners and employers are doing across the province to 

ensure that we have and continue to have a very, very strong 

economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people choose to stay in Saskatchewan because 

they’re coming to an area that is indeed growing. The economy 

is thriving. I look at my home constituency of Saskatoon Silver 

Springs, one of the fastest growing constituencies in the 

province. You look at the area of Willowgrove, for example. 

They said that that area would fill up, some 9,000 people, it 

would take about 15 years. Well, Mr. Speaker, what’s 

happening? The record growth, the record in-migration that 

we’re having, that community will fill up within nine years, Mr. 

Speaker. And we’re already opening up to new areas, to the 

Evergreen area in Saskatoon, that will continue to see growth. 

 

More people, more taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, more money for 

governments, more money to pay down debt, more money to 

put to our priorities like health care, education, infrastructure 

development, Mr. Speaker — that’s why people come to 

Saskatchewan. It is a self-fulfilling prophecy if you can provide 

those services and you can do so in a fair manner. That’s 

something that is happening, and that’s something, to be fair, 

that didn’t happen under 16 years, Mr. Speaker, of NDP 

governments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget fulfills our government’s commitment 

to reduce the education property tax and to make investments in 

school capital projects. Well under the NDP government, Mr. 

Speaker, they said you couldn’t do both. They said you couldn’t 

reduce taxes and spend more money on capital infrastructure. 

And that’s indeed what we are doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I had the opportunity in March to welcome members of the 

public school board and the separate school board from 

Saskatoon into the constituency of Saskatoon Silver Springs to 

announce two new schools for the Willowgrove area, Mr. 

Speaker. And again, that’s why people move to Saskatchewan, 

move to areas, so they can have the very best education 

possible. And that’s indeed what the role and responsibilities of 

governments are, Mr. Speaker. And that’s indeed what this 

government is doing, and we are very proud of it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Not only building new schools — it is attractive to be able to 

announce new schools, and we’ve done that time and time 

again — but also to put money into restoring schools that are 

already there, to fix the roofs, to fix the leaks, to fix what needs 

to be done. And, Mr. Speaker, this budget does it in an 

unprecedented fashion, and I am proud to say that Forest Grove 

School in the Silver Springs constituency has benefited from 

that money as well. And also portables that come into the newer 

schools, and Centennial Collegiate is a new collegiate in my 

constituency. And again because of the growth, more money to 

ensure that the recent residents of Saskatchewan have an 

opportunity to educate their children in this fashion. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, you’d say that’s just what a government 

does. That’s what a good government does. Well that is indeed 

what a good government does. But, Mr. Speaker, I can point to 

an example in the last government, the NDP government, where 

the people of Arbor Creek, for example, I had the opportunity 

to stand in my place for years and bring petitions to this 

Legislative Assembly about the need for a new school. Mr. 

Speaker, that was ignored by the previous government. And 

that is one of the many reasons why they are sitting on that side 

of the House, and will continue to do so for many, many years, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We talk about the Saskatchewan advantage. And that is 

certainly something that typifies what this budget is because it 

is indeed an advantage to live in Saskatchewan and to be part of 

the opportunities that we have today. It’s a budget that limits 

tuition costs, post-secondary education. 

 

The constituents I represent in Saskatoon are pleased what’s 

happening in their city. I point to a quote from the Saskatoon 

StarPhoenix of March 24th, and it says, and I quote: 

 

“Across the country, we see other universities are 

suffering, but in Saskatchewan there is still positive 

investments,” said Brett Fairbairn, U of S provost and 

vice-president of academics. 

 

Again quote: “We’re fortunate to be in a province that is still 

investing [records amount of money] in post-secondary 

education.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s indeed what’s happening in 

Saskatoon. Saskatoon is the largest city in the province and 

continues to grow and continues to thrive, mostly because of 

the business people that work there and those that provide the 

job opportunities. But you need a responsible government that 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6983 

invests in infrastructure if you want to ensure that that growth 

continues. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m so proud to say that I’m part of a 

government that funded the first children’s hospital in 

Saskatchewan. For so long we got tired of hearing that 

Saskatchewan and Prince Edward Island were the only 

provinces that didn’t have a children’s hospital, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Academic Health Sciences centre, and that’s something 

that I don’t think the Minister of Advanced Education and 

Immigration gets enough credit for. By taking that 

responsibility on, by funding it fully, and to making sure that 

we have something that we can be very proud of, he’s done 

that. He’s done that also with the student residences, a 3,000 

per cent increase in student residences in our province under 

that minister. I am proud to call him a colleague. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, we will take different sides on this 

budget, and we know it’s quite predictable what will happen 

from the opposition.  

 

But let’s look and see what people from outside our jurisdiction 

have to say, other leaders in the province, Mayor Don Atchison 

for example. You know, I know I speak for all members here 

that we are very, very pleased and proud when he thanks this 

government for unprecedented investments into the 

infrastructure in Saskatoon. And I’m very, very proud to say 

that we worked together with the city of Saskatoon and others 

to make sure that that growth continues. 

 

What did the chamber of commerce have to say in Saskatoon, 

Mr. Speaker? Well they said they would give this budget an A 

minus grade. They said the province has the potential for an A 

plus, but we’re at an A minus. It says great job, but there’s 

more work to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I don’t know what the other members would be like when 

they brought home a report card and had an A minus. I know 

what would happen in our household when I brought home a 

report card like that. It didn’t happen all the time, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s for sure. And I have a mother that was a teacher, so she 

made sure she looked at that. But I tell you, if you got an A 

minus, it said that you were on the right track. But again it said 

that there is more work to do. 

 

And that’s indeed what the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce 

has said. Kent Smith-Windsor, who I think anybody would 

agree would be a tough teacher by any means, doesn’t give out 

A’s easily. But indeed he said that our government, when you 

look at the overall grade, A minus. When you look at specific 

items like continuing the long-term strategy of debt reduction, 

an A from the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce. Spending 

control, an A. Commitment to education property tax reform, 

that was a B. There was more work to do, Mr. Speaker. So 

indeed a budget like this that receives an A minus I think is 

something that we can all be proud of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, another person that’s often asked to comment on 

budgets is Marilyn Braun-Pollon from the CFIB [Canadian 

Federation of Independent Business], and she’s vice-president 

here and responsible for Saskatchewan. And what did she have 

to say? She said, “When most provinces are running deficits 

and unable to provide tax relief, we’re encouraged that 

Saskatchewan’s balanced budget offers $200 million in tax 

relief.”  

 

And of course she’s speaking on behalf of her members, the 

thousands and thousands — I think it’s in the 50 or 60,000 

range — of members that they have in Saskatchewan. And they 

are benefiting from a reduction in the rate of the small-business 

tax rate from 4.5 per cent to 2 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And that is 

very encouraging for those business owners. But it is more 

encouraging for everyone in Saskatchewan because we know 

when business owners have some money, have some profits, 

what do they do? They hire more people. They put money back 

into their businesses. They employ more. They buy more 

services. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s that self-fulfilling prophecy 

that we are seeing here in Saskatchewan. 

 

I had the opportunity last Friday, Mr. Speaker, to join the 

Minister of Justice and the Attorney General, and also the 

Minister of Government Services, member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley, and the member from Saskatoon Northwest 

at the announcement of a new expanded courthouse in 

Saskatoon, some $13.8 million to expand the Court of Queen’s 

Bench so that they can undertake the administration of justice 

in a safe and understandable manner, improving the efficiency 

of the courthouse. Mr. Speaker, this is something again that 

judges and others have been asking for, for 15 years they said, 

Mr. Speaker, and finally it has been announced and it has been 

brought. 

 

Yesterday in Saskatoon the Minister of Social Services 

announced the details of a five-point plan to add at least 4,600 

new housing units to Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan citizens 

for a better future, Mr. Speaker, some $252 million expenditure. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know in government you start talking 

about millions and you start talking about billions. But 

one-quarter of a billion dollars towards housing in our province, 

Mr. Speaker, that is a priority by anybody’s standards, and I 

congratulate the Minister of Social Services for that money. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government’s promise to municipal 

revenue-sharing formula is something that we take great pride 

in. It’s a promise that was made a few years ago. It was a 

promise that was partially delivered. It was a promise that had 

to be delayed in light of economic circumstances. But at the end 

of the day, the members opposite and all members of this 

House will know that when the Sask Party government makes a 

promise, they deliver on that promise. And all Saskatchewan 

residents are indeed benefiting from those monies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I mentioned Mayor Don Atchison from 

Saskatoon. He applauded the Premier. He said he was true to 

his word and thanks him for delivering revenue sharing to his 

city. Mr. Speaker, indeed that money can go to many, many 

projects. When we talk about bridges, when we talk about the 

needs of a growing infrastructure, that is indeed something that 

we will continue to make a priority. 

 

Another priority certainly is health care, and I have the 

opportunity and the privilege to be a seatmate with the Minister 

of Health, Mr. Speaker, somebody who is making 

unprecedented change in our province by bringing more than 



6984 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

800 nurses to our province, Mr. Speaker, by administering a 

budget of $4.46 billion, an increase of 6.2 per cent, an increase 

of some $260 million. That again is exactly what the mayor and 

others have said about this budget. It is putting your money 

where your mouth is. It is in doing what needs to be done to 

ensure that this province continues to grow. Mr. Speaker, we 

can look at specifics under the health budget. We can look at 

more money for diagnostic kidney disease. Two point eight 

more million dollars for special services in Prince Albert and 

Saskatoon. It addresses the need for more quality health care in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I had the opportunity to see members of the Saskatoon and 

Region Health Authority here in the legislature. And they had a 

smile on their face because they understand that they now have 

the resources, more than ever before, to undertake what needs 

to be done to provide better health care for Saskatchewan 

residents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We look forward to the partnership with the STARS [Shock 

Trauma Air Rescue Society] organization, the helicopter for 

medical services. It will ensure residents that we get faster 

medical attention and transportation to health facilities. We 

look forward to the more details and the good work that the 

member from Melfort has done, Mr. Speaker, in this. And I’m 

sure we’ll be a source of pride for Saskatchewan residents when 

they realize again that health care is indeed a priority for this 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I have the opportunity in this legislature to talk about First 

Nations and Métis Relations, to be in charge of Northern 

Affairs and the Gaming Corporation. And I’m very, very proud 

about what this budget does for people across the North and 

certainly for First Nations and Métis individuals. 

 

[15:00] 

 

This budget provides $167.2 million, an increase of $13.1 

million or 8.5 per cent, Mr. Speaker, indeed unprecedented 

growth, unprecedented priority for First Nations people. That’s 

the way it should be. That’s the way it is under the Sask Party 

government, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’re increasing the 

availability of pre-kindergarten programming, increasing the 

high school completion rate for First Nations individuals, 

supporting adult basic education, skills training. 

 

First Nations leaders were very, very pleased. And I had the 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to invite every chief from around the 

province, every mayor from northern Saskatchewan to come 

and to witness the budget. We were very pleased. We had about 

600 people here even though there were trying road conditions. 

But they came from all over Saskatchewan. They came from 

northern Saskatchewan to hear exactly what their government 

thinks of the North and, Mr. Speaker, they were very, very 

pleased. They certainly had the opportunity, and I want to say 

thank you to those that made it. 

 

And we can look at Chief Guy Lonechild, the chief of the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, and he said this 

government has put its money where its mouth is. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s indeed what we had the opportunity to do. 

 

I could go into much detail. I know I want to talk about the 

children and youth agenda that we have in the province. I want 

to speak about the money that First Nations and Métis Relations 

have been putting towards the investment in the northern action 

plan, some $1.5 million for this commitment over three years 

and $490,000 this year to reduce suicides and drug use in 

northern Saskatchewan. And I would contend that there is no 

more important use of public funds to ensure that we address 

those concerns. We don’t have any magic answer, Mr. Speaker, 

but what we do have is the resolve to put the resources towards 

that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on, but I know that my time 

has quickly elapsed. But I want to say that I appreciate the 

opportunity as serving as the member for Saskatoon Silver 

Springs as an MLA in this legislature. And I appreciate the 

leadership that has been shown and the inspiration, whether it’s 

from the Premier, whether it’s from the Minister of Finance, 

city councillors, or other leaders in our constituencies like those 

that lead the way of community associations. I want to thank 

them for leadership, for the inspiration, and for making 

Saskatchewan a better place. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I certainly want to say that I look 

forward to voting against the amendment. I look forward to 

voting for this truly historic budget. And once again I want to 

say to colleagues on both sides of the House, thank you for the 

opportunity to participate in this debate. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

proud to rise today to enter this debate on last week’s budget 

which is truly Saskatchewan’s advantage. 

 

But first as is customary, there are people that I must thank. 

And I will start off with my constituency assistants. My 

full-time assistant is Rosalie Story, and my casual is Wilma 

Bjorndalen. And these girls do a great job of handling the 

affairs in the office, and I really appreciate the fact that every 

constituent that comes into the office is treated with courtesy 

and respect. 

 

I must also thank my executive for all they do for me as well 

and of course to thank my constituents for the privilege of 

representing them. It’s unbelievable that it’s going on to 12 

years that that’s been happening, but it has certainly been a 

pleasure for me, and I appreciate their support. And as you 

would know, Mr. Speaker, the people that I represent are from 

very diverse sectors. They are hard working and the backbone 

of our economy. They and those before them have made our 

province what it is today and this province that we are all so 

proud of. 

 

And last but certainly not least, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

thank my family: my son Terry, my daughter Trisha, my 

grandchildren, Beau, Bailee, Shelby, and Tristan. They are my 

constant. And they give me yet another reason to be part of this 

government and, I must say, a government that has made and 

continues to make positive changes in this province. And I must 

also mention my mother, Mr. Speaker. I know she’s watching 

this afternoon, and she watches us every day. And I just want to 

thank her for her support and for the love and guidance she’s 

given me over the years. 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6985 

Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you why I will be supporting the 

motion put forward by the Minister of Finance, the member 

from Canora-Pelly. First of all regarding the changes to the 

personal exemptions, basic and spousal rise by $1,000 each to 

bring the exemption amounts to $14,535. Dependent children 

increased by $500, and that brings the amount to $5,514. And, 

Mr. Speaker, those that have spoken before me have said it, but 

I will say it again because it is pretty historic, that this means 

that a family of four will pay no provincial tax on the first 

$45,550 of combined income. And, Mr. Speaker, that is the 

highest threshold in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the 2007 election campaign, we made 

promises to the people of this province, and I’m proud to say 

that we have kept over 100 of our promises. But one specific 

promise was regarding the education portion of property tax. 

And this is something that has been talked about for decades in 

this province, talked about, but nothing was ever done. And as 

my friend, the member from Wood River stated on Thursday, 

even Tommy Douglas stated how unfair this form of taxation 

was and something had to be done about it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, years passed and the NDP commissioned 

studies. They cherry-picked from reports, and they had every 

excuse in the world why they couldn’t act on the education 

portion of property tax. You know, I think the first one was 

amalgamation and just everything you can imagine. I think it 

was almost to the point where even the stars in the sky weren’t 

aligning properly, and that’s how wild it was. But they always 

had an excuse. 

 

And in the 2007 election campaign, they too had a plan 

regarding the education portion of property tax. But in typical 

NDP fashion, agriculture owners, landowners did not qualify. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to be part of a government that 

got it done. Agriculture landowners will see the education 

portion of property tax drop by 80 per cent when compared to 

2007. Homeowners will see a reduction of about 29 per cent, 

and businesses by about 17 per cent. And this represents the 

largest property tax reduction in Saskatchewan history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the municipal operating grants will be a full point 

of 1 per cent and that is something municipalities are extremely 

pleased about because they can plan for their future. And this is 

a complete turnaround from the shell game that the NDP played 

with them. In the Lifestyles magazine of March 25th, 2011, the 

NDP Finance critic did an interview and I will quote from the 

article. And it says: 

 

The NDP is pleased to see that the Sask. Party will fully 

fund municipal revenue sharing this year, but . . . they 

would like to see some long-term infrastructure planning 

and funding for municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what the municipal operating grant 

does. It’s basically a news flash for the Finance critic over there 

and for every member of the NDP caucus, but that’s what this 

does is give them the stability that they need so that they can 

plan for the future and for their infrastructure spending. 

 

And I have another news flash for him: that infrastructure needs 

are something that just haven’t arisen in the last three and a half 

years since the Saskatchewan Party formed government. It was 

just because that party, when they were in power, they never 

listened to the municipalities and they totally ignored the needs 

of rural Saskatchewan. And, I think, that was just one of the 

parts of the rural revenge that they had on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, agriculture sees a commitment to fully fund 

AgriStability, AgriInvest, and crop insurance, and again this is 

a far cry from what the NDP ever did. The NDP’s actions 

regarding agriculture . . . The agriculture file clearly proves that 

they didn’t understand ag or didn’t care or perhaps even both. 

They left farmers in limbo regarding the predecessors of 

AgStability and AgInvest. And I have had so many people 

approach me and tell me how nice it is to have an Agriculture 

minister that understands the ag file. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, this is in sharp contrast to the 

Agriculture minister under the NDP, Mark Wartman, who said, 

“Farmers make business decisions.” And this was when farmers 

were dealing with elements, elements beyond their control, and 

he says farmers make business decisions. And I mean that was 

the epitome . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — He once visited a produce stand. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — . . . of arrogance. And I do believe what my 

colleague, the member from Cannington said, that he thought 

his qualifications to be an Ag minister were that he visited a 

produce stand at one time. But they didn’t, just didn’t 

understand the file. And of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was 

the NDP that continually raised premiums and reduced 

coverage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m also very pleased with the announcement of a 

satellite agriculture office in Estevan, or a rural service centre. 

Estevan was one of the 22 or 23 rural service centres that that 

bunch over there shut down when they were in government. 

And the people in Estevan have brought this issue up to me and 

of course, in his typical fashion, the Minister of Agriculture has 

listened and seen fit to have a satellite station out there. So that 

is extremely good news. 

 

And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members over there, 

now they get up and they claim to really care about rural 

Saskatchewan, but the people in rural Saskatchewan will never 

forget how they were treated. And the best indicator of future 

behaviour is past behaviour, and that is something that they 

have in their minds all the time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Energy and Resources, and of course that is a 

sector that is very important to my constituency, there were 

some very important announcements in this area, but the one I 

was extremely pleased with was the additional funding to 

decrease the time to review and approve licences for oil wells. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve had many people in the industry 

express appreciation for this move. And our government 

understands that while you’re waiting for permits to be 

approved and the equipment is sitting, the industry is losing 

money. So again this government listened and acted. And I 

must say, Mr. Speaker, that people in my constituency, and I 

think throughout the whole province, are also gravely 

concerned as to what the NDP are saying about the royalty 

rates. 

 



6986 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

And I mean, they’re focusing on potash right now, and we are 

the highest taxed jurisdiction in the world but, you know, 

sometimes it’s uranium. It all depends where the Opposition 

Leader is in the province. But the people in my constituency are 

aware that oil will be next on their agenda. Because they 

remember the oil policies of the NDP in the 1970s when Allan 

Blakeney was premier and all the oil people had to move to 

Alberta in order to put bread on their table. And the people have 

never, ever forgot that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, changes to the small business tax from 4.5 per 

cent to 2 per cent increases the amount of after-tax funds in 

small business owners’ pockets. And I believe that this extra 

funding will be invested directly back into their businesses and 

its employees, and I also think that moves such as this promote 

a culture of entrepreneurialism in our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Moving over to the housing file, and you know, the minister 

addressed the housing shortage yesterday and gave details of 

what was outlined in the budget. And the rural rental incentive 

program will assist municipalities in their efforts to increase the 

supply of affordable rental housing in the province, and in 

2011-2012, $1.5 million will be provided to develop rental 

housing units. 

 

[15:15] 

 

To help municipalities stimulate home ownership opportunities, 

the province is providing $200,000 for the Saskatchewan 

municipal affordable home ownership program. This initiative 

will reimburse participating municipalities for the education 

portion of property tax that municipalities provide to 

homeowners as a grant. 

 

And there was also the Headstart on a Home program, which is 

expected to stimulate the construction of at least 1,000 new 

entry-level homes in Saskatchewan over the next five years. An 

additional revenue at the end of the 2010-2011 fiscal year 

allowed for an investment of $33.9 million which went toward 

renovations of existing government-assisted housing and 

support for development of new housing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Is there more that can be done regarding this file? Of course 

there is. But, Mr. Speaker, with growth comes challenges. And 

the NDP discouraged growth and therefore never put any 

infrastructure money into place to accommodate growth. They 

implemented programs that drove people out of this province. 

In fact, it was former NDP cabinet minister Eldon Lautermilch 

who said, as people were exiting this province, that left more 

for the rest of us. And what a mindset, Mr. Speaker. And yes, 

even the Leader of the Official Opposition was one of those 

making that exodus. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was also investments for disability, sports, 

and income assistance. And I know my time is limited here, Mr. 

Speaker, but I do want to, just want to say regarding the seniors, 

that it was a Sask Party government that increased the benefits 

by 110 per cent, the first time there had been an increase for 18 

years. So I think even the members over there can do the math 

of who was in power, who claims ownership of these programs, 

and who did absolutely nothing to address that situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to move on to health care, but I just 

have to say that when I was home last weekend, people were so 

excited about this budget. And I will tell you that I had the 

honour of attending . . . Estevan has built a new events centre, 

the Spectra Place events centre. And, Mr. Speaker, just to tell 

you what kind of a community I come from, this is a $23 

million project and there’s less than $2 million owing on this 

project. And the generosity of the people of that community . . . 

In fact Friday night I went to a fundraising dinner they had and 

I was so honoured that the member from Saskatoon Silver 

Springs came down for it as well. But at this dinner there was 

770 people there. My CA [constituency assistant] called them 

this morning and they said that they netted at least $310,000. 

That’s netted in that one evening. So that just shows you what 

kind of a community I come from, and the volunteerism and the 

generosity of that community is second to none. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, while I was at this fundraiser, you would not 

believe the people that came up to me and said, good on you 

guys. You just aced it. And the Minister of First Nations and 

Métis Relations, he was there and honestly, they went over to 

him and he always had a crowd around him, people just 

expressing their gratitude for this government’s budget. 

 

And you know, I’ve had many, many letters, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, regarding the budget and many comments. But the one 

letter, it’s just very, very short and simple. It was a copy of a 

letter that was sent to the . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . you 

probably got a copy of it actually — that was sent to the 

Minister of Finance. And all it said was, hallelujah, amen, the 

Saskatchewan advantage. And I want to thank Gerry for that 

letter, and I know the members over there are aware who Gerry 

is because he writes them on a regular basis and he copies me 

on those. So I know that he is no stranger to them. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do just want to talk briefly on the 

health care file and I am very pleased to see a $250 million 

increase in the regional health authority base funding. And this 

brings the total base funding to 2.8 billion — that’s billion with 

a “b”. And also the increases in funding to the Cancer Agency 

to address patient volumes for cardiac care and diagnostic 

image are very welcome. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m just going to go back to the regional 

health authorities for a minute. And throughout this session and 

the session prior to this, the NDP Health critic, the member 

from Saskatoon Eastview, has mentioned many times how 

she’s toured the rural areas last summer and how she’s visited 

hospitals and wellness centres. And well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

know of 52 that she couldn’t visit, and those were the 52 

hospitals in rural Saskatchewan that that government shut down 

in the ’90s and that’s not including the Plains. 

 

So when that member gets up now . . . And the member from 

Riversdale’s chirping, she’ll get her chance. But when that 

member gets up and boasts about how she cares for rural 

Saskatchewan, they are not buying it. She can save her breath. 

And I honestly don’t know how she even has the nerve or the 

audacity to go out in those constituencies and try to discuss 

those issues, because the people of rural Saskatchewan will 

never forget Roy’s rural revenge. It’s still happening out there 

and . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, on your account. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Roy was your guy. 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6987 

Ms. Eagles: — Roy was your guy. He wasn’t ours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also listened to the member from Battlefords and 

his response yesterday. And he spoke of priorities, and he was 

specific about the hospital that he wants in North Battleford. 

And he was specific about a Highway No. 4 North, Highway 

378, and he said they should be priorities. He said Highway 378 

hadn’t had support for 40 years. Really? Who was in power 

most of those 40 years? 

 

And regarding that hospital, he was the minister. Couldn’t he 

convince his premier of the day and his cabinet to support him? 

And you know, he talks about how we have to have our 

priorities straight, and I guess I have a few of the NDP 

priorities. Rather than build the hospital in North Battleford or 

look after highways, their priorities were SPUDCO 

[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company], 

Navigata, Channel Lake, Clickabid, Retx.com, mega bingo. 

And the list goes on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, amounting to 

hundreds, hundreds of millions of dollars. And their priorities 

are having an effect yet today because they chose losing 

investments over hospitals, housing, or highways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was very happy with our government’s 

investment regarding the STARS program, and that is regarding 

the new helicopter ambulance service. And I think I mentioned 

this in my speech last fall, how I had the pleasure of touring 

that facility in Calgary. I was accompanied by the member from 

Thunder Creek and his wife, Linda, and also the wife of the 

member from Cut Knife-Turtleford, Heather Chisholm. And 

those girls are both RNs [registered nurse] so I mean they were 

more aware of what was happening there than I was, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And they were amazed and in fact we all were. 

It is an amazing, it’s an amazing facility, an amazing program. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, time is so critical when tragedy strikes. And 

I know that local doctors and nurses, EMTs [emergency 

medical technician], and everyone involved are very, very 

competent, but sometimes the clock is against you when you 

have to transport a patient to a specialized facility. And to have 

a trauma team and unit come out is probably one of the greatest 

gifts the people who live a distance from a hospital or a 

specialized facility can receive. But I want to be very clear, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that I know the local medical staff are very 

competent and dedicated, and I would like to thank them for 

that. 

 

And yesterday I was appalled when the member from 

Wakamow and the member from Eastview, the Health critic . . . 

And just a short time ago, when my colleague was giving his 

speech and mentioned STARS, the member from Riversdale 

was chirping. And these are all people that live within a city 

setting . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You’ll have your chance; 

just wait. These people are all living in an urban setting, and 

they don’t have far. They don’t have the worries that people in 

rural Saskatchewan have. 

 

But I would like to ask those members, especially the member 

from Wakamow and the member from Eastview: have they ever 

sat in a hospital and comforted their daughter while their 

granddaughter was being worked on by every doctor in that 

facility, trying to stabilize her enough to get her to Regina, a 

two-hour trek? I ask them that. You put a price on that. Put a 

price on it. I’ve done it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll just close by saying Saskatchewan used 

to be next year country, but our time has come. I’m proud to 

support this budget. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I recognize the 

member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wasn’t 

aware I’d get such an applause for simply getting to my feet to 

enter into the budget debate, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to at the start of my remarks just take a few minutes to 

thank those who make it possible for each of us to be here in 

this Assembly. Start by thanking my family for their support 

over the years — my wife, my children, and of course my 

extended family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all are here by the grace of those who support 

us and, Mr. Speaker, we should be thankful every day that we 

get to be here representing the people of Saskatchewan. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, there’s no higher calling than being able 

to represent the people and to bring forward the ideas and the 

aspirations of the people of Saskatchewan to this Assembly and 

act on their behalf. So, Mr. Speaker, for the many years we’ve 

been here, many of us in this Assembly, we should be thankful 

for the opportunity to work on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan because there’s no greater calling. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m up today to speak about a budget, a 

budget brought down by the government. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that budget leaves many, many people of Saskatchewan 

questioning what their futures might be. Mr. Speaker, we see 

significant increases in affordability over the last 24 months, 

Mr. Speaker — inflation and issues of food and rent in 

particular, gas, Mr. Speaker — leaving many people who once 

were able to afford to live with a standard of living that was 

more comfortable looking to see which bills they can afford to 

pay, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a Saskatchewan that 

is leaving people behind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a vibrant economy like we have in the province of 

Saskatchewan is good for many, Mr. Speaker, but our challenge 

as members of the legislature is to ensure that it’s good for 

everyone. Mr. Speaker, those who are left behind in any 

community are those who we as legislators have the greatest 

responsibility for and to because, Mr. Speaker, we make the 

decisions that affect their lives. And we have a responsibility to 

help those who need our help the most, Mr. Speaker, and to 

those people I would wish to make my remarks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do have a vibrant economy. We have not seen 

the type of increase in expenditures we’ve seen I think ever in 

our history. Mr. Speaker, over the last four years we’ve seen, in 

four consecutive budgets, about a 40 per cent increase in 

expenditure, Mr. Speaker. We are spending now more than $4 

billion than we did in the last 2007 budget. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party would have you believe that 

the economy and everything started the day, started to grow and 

we became, for lack of a better word, a have province, the day 

they became government. Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the 

members opposite, I want to remind the members opposite that 



6988 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

we were a have province in 2004; 2004 we became a have 

province. We became a have province as a result of building a 

base for an economy that’s today flourishing. 

 

[15:30] 

 

But before the economy can flourish, you have to build the 

base. And you have to take the time to do it, and you have to 

make sure that base is inclusive of all the people. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that it’s solid. It’s not built on a sand base, Mr. 

Speaker, but it’s built on a solid base that allows that economy 

to grow. And, Mr. Speaker, I think there was a number of 

decisions that were made in the early 2001, 2002, Mr. Speaker, 

and some before that that are really the catalyst that have 

moved our province to its current economic level. Mr. Speaker, 

the royalty changes made in 2001 to the oil and gas sector were 

instrumental in our economy being what it is today. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, those who say that we believe 

in changing the royalty structures in oil and gas, Mr. Speaker, 

industries, are absolutely wrong, Mr. Speaker. In the oil and gas 

industry, where we represent a very small portion of the world 

market, Mr. Speaker, we don’t have the luxury of being able to 

be instrumental in setting the world market. And, Mr. Speaker, 

so those who say that an NDP government would change the 

natural gas and oil royalty structure in Saskatchewan are 

absolutely wrong. We put . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And 

our leader does not say that. He does not say that. In fact he has 

emphatically, he has emphatically said that oil and natural gas 

would not be changed. And it would not be changed for a 

number of reasons, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to again say that in 2001 the very difficult decision 

was made that allowed the significant growth in our oil and 

natural . . . particularly in the oil sector in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, that boosted our economy to a new level. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I also want to point out and, Mr. Speaker, 

when you make a royalty change like that, it takes four to seven 

years before you see the economic benefit of that change in 

most cases. It takes time for that economic benefit, it takes time 

for that economic benefit to move into the economy, Mr. 

Speaker, so that it becomes part of the base of the economy of 

the province. 

 

Now those in the oil sector in our province understand that. 

They do. And, Mr. Speaker, I think if we were honest with one 

another, we would know one of the reasons those changes 

weren’t made is because when you first make those changes, 

Mr. Speaker, you get less revenue. You get less revenue for a 

period of years. And we’re elected on four-year cycles, Mr. 

Speaker. The members of this Assembly are elected on 

four-year cycles, and the risk of losing money during that four 

years, Mr. Speaker, made it difficult for governments to make 

those choices. 

 

But in 2001 that choice was made, Mr. Speaker, and that played 

a pivotal role in the development of the base of our economy, 

Mr. Speaker. And then several years of business tax breaks or 

cuts, Mr. Speaker, which put our economy on a much safer, 

more prosperous, and more forward-looking base, Mr. Speaker, 

made a big difference to change the economy. 

 

And by 2004 Saskatchewan became a have province. And by 

2004 we started to see continual years of more revenue coming 

in than expenditure, Mr. Speaker. We saw that base 

implemented in a manner and taken up by the business 

community. And yes, Mr. Speaker, the business community, 

the business community took that opportunity and they 

expanded. We had growth, Mr. Speaker, and from 2004 on we 

saw an economy that was growing, was prospering, and we 

became a have province. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s good. That’s 

good. By 2004 we were a have province, and we’ve continued 

to grow. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the population, the population started to 

grow as well, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the population began 

to grow as well. Because the population, Mr. Speaker, grows as 

the economy grows. As there’s work and as there are 

opportunities, people shall come. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite do not want to ever, 

ever admit that the economy in fact reached the pivotal point in 

2007, Mr. Speaker. Population was continuing to grow, Mr. 

Speaker, and this province was doing extremely well. So they 

inherited a province with, Mr. Speaker, a very hot economy — 

$2.3 billion available to them, Mr. Speaker, from the previous 

government, Mr. Speaker. And they had the opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker, to move our province forward. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to point a few things out. Today in 

this prosperity, Mr. Speaker, debt is rising. Mr. Speaker, they 

will tell you or try to convince you that debt isn’t rising. But, 

Mr. Speaker, in their own budget documents, Mr. Speaker, in 

their own budget documents on page 61, Mr. Speaker, it shows 

very clearly that public debt, public debt this year is not going 

down, Mr. Speaker. Total public debt is going from eight point 

three — Mr. Speaker, I need to get my glasses just to be 

absolutely precise — $8.368 billion, Mr. Speaker, to eight point 

eight five three point eight billion dollars. So to $8.853 billion, 

up from $8.368 billion, Mr. Speaker. That’s their document. 

This isn’t an NDP document. This is a Government of 

Saskatchewan document, Mr. Speaker, showing an increase in 

debt of a half a billion dollars this year alone. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, they can pay debt down in the 

General Revenue Fund, but if you increase debt in the Crown 

corporations, total public debt is still increasing. You can try, 

you can try, Mr. Speaker, to make the people of Saskatchewan 

believe otherwise, Mr. Speaker, but the reality is, debt’s on the 

rise. And we saw this once before. We saw this in the 1980s 

where a government tried to convince the people that debt was 

going down when in reality debt was going up. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, for a period of time you can fool people, Mr. 

Speaker, because people do want to hear good news. And all of 

us like, all of us like to look forward and be optimistic about the 

future, Mr. Speaker. That’s life. We want, we want to look to 

the future and look to the future with pride and look to the 

future with optimism. But, Mr. Speaker, we want the best for 

our families. But the reality is debt is going up, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about that in context to our 

accounting principles, Mr. Speaker. If you go to page 7 of the 

Estimates of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, you 

will see here very clearly laid out under accounting policies, for 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6989 

those people of Saskatchewan who want to go to the Internet 

and look because, Mr. Speaker, these documents can be 

obtained through the Internet, Mr. Speaker. And they’d have to 

go to page 7. And it says this, Mr. Speaker: 

 

The financial statements and schedules in the Estimates 

are prepared in accordance with generally accepted 

accounting principles for senior governments as 

recommended by the Public Sector Accounting Board of 

the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants with the 

following exceptions [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

So what they’re saying is, yes, we follow most of the rules. But 

we don’t follow them all, and we’re the only government in 

Canada that doesn’t. Mr. Speaker, we have a government that 

believes they can make their own rules. And, Mr. Speaker, what 

does that do? It takes debt off the books. 

 

Mr. Speaker, goes on to say: “Transfers to and from the Growth 

and Financial Security Fund are included in the determination 

of surplus for the year.” So they’re artificially putting dollars in 

to determine surplus. 

 

“Pension expenses are accounted for on a cash basis.” So 

pension liabilities no longer show up in the debt of the 

province, Mr. Speaker. So the liabilities for a pension show up 

only as the cash expenses for that year, Mr. Speaker, not as 

their liability that has to be paid over the long term as a 

responsibility in debt of the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Transfer payments from the federal government to the 

Province are recognized as revenue when the transfer is 

authorized by the federal government and the Province 

meets the eligibility criteria. Similarly, transfers from the 

GRF are recognized as an expense when the Province 

authorizes the transfer and the recipient meets the 

eligibility criteria [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Debt Servicing Costs . . . Crown corporations be recorded 

as interest revenue (rather than netted against debt 

servicing costs). The exception to this is where debt is 

specifically borrowed on behalf of a Government Business 

Enterprise, such as SaskPower. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, they’re changing how debt servicing costs are 

featured in our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we don’t . . . As a government, we should live by 

the rules every other government in Canada has to live by, Mr. 

Speaker. We should live by the same standard as every 

government of Canada has to live by. We should be open and 

transparent, Mr. Speaker. We should tell the people of 

Saskatchewan what the true debt situation is, Mr. Speaker. And, 

Mr. Speaker, what is that true debt situation? If you go to page 

61 of their book, Mr. Speaker, their book, and it shows growth 

of debt from 2009 to 2015 being more than $3 billion. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, if you would have taken this same graph a year 

ago, that would have been more than $4.2 billion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the question is, Mr. Speaker, is the change as a result of 

them looking at less borrowing into the future, Mr. Speaker? Or 

is it just not wanting to show the true situation that we will face 

in the coming years? But nonetheless, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t 

matter. Debt is on the rise in the province of Saskatchewan, and 

by 2015, we will be more than $10 billion in debt again. More 

than $10 billion in debt. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s right here. It’s 

right here on page 61 of their budget book, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the responsible thing to do, the 

responsible thing to do is to take and accept responsibility for 

your actions, is to accept responsibility for your actions and 

admit. Earlier today I stood in this House and apologized for 

something I did yesterday, Mr. Speaker, because I had done 

something I shouldn’t have done, and you take responsibility 

for it. Mr. Speaker, that is what you do. That is what you do as 

a professional individual, Mr. Speaker. You take responsibility 

for what you do. You admit if you make a mistake. You put, 

Mr. Speaker, the truth. And, Mr. Speaker, this book, clearly a 

budget document, shows the debt, debt is on the rise, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have a right to know 

the true financial situation of their province. They have a right 

to know the obligations and liabilities the government’s putting 

in front of them on their behalf. Because, Mr. Speaker, there is 

only one taxpayer in this province. It’s the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. Governments don’t have money that 

don’t belong to the people, Mr. Speaker. We don’t work for 

ourselves, Mr. Speaker. We’re here on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan. And we are accountable to the people of 

Saskatchewan, and we have an obligation to put the true facts, 

the true facts before the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I started a few minutes ago talking about 

affordability and our obligation and responsibility to the people 

of Saskatchewan. Now, Mr. Speaker, affordable housing in this 

province is becoming a more serious and more crucial issue 

every year. And, Mr. Speaker, we have a budget before us that 

puts 1.7 billion, or one point — pardon me; I wish it was $1.7 

billion, Mr. Speaker — $1.7 million towards affordable 

housing. And in one place in the budget, Mr. Speaker, they say 

it will build 300, provide 300 housing units. In another place, 

Mr. Speaker, the same money’s supposed to supply 350 

housing units, Mr. Speaker. And then in their glossy 

pre-election pamphlet they sent out to every Saskatchewan 

citizen, it says 650, Mr. Speaker, 650. Not 300, not 350. Now 

which document are we to believe? Which document are the 

people of Saskatchewan to believe, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Well the people of Saskatchewan are only going to receive this 

glossy little pamphlet talking about the great things that they 

believe the government is doing. Mr. Speaker, this is a 

pre-election pamphlet by any standard, Mr. Speaker. And the 

accuracy, the accuracy of this pamphlet needs to be questioned, 

Mr. Speaker, because it says 300 in the budget and it says 650 

here. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, integrity and credibility is important. The 

government shouldn’t be putting in its budget 300 housing units 

and 650 in its pamphlet. Mr. Speaker, they shouldn’t be putting 

different numbers in their pamphlets, Mr. Speaker, than their 

budget says. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that the people of 



6990 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

Saskatchewan truly know what their government’s going to do, 

not what they say their government’s going to do. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we see this government today adding debt to 

the Crown corporations for things that should have been funded 

through the General Revenue Fund, Mr. Speaker, so that they 

can claim to the people that they’re paying debt down to the 

General Revenue Fund. A great example, Mr. Speaker, is 

something that I think every member of this Assembly 

supports. It’s not that we don’t support a children’s hospital 

because we damn well do support a children’s hospital, Mr. 

Speaker. I think every citizen does, and I think every member 

of this House does, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

something that should have been funded through the General 

Revenue Fund, Mr. Speaker, not through the Crown 

corporations, Mr. Speaker, and then debt is added to the 

province, to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all support the hospital. That’s not the issue. 

But it’s how you do it, Mr. Speaker, and whether you’re 

transparent, whether you’re honest, and whether you show 

truly, truly the financial picture of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

And they’re not doing it. They’re not doing it, Mr. Speaker. 

And for members opposite to suggest we don’t support the 

children’s hospital, they’re being disingenuous, Mr. Speaker, 

because they know. The member from, Mr. Speaker, the 

member from Greystone knows fair well that every member in 

this province, in this Assembly supports the children’s hospital. 

They do. They do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was an initiative of our government. It’s an 

initiative of their government, Mr. Speaker. It is something 

that’s right for the people of Saskatchewan. We all agree on 

that. And where we agree, Mr. Speaker, why do we try to have 

people say we disagree? Because we do agree. We agree on a 

children’s hospital. Everybody knows that. It’s a fundamental, 

fundamental piece of infrastructure that we all agree on. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I was dealing with the issue of reporting of 

debt and reporting of where the debt is. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

only thing we are concerned about at all with the children’s 

hospital is the fact that, Mr. Speaker, the money came from the 

Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, and the Crown corporations 

then borrow money to carry on with their operations so that the 

government didn’t have to take the money from the General 

Revenue Fund where it should’ve come from. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, they can try to tell us they’re paying down 

debt, and the reality is they’re increasing debt. Total public debt 

on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan’s going up this year by 

over a half a billion dollars and, Mr. Speaker, over the next 

three years, Mr. Speaker, more than $3 billion. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that is a concern. That is a concern. It is a concern and 

we’ve seen this before. We saw this in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker, 

and it worked for a period of time. You can fool people and tell 

them that the situation is other than what it really is, but 

eventually it catches up with you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out as well that the costs for 

servicing our debt are going up this year, Mr. Speaker. And 

why are the total costs of servicing debt going up? They’re 

going up because total debt’s going up, Mr. Speaker. If we go 

to page 61, Mr. Speaker, we are going to see that public debt is 

forecast to increase by $485.3 million in 2011-12, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s total public debt. Mr. Speaker, that results in an increase 

in debt servicing cost. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s debt that the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan have to pay for. There 

isn’t somebody other than the people of Saskatchewan who 

magically pay for that debt, Mr. Speaker. There is only one 

group of people who pay and that is the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And in good times like we have today, Mr. Speaker, if debt is 

going up, how can the people of this province believe that this 

government can manage the province when things are tougher, 

when the economy isn’t as vibrant as it is today? And, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re at the top of a windfall right now, Mr. Speaker, 

and things are going very well in many . . . in our economy, Mr. 

Speaker, except for those who are being left behind by the 

government. 

 

But at this period of time, Mr. Speaker, at this period of time 

the total cost of debt is going up. The total cost of servicing 

debt in 2010-11 was $657 million, and today it’s $663.5 

million. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have used my allotted time in the budget 

speech. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m hoping that I’ve had the 

opportunity to shed some light on the true picture of the debt 

for the people of the province of Saskatchewan. And for those 

reasons, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment and 

not supporting the original motion on the budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I recognize the hon. 

member from Lloydminster. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

have a few comments I’d like to make today about this budget, 

but before I get into them, as I do every year, I’d like to give a 

few thank yous. 

 

First off, to the people that work in my office in Lloydminster. 

I’ve got three ladies, Caren, Marilyn, and Rachelle, and they do 

a great job. They serve the people of Lloydminster and as a 

team I think that we are a very good representative of our 

government in Lloydminster. So thank you to them. 

 

I would also just like to mention that the people we work with 

here in Regina are an excellent bunch. The ministries that I deal 

with are professionals that again have the best interests in 

Saskatchewan in mind each and every time, and it is a pleasure 

to work with such professionals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one thing that I really want to do properly . . . I’ve 

gotten some grief the last budget speech I made. I talked about 

my wife. And I’m a little nervous sometimes when you start 

speaking on the floor of the legislature, Mr. Speaker, and as I 

was speaking of my wife, I said, you know, we’ve been through 

thick and thin. And I have not heard the end of that line, Mr. 

Speaker. Thick and thin, she tells me. And you know, I’m prone 

to misspeaking on occasions, and she’s prone to letting me 

know when I do. So this time, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to 

say I’ve got a very beautiful wife who is a great partner. We’ve 

got a couple of lovely kids, and I love them all very much. 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6991 

And now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn to the business of 

this budget. This is the best budget in Canada, Mr. Speaker. I 

am proud of standing behind the best Finance minister in 

Canada, Mr. Speaker. And I think that our province is poised 

for greatness. 

 

Before I get into the details of this budget, there is just 

something that I think needs to be acknowledged. What we just 

witnessed, Mr. Speaker, the speaker before us, it was fantastic 

to get a treatise on the oil industry from the member from 

Dewdney, Regina Dewdney, downtown Regina, Mr. Speaker, 

was explaining how the oil industry works to the member from 

Cannington. We’ve got the member from Weyburn and the 

Weyburn from Estevan. I represent Lloydminster, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I learned a lot and I hope that my fellow members were 

paying attention because we could, from a member with a 

background in the oil industry like that, we could certainly learn 

a great deal. 

 

I think only a socialist, Mr. Speaker, would understand that they 

are in fact the expert and, you know, if only we were running 

the potash industry or if we could just take over the oil 

companies and start Saskoil, everything would be great. It’s 

funny. The member beside me, Mr. Speaker, says they did that 

once in the past. 

 

One of the comments that the former speaker, the member from 

Dewdney, was making was that his leader never said they were 

going to review oil royalties, oil and gas. He said it, and we 

may have said, yes he did, Mr. Speaker. And he again repeated 

it: his leader, the leader of the NDP, never was going to review 

royalties, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the 10 minutes, Mr. Speaker, from his speech until now, with 

very little research I can tell him that CKRM radio, December 

13th, his leader, the leader of the NDP, Mr. Speaker, did an 

interview. In that interview with Craig Wallebeck he said, 

“NDP leader Dwain Lingenfelter wants full review of 

Saskatchewan oil royalty rates on oil and potash.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it says right here. The quote is oil and 

potash. That is what Craig Wallebeck, Mr. Speaker, had to say. 

Then the leader of the NDP, Mr. Speaker, speaks up and says, 

“If I become Premier in November of 2011, I would institute a 

review of all royalties in the province, whether it’s potash, 

uranium, oil, gas.” Mr. Speaker, he was unequivocal that he 

was going to go after the oil companies. He was going to go 

after the gas, potash companies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have seen this story before. We’ve seen it in oil when they 

started Saskoil and took over the industry. We’ve seen it in 

potash when they devastated that industry and set our province 

back for decades, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, just a couple weeks ago he went up north, 

Mr. Speaker. I guess they thought that the uranium mines 

would have some difficulty if the NDP ever become 

government. It got to be a bit of a problem. I’m guessing that 

his northern members representing their constituents said to the 

leader of the NDP that this is not even reasonable. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m certain that he said to their leader, we cannot have this kind 

of talk. We can’t have the people in northern Saskatchewan 

knowing that we’re going to review royalties on uranium and 

likely set that industry and northern Saskatchewan back for 

decades. So what does the Leader of the Opposition do? He 

goes up to northern Saskatchewan. He gets on the radio station, 

and what does he say? He says, we will not review royalties on 

uranium. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, he says one thing in northern Saskatchewan. 

He says one thing in southern Saskatchewan. He makes a 

commercial that says something else. He will say whatever he 

thinks people want to hear. But I think the reality is, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve all seen this before. When he has the 

opportunity, he will raise taxes. He will raise royalties. He will 

try to nationalize industry. The only time that he deregulates 

and denationalizes industry, Mr. Speaker, is when he then gets a 

job with a company that he sells off. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

people of Saskatchewan have seen it. They’ve seen it from that 

member in particular and they will not, will not, Mr. Speaker, 

let that happen to Saskatchewan again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just, I want to start with a few of the 

fundamentals of this budget. Income tax cuts, Mr. Speaker. An 

income tax cut is across the board. It’s a pay hike for every 

working person in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Every month 

you get your paycheque and government takes a little bit less. 

That means there’s a little bit more in your pocket. 

 

Debt repayment, Mr. Speaker. That is a retirement plan for 

every single person in Saskatchewan. Debt paid down today 

pays off for everyone tomorrow and every day following, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Corporate income taxes, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of those things 

that I think might get lost in a bigger picture, but it is our duty 

to highlight it. And coming from Lloydminster, Mr. Speaker, 

where we are on the border and businesses make decisions 

every day as to where their companies will operate, where their 

head office will be, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan wasn’t as 

competitive as Alberta on corporate income tax rates. And I 

have friends, Mr. Speaker, that started businesses in 

Lloydminster and made the conscious decision that when they 

start their business, when they invested in equipment, 

machinery, property, Alberta offered a more competitive 

royalty tax rate. 

 

What we’ve done here, Mr. Speaker, in this budget, what our 

Finance minister has brought forward on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan is a corporate income rate on small business. It is 

not just competitive but one of the most competitive income tax 

rates on small business in the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another item broad based across the entire 

province, property tax. Every single property owner in our 

province will see a reduction in property tax again this year, 

coming to the full commitment from our campaign, Mr. 

Speaker. And that is something that farmers will see a 

reduction, business people, house owners, Mr. Speaker, cabin 

owners. It’s good for our province. It’s good for property 

owners, and it’s a competitive issue, Mr. Speaker, that makes us 

more competitive. 

 

I would like to talk, Mr. Speaker, about a couple of the 

ministries in which I am minister of, Mr. Speaker. The first is 



6992 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

the Crowns. Crown corporations in this year’s budget 

announced that they will have a dividend this year of about . . . 

of exactly $110 million, Mr. Speaker. That is about 30 per cent 

of profits, Mr. Speaker, 30 per cent. That is a extremely 

conservative, a modest dividend to GRF. 

 

It allows the Crowns to build up cash, Mr. Speaker. We have 

some Crowns . . . We have SaskPower that is paying zero 

dividend, Mr. Speaker. They are reinvesting every cent of their 

profits, Mr. Speaker, as they did last year, back into the 

infrastructure. And that is extremely important. SaskPower has 

some challenges, nothing that our province isn’t up to, but, Mr. 

Speaker, challenges. It’s a position we were put in by 16 years 

of non-investment. 

 

When they became government, Mr. Speaker, in 1991, the 

former government left them a brand new power plant at Shand, 

Mr. Speaker, one of the largest, most modern power plants in 

the world, built right here in Saskatchewan, finished in 1991. 

From that date there was a meagre, Mr. Speaker, a meagre 

reinvestment in SaskPower as there was in the other Crowns, 

but that one is where it is glaringly obvious, that 16 years of 

neglect. 

 

We find ourselves in 2007 in a situation where companies are 

looking at Saskatchewan optimistically, that we see growth and 

we see a infrastructure, a base of power, that isn’t going to keep 

up. And our government views that our province will have 

growth, that we will increase in capacity, that we’ll need more 

power production, Mr. Speaker. And our party is going to drive 

an aggressive investment agenda in SaskPower, in SaskEnergy, 

Mr. Speaker, in SaskTel. 

 

[16:00] 

 

That is another area, Mr. Speaker. In the last year we’ve seen a 

large rollout in towers. I believe it’s 55 towers. We’ve rolled 

out the G 3, the G 3 plus, and I believe now it’s even G 4, Mr. 

Speaker, that allows Saskatchewan to have one of the most 

modern Wi-Fi cellular networks in North America. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that costs money. The alternative, Mr. Speaker, is to 

not spend the money, and that, that was the plan of the former 

government. We can look at that as an option. I don’t think it’s 

an option for this side of the House, but the members opposite, 

they advocate that position on a daily basis, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They say that, why would we want to run up debt? Why would 

we want to invest in our future? . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

And, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is saying that that isn’t 

accurate, Mr. Speaker. We hear it every day. We heard it today 

in question period that our government is going to invest 

heavily in the Crowns. And I think the option, Mr. Speaker, is 

how would you set up an economy in Saskatchewan where you 

didn’t need that sort of investment? 

 

Well I could think of a couple of moves that a government — 

our government will not, but the former government if they 

ever get the opportunity — if they raise royalties, Mr. Speaker, 

on potash, if they raise royalties on oil and gas, that will have 

people leaving in droves, Mr. Speaker, and there will not be the 

requirements for growth that there currently is. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, when he was in 

government, raised taxes on the citizens of Saskatchewan 

seventeen times. Mr. Speaker, that is the kind of moves that 

will again have people leaving this province in droves. And 

when people leave and our power requirements go down, Mr. 

Speaker, if they ever get in power again, I guess they won’t 

have to invest as heavily as we will or are planning on this side 

of the House, Mr. Speaker. But that isn’t a future we’re looking 

forward to, and it’s not a future I think Saskatchewan’s going to 

choose for itself, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would like to discuss the beer discount. That is something . . . 

Mr. Speaker, last night I had the opportunity to speak at the 

hoteliers’ association last night, Mr. Speaker. And I can tell you 

the people in that room had nothing good to say about the NDP, 

Mr. Speaker. They talked about the history with the NDP, that 

they saw their margin reduced year after year after year since 

1993, Mr. Speaker. While other players in the industry had a 

percentage remuneration, the beer discount was a fixed price, 

Mr. Speaker, and it eroded each and every year. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that needed to be addressed to ensure that 

we have a distribution arm in many communities where SLGA 

[Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] doesn’t have 

distribution. It provides a service in communities where we do 

have a distribution, Mr. Speaker. They provide different hours, 

Mr. Speaker, than SLGA. 

 

But the people in that room reminded me that in 2003 that 

government, Mr. Speaker, when they were government in ’93, 

in the budget not only did they not rectify the year-over-year 

reduction, they actually tried to claw back $5 million, crippling 

the industry. Now the industry made a very strong case at that 

time. They tried to reason with the opposition. It wasn’t until 

they got the Sask Party MLAs, Mr. Speaker, to make this a 

major issue, to stand up for hoteliers, to stand up for the 

hospitality industry that the NDP backed down and actually 

reinstated that money, Mr. Speaker. But if they had had their 

way, they would have crippled the hospitality industry like they 

did so many other industries in Saskatchewan through those 

dark, dark years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I had a very interesting conversation last 

night. One of the members that’s on the board, he’s a 

Vice-Chair of the Saskatchewan Hospitality Association, Mike 

Billard. He’s invested in Saskatchewan. He’s got some 

properties here. He’s a hotel owner. And you know what he did, 

Mr. Speaker? He looked around and he saw that Saskatchewan 

is growing, and it’s a place he wants to be further involved. He 

identified that Eatonia is a place that had a bar that closed down 

in 2006, Mr. Speaker. I can imagine it was a time in the 

industry when again the NDP was in power, that the NDP 

wouldn’t listen to the hospitality association, where people 

were probably leaving the province in droves as they did under 

. . . the entire time the NDP were in government. And they 

closed the bar, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Four short years later, Mr. Speaker, the town is growing, the 

prosperity in our province. They want a pub. They want a 

meeting place in their community. And Mike and his family 

have identified it as a good investment for their business. 

They’re opening the bar as of April 1st, Mr. Speaker, which 

coincides with the date that the beer discount is . . . and this 

budget, Mr. Speaker. It coincides with this budget’s coming 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6993 

into effect. 

 

Making this bar a go, Mr. Speaker, he told me that his son is 

moving back to Saskatchewan to manage it. When the former 

bar owner closed it, Mr. Speaker, he actually took out all the 

innards. He took out the equipment, the stoves, the dishwashers 

and hauled it away because at that point it wasn’t expected that 

it would ever open again. Well with Mike’s investment and 

interest in the community and in the industry and his optimism 

in Saskatchewan, he actually went out of province again, Mr. 

Speaker, and found a facility that was closing. He bought up all 

their equipment. They loaded it in a Sea-Can. They’ve hauled it 

to Eatonia, Mr. Speaker. They’ve set up a bar. And within days, 

it will be open and serving the community and serving as a 

meeting place for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

And that is a very positive thing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for my city of Lloydminster, I spoke a little earlier 

that the corporate income tax rate is something that will be felt 

very directly in Lloydminster. But a couple of other things, Mr. 

Speaker, that will be felt very directly. New schools. Last year 

we were able to announce a new school for the Catholic school 

division, Mr. Speaker, very much needed. The public school 

division, Mr. Speaker, it was announced in this year’s budget 

that the public school division will be getting a new school, Mr. 

Speaker. Again, a very welcome and a very good news story, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But a couple of other things, Mr. Speaker, that will be felt very 

directly: new schools. Last year we were able to announce a 

new school for the Catholic school division, Mr. Speaker, very 

much needed. The public school division, Mr. Speaker, it was 

announced in this year’s budget that the public school division 

will be getting a new school, Mr. Speaker. Again a very 

welcome and a very good news story, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The town of Hillmond, Mr. Speaker, a town that has a hockey 

rink. It’s the home of Wade Redden. I would guess a population 

of probably less than 100 people, but it is a vibrant community. 

It is in the centre of the oil field. It is a ranching community. 

They needed a new gym, Mr. Speaker. Their gym had some . . . 

floor was heaving. It had some health and safety concerns with 

air quality. In this year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, a new gym in 

Hillmond. Mr. Speaker, raising NHL [national hockey league] 

calibre hockey players, I think they need a good sports and 

recreation facility there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am drawing close to the end of my time, but 

there are a couple of things that I would like to just point out, 

just for interest for my colleagues. It’s something that the 

Leader of the Opposition, this weekend at their policy 

convention, talked about their policy book as a beacon of light. 

And that struck me, as soon as I heard it. Beacon of light, isn’t 

that what The Globe and Mail called our budget last year? And 

it is. 

 

So I looked it up, Mr. Speaker. This is March 25th, 2010, and it 

is The Globe and Mail, and this is the quote: “Amid the ruin 

that has devastated most governments’ balance sheets, 

Saskatchewan stands as a beacon of light, tabling another 

balanced budget yesterday.” Well, Mr. Speaker, last year’s 

budget was a fantastic budget, and this year’s budget, I think 

that our province has outdone itself. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know that all of us on this side of the 

House believe that it isn’t our government that enabled this 

budget to look as it did, it is the people of Saskatchewan — the 

people working on the drilling rigs, the service rigs, and the 

potash mines, Mr. Speaker, the farmers, the nurses, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve got people, the hardest working people in 

Canada that is driving this economy, driving this budget, Mr. 

Speaker, and that is where the credit is due. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I have expressed many of the things . . . 

I think any of us could go on for a substantial length of time of 

the good news in this budget and the positive outlook the 

people of Saskatchewan have for our province. But I will leave 

that work to my colleagues, and I thank the House for their time 

and the people of Saskatchewan for their hard work. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. Wyant: — I’m pleased to stand today to speak to the 

2011-2012 budget, Mr. Speaker. But before I begin, there’s a 

few people that I need to thank. I’d first like to thank my 

constituency assistant, Kelly Merriman. Sometimes it’s a 

thankless job that they do. She keeps me very, very well 

organized, so I owe her a great debt of gratitude. 

 

I’d also like to thank my constituency association and my 

executive for all their help and support. It’s been a busy, it’s 

been a busy eight months for us, Mr. Speaker, and they’ve 

stepped up and taken the time to make sure that we get the job 

done in our constituency. We just had our fundraiser last week, 

Mr. Speaker, and I wanted to thank all the members of my 

constituency that came out to support us, and members of the 

legislature, some of my colleagues that were there as well, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I also want to thank my constituents for giving me the great 

honour of representing them in the legislature. It’s a humbling 

experience, Mr. Speaker, and I’d owe them a great debt of 

gratitude as well. 

 

Also wanted to thank my colleagues here in the legislature, Mr. 

Speaker. I felt welcomed, and I very much appreciate all the 

support that I’ve received from them. It’s an outstanding group 

of men and women, especially . . . And not to single anyone 

out, Mr. Speaker, but I feel it necessary just to thank the 

Minister of Finance for delivering an outstanding budget, a 

historic budget. And I’m very proud to be able to stand today, 

very proud to be able today to stand up and support the budget, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank my 

family. We all know that theirs is the sacrifice, Mr. Speaker. 

And I very much miss being with my family every day, my 

children Allison, Stephen, Jeremy, and Kayla. And my brothers 

as well, those that live in Saskatchewan, they’ve always been 

very supportive. I’ve often said, Mr. Speaker, I’ve got four 

heroes in the world. They’re my brothers, and I can’t help but 

stand and thank them very much for all their support over these 

many years. 

 

And I especially want to thank my wife. Obviously you can’t 



6994 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

say enough about your spouse and all the support that they give. 

She’s a terrific woman. She stood beside me for many years, 

and I do adore her for all that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the budget. This budget continues to improve 

on Saskatchewan’s health system by allocating $4.46 billion in 

this year’s budget. In addition to meeting our election 

commitment of hiring more than 800 nurses and providing 

better care to patients, this year’s health budget includes 

funding for physician positions and other important health 

initiatives. 

 

The 2011-12 budget continues with education, recruitment, and 

retention efforts for health providers, including an additional 

1.5 million for the clinical and medical teaching units at the 

University of Saskatchewan and Regina General Hospital to 

ensure students have access to appropriate training and an 

additional $800,000 for four faculty positions at the College of 

Medicine to ensure a stable supply of pediatricians. 

 

Other important incremental improvements to the budget 

include much-needed investments of $10.9 million to address 

increased volumes in diagnostic imaging services, cardiac care, 

and chronic kidney disease; $4.2 million for bone marrow 

transplant patients to undertake treatments in Saskatchewan and 

help reduce the number of patients being transferred out of 

province and out of country, Mr. Speaker; $493,000 to the 

Ombudsman to establish a dedicated health care unit within the 

provincial office; $1 million for autism spectrum disorder 

assessments, intervention, and training as part of the 

government’s child and youth agenda; $600,000 for fetal 

alcohol spectrum disorder prevention, diagnosis, and supports 

as a part of the government’s children and youth agenda; and 

$2.8 million for additional specialist services, some of which 

will be located in Saskatoon; $2.4 million for electronic 

medical record expansion in the physician’s office which is 

very important, Mr. Speaker; and $2 million for kidney 

transplant program revitalization to recruit more specialists and 

resume deceased donor transplants in Saskatchewan. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, our government fulfills its 

commitment to fully fund the construction of the children’s 

hospital in Saskatchewan. The children’s hospital will serve our 

province’s sick children and will be a hub of research, 

knowledge, and learning for professionals dedicated to 

children’s health. This funding was announced in the 

2008-2009 budget, and our government delivered on that 

promise. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I was one of the founding directors of the 

Children’s Health Foundation of Saskatchewan, and our goal 

was to see that facility built. I’m proud to be part of a 

government that recognizes the need for such a facility in 

Saskatchewan, something that’s claimed by almost every other 

province. And our friends across the way had 16 years to fulfill 

the promise, we had many meetings with them. Our 

government has fulfilled that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Our government also has taken considerable steps to introduce 

the first ever children’s and youth agenda budget. The purpose 

of this important new step in the children and youth agenda is 

to identify funding and programs across several ministries that 

address common problems facing children and families at risk. 

This cross-government agenda will result in a targeted and 

comprehensive approach that challenges of lower education 

levels, unemployment, and substance abuse. 

 

As part of this new approach to a long-standing issue, this 

budget includes funding important initiatives, initiatives such as 

$1 million to develop a 24/7 intensive family support model to 

prevent children from coming into care. And, Mr. Speaker, $2 

million to establish a task force on First Nations and Métis 

education and employment to provide recommendations aimed 

at eliminating the education and employment gaps; $7 million 

for adult basic education and provincial training allowance 

targeted to First Nations and Métis students; $2.9 million to 

increase high school completion rates and improve achievement 

for First Nations and Métis students. 

 

Our government has also taken the bold step by investing in 

Saskatchewan people in need of affordable housing, income 

assistance, and disability services. More importantly these 

investments will support the need of our growing population 

while at the same time ensuring that our government fulfills its 

responsibility to protect our most vulnerable citizens. 

 

To support those needs of housing, the province will invest $1.7 

million into housing initiatives. Another important housing 

measure will be the Saskatchewan rental incentive program 

which will increase the supply of affordable housing throughout 

the province. In this budget, $1.5 million will be provided to 

develop nearly 300 rental housing units, and this budget will 

address the interests of all Saskatchewanians. 

 

Another important measure will be to address the housing 

supply in this province as the government’s Headstart on a 

Home program. This valuable new program should stimulate 

the construction of at least 1,000 new entry level homes in 

Saskatchewan over the next number of years. And, Mr. 

Speaker, additional revenue from the 2010-11 budget allowed 

our government to invest $33.9 million in renovations of 

existing government-assisted housing as well as supporting the 

development of new housing. 

 

This year’s budget also includes $2.3 million for the ongoing 

development of the Saskatchewan assured income for 

disabilities program which provides additional support to those 

who quality. Our government is also taking important steps to 

support families with individuals who have intellectual and 

cognitive disabilities. In this budget we provide $14 million to 

provide specialized residential and day programs for people 

with intellectual disabilities. Its investment will significantly 

address the wait list for those waiting for such services. 

 

Our government also provided $27 million for this province’s 

income assistance programs, including Saskatchewan assisted 

program, transitional employment allowance, Saskatchewan 

rental housing supplement, and the child care subsidy. Mr. 

Speaker, these investments will work toward the goal of 

ensuring that our province’s most vulnerable people receive the 

supports they need. 

 

Another important aspect of this budget, Mr. Speaker, is that 

our government will keep post-secondary education and 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6995 

training accessible and affordable for students. Our government 

is doing this by eliminating the cost of tuition and improving 

educational opportunities. 

 

We have also provided significant investments in education and 

employment for First Nations and Métis people. As part of our 

government’s $125 million investment to ensure 

post-secondary affordability and accessibility, we’ve done the 

following: $24.6 million to limit tuition increases to an average 

of about 3 per cent at Saskatchewan’s universities, SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology], 

and regional colleges; $3 million for a new Saskatchewan 

advantage scholarship for a total provincial investment in 

scholarships of $5 million; and $97.8 million in support of 

students through student loans, scholarships, grants, bursaries, 

provincial training allowance, the apprenticeship training 

allowance, the skills training benefit and the graduate retention 

program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is also taking significant steps to 

improve the opportunities for First Nations and Métis people. 

We will provide $7 million for basic adult education and 

provincial training allowance to target First Nations and Métis 

students, $2 million dollars to establish a First Nations and 

Métis education and employment task force aimed at 

eliminating the education and employment gaps, and we’ve 

designated the apprenticeship funding of $600,000 to improve 

outcomes for First Nations and Métis apprentices. 

 

Northern students will also benefit from this budget, Mr. 

Speaker, as we have allocated $1 million for the International 

Centre for Northern Governance and Development at the 

University of Saskatchewan to help northern students study, 

stay, and succeed in their northern communities, and $600,000 

for SIAST to enhance supports available to First Nations and 

Métis students to improve completion rates. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, our government has made significant 

strides in advanced education. We’ve increased registered 

nursing seats by 170 in 2010, meeting our election commitment 

of 300 new seats. We have made key changes to Saskatchewan 

student loans, Mr. Speaker. We removed the restrictions on 

vehicle ownership; allowed students to work as many hours as 

they wish during their studies; reduced student loan repayment 

to prime rate; and increased the post-secondary funding this 

year by 5.1 per cent — the second highest increase among all 

provinces — a total of over $2 billion post-secondary education 

funding since taking office, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With respect to immigration, Mr. Speaker, our government has 

made important advancements in improving net migration, both 

interprovincial and international. Our province’s $14.7 million 

immigration budget includes $1.8 million in new funding for 

settlement and integration supports. The Ministry of Education 

will provide $2 million in new funding to support new students 

in the classroom and their teachers through English as an 

additional language program. 

 

In agriculture, Mr. Speaker, record crop insurance coverage and 

funding in the 2011-12 agriculture budget will protect 

Saskatchewan producers against risks such as excess moisture. 

The Government of Saskatchewan has increased its agriculture 

budget by $32 million to $418 million in 2011 and 2012. This 

is the second largest agriculture budget ever announced in this 

province’s history, Mr. Speaker, next only to the budget in 

2009-2010. More than three-quarters of this year’s budget will 

fully fund business risk management programs, including crop 

insurance, AgriStability, and AgriInvest. 

 

Our government will be leaving more money in the hands of 

Saskatchewan farmers and ranchers by implementing phase 2 

of its education property tax reduction plan, which will reduce 

education property taxes by up to 80 per cent on agricultural 

lands compared to 2007. Mr. Speaker, this is the largest 

educational tax reduction in the province’s history. This year 

the mill rate will be reduced from 7.08 to 3.91 on agricultural 

land. 

 

The 2011-12 agricultural budget will also include expanded 

agricultural extension services with the opening of seven new 

satellite offices in Meadow Lake, Lloydminster, Assiniboia, 

Moosomin, Estevan, Shaunavon, and Wadena. Our government 

will continue to provide funding for the Crown land sales 

program, the wildlife damage compensation program, the 

gopher control rebate program, irrigation infrastructure, the 

farm and ranch water infrastructure program, the farm business 

development initiative, and other programs that benefit 

producers. 

 

In the area of highways, Mr. Speaker, the 2011-12 budget will 

continue to improve Saskatchewan highways and transportation 

system with an investment of $556 million. This brings the total 

transportation spending to $2.2 billion over four years, Mr. 

Speaker. This year’s highway and infrastructure budget will 

improve 1400 kilometres of provincial highways. The budget 

includes $285 million of capital construction, the largest capital 

investment in the province’s history. 

 

Highlights of this year’s construction program include $54.6 

million to support major, multi-year projects including the 

opening of twin lanes from Highway 11 from south of Hague to 

north of Duck Lake, and north and south of Macdowall — new 

lanes will also be upgraded from north of Duck Lake to south 

of Macdowall — completing the Highway 1, Lewvan Drive 

interchange at Regina; continuing work on the west Regina 

bypass to support development of the Global Transportation 

Hub, and continued work on the new St. Louis Bridge. 

Ninety-one million dollars to upgrade 160 kilometres of rural 

highways, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the area of education, Mr. Speaker, the new education budget 

fulfills our government’s commitment to reduce education 

property tax while making important investments in school 

capital projects, student achievement, improving educational 

outcomes for First Nations and Métis students, and a continued 

commitment to child care and pre-kindergarten. The overall 

funding for school divisions will increase by $36 million or 2.3 

per cent in this budget. Our government has also committed to 

covering increased costs for the teachers’ collective bargaining 

agreement when a new one is reached. 

 

This budget includes $19.9 million for capital projects, 

including $13.9 million for school capital, $4 million for 

school-based child care capital, and 2 million for 

pre-kindergarten capital funding. The 2011-12 capital 

investment is in addition to the more than $402 million our 



6996 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

government has committed since November of 2009 for 29 

major school capital projects across this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our government is also continuing the commitment made in the 

2010 Throne Speech to increase the number of licensed child 

care spaces and pre-kindergarten programs. This budget 

provides $2.1 million for 500 additional child care spaces. In 

addition there’ll be 40 new pre-kindergarten programs for 

vulnerable three- and four-year-olds. 

 

The budget includes $2.9 million for initiatives that are part of a 

broader government commitment to work with First Nations 

and Métis stakeholders and the federal government to close 

education and employment gaps for First Nations and Métis 

people. 

 

The 2011-12 budget fulfills the second phase of our 

government’s education property tax plan, reducing education 

taxes by a further $55.6 million. Education taxes have been 

reduced by approximately 20 per cent on residential properties 

and 80 per cent on farm lands as I said, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s much more to speak about on this 

budget, and I’ll leave that for some of my colleagues. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m proud to support a budget that delivers lower taxes 

which strengthens our economy, and that’s the Saskatchewan 

advantage. I’m proud to support a budget that improves quality 

of life by increasing support, that improves quality of life by 

increasing support for health, housing, and families. And that, 

Mr. Speaker, is the Saskatchewan advantage. I’m proud to 

support a budget that lowers government debt. I’m proud to 

support a budget that is balanced. That’s the Saskatchewan 

advantage, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget continues the positive momentum 

Saskatchewan people have created; this moves us forward. 

Saskatchewan deserves nothing less. Mr. Speaker, I’ll be 

supporting the budget and voting against the amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

today to enter into the debate on the 2011-12 budget. Before I 

begin, as is customary fashion, I have a few people that I want 

to thank. Of course, my family. I have . . . As a mother of 

young children, I think the only people who allow me to be able 

to do this job really well is my support system. I have a 

wonderful husband who’s taken a leave from his job and is able 

to come with me here to Regina . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

SEIU [Service Employees International Union], as a matter of 

fact. My husband’s a union rep, if you were asking. But I 

appreciate my husband and all the support he provides me. 

 

I’ve got great kids. My 13-year-old . . . I’m now the mother of a 

13-year-old. You’ll notice that my hair’s a little greyer than it 

was last week. She turned 13 on Friday. So my daughter 

Hennessey and my daughter Ophelia, who is three, help me. My 

daughters are the big reason why I do this job. I look towards 

the future and see what this future might hold for them. My kids 

are my motivating factor for putting my name forward and 

letting my name stand as a candidate in Riversdale. My kids are 

my motivating factor. 

I also just want to thank my mom and dad who make it a little 

bit easier for me to do my job as well, and my sister Michelle. I 

have a great staff person in Yvonne McCowan, who serves the 

people of Saskatoon Riversdale very well and helps to make 

sure that people have what they need. Yvonne is a tremendous 

help and a support. And so I just want to make sure that they 

know how much I really appreciate all that they do for me. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s many issues I’d like to discuss today 

but I’m going to keep my focus fairly narrow. I’m going to talk 

about some budget items that fall short and fail the people of 

Saskatoon Riversdale and the whole province, for that matter. 

I’m going to talk about some housing, some health and safety 

issues, and care issues in particular. And I’ll talk a little bit 

about the Ministry of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport, for 

which I have a responsibility as an opposition member to 

follow and understand. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister began his speech last 

week by acknowledging his family in the audience — his wife, 

his son, his daughter-in-law, and grandchildren — and ended 

his speech a bit choked up telling a story about a 

Saskatchewan-born daughter and her family who now get to 

come back to Saskatchewan because of this wonderful place 

this province now is and all it has to offer. 

 

And I understand. I too have those sentiments sometimes of 

being a bit choked up. But when I think about my daughters’ 

futures here in Saskatchewan, I don’t actually have tears of 

gratefulness that they may be here because I genuinely am 

concerned about what this province will look like for them in a 

few short years. Will we be able to afford tuition with the few 

dollars we’ve managed to put away, or will the cost of an 

education continue to increase, making it inaccessible for so 

many? How will my daughter be able to even own a home here 

in Saskatoon? My 13-year-old talks about becoming a doctor. 

What kind of health system will remain if she chooses to go 

down this career path? Will our commitment to public, 

not-for-profit health care remain, or will our system be so 

eroded by a government that chose not to invest in the public 

system? 

 

[16:30] 

 

I think about my daughters’ peers, including the growing 

number of First Nations and Métis children in our province. 

Will they and their families have received the supports they 

need to overcome a legacy left behind by residential schools 

and systemic racism? 

 

Mr. Speaker, these fears aren’t baseless. I chat with people on 

the doorstep, at my community office, at events, and out and 

about who share stories that illustrate they are being left out of 

the boom and that we do have reason to be concerned and to 

ask these kind of questions. We have growing numbers of 

citizens here in Saskatchewan who are relying on social 

assistance, record use of food banks in Saskatchewan, and 

working people struggling to make ends meet. Many people 

long for the day when they won’t have to live paycheque to 

paycheque. 

 

So just a few weeks ago in the back-and-forth banter that goes 

on in this place, I was trying to make the point to the member 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6997 

from Kindersley that there were a lot of people left out of this 

government’s so-called boom, and I made the comment that I 

had people coming into my office on a regular and frequent 

basis who are struggling with the rising cost of living, who 

actively make the choice between paying for their housing, rent 

or mortgages, and paying for other necessities. The member 

from Kindersley shot back with something to the effect of, 

Danielle, that is just not true. Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, the member 

from Kindersley was just trying to get my goat. I must admit 

my goat is fairly easily got. But I wonder, is this the sentiment 

of the government, that every boat is rising with the tide? 

Unfortunately this just isn’t the case, and many people are 

being swamped by rising costs and lack of resources. 

 

I’m close to completing my master’s in public policy, which 

I’m quite proud of. It’s been a bit of a struggle. And what I’ve 

learned from this and from my experience as a mother, as 

someone with a social work degree, as someone who’s been a 

reporter, is that there is no issue for which there is a silver 

bullet, a quick or instant fix. The problems we all face today are 

multi-faceted and require many different policy approaches. 

 

The approach governments take to solving problems should not 

be ad hoc one-offs. Rather, I think for the major issues that 

confront our citizens, we owe them the long-term visioning and 

a comprehensive plan. I don’t think people expect us to solve 

all issues, nor do they expect them resolved instantly. But they 

do want to see what our plan is, when and how we’ll deliver it 

even if it’s in stages, and what the road signs are all along the 

way indicating that we’re getting there. Unfortunately this 

government is not offering us any of this long-term planning on 

some of the tough issues facing families today. 

 

One of these tough issues for families right now is housing — 

rather, the lack of affordable housing. Doesn’t matter where 

you go in the province, it is an issue. Might look different in 

southwest Saskatchewan than it does in northeast 

Saskatchewan, but talk to anyone on the street throughout the 

province and you’ll hear about housing struggles of one sort or 

another. 

 

It’s odd that on an almost $11 billion budget, the only housing 

mentioned in the $147,000 mailer that’s landing in all our 

mailboxes is, and I quote, “Up to $1.5 million in up-front 

provincial incentives to apartment builders to offset the cost of 

education property tax on as many as 650 new units per year.” 

And I quote, “Support for Municipal Affordable Home 

Ownership programs that provide homeowners with grants for 

home purchases.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a drop in the bucket, and not to mention it’s 

a contradiction with a budget that says there’ll only be 300 

rental units in 2011 and ’12. This government has been given so 

much and has done so little with these vast resources we now 

have in this province. 

 

The Minister of Social Services’ announcement yesterday of an 

affordable housing plan is a bit odd, even more odd than the 

limited amount of money announced for housing in the budget. 

You’d think if you’d planned to put a strategy in place, you 

would have put it in your budget document and you put it in 

your promotional document as well, especially considering how 

housing — or rather the lack of affordable housing — is one of 

the key problems facing us all over Saskatchewan today. We’ve 

experienced housing prices that have made home ownership 

unattainable for many and skyrocketing rents in the last three 

years. And I’d like to ask too, isn’t this government in the 

middle of a consultation process that will culminate in a 

housing summit in just a few weeks? Why would you announce 

a housing strategy before your consultations are wrapped up or 

before you’ve brought everyone together to discuss the issue 

thoroughly? 

 

The government has tried to dress up a few items in a fancy 

package but I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, this isn’t enough for 

families who are suffering from rising costs of housing right 

now. People need help, not in a year from now, not in two years 

from now. Their suffering is immediate and needs to be 

addressed immediately. I hear frequently from people whose 

rents have gone up 30 to 40 per cent in the last four years, and 

they are being forced to make difficult decisions, as I’ve said 

before, like prioritizing rent over food or medication and other 

necessities in life. 

 

This should not be happening in Saskatchewan where our 

government has a budget spending close to $11 billion. I think 

that the question people need to ask themselves, is life really 

that much more affordable now than it was for them four years 

ago? What is their quality of life? For many people in 

Saskatoon Riversdale and other parts of the province, it has 

diminished. They ask, as my colleague from Regina Rosemont 

has asked, the boom for whom? 

 

In the same election propaganda that’s in our mailboxes, the 

government goes on to say, I quote, “We are investing in public 

safety.” I am the daughter of a police officer and live in a 

community where safety is definitely on people’s minds. I’m 

glad for the investments in the gang database and this 

government carrying on the former administration’s investment 

in police positions. But again this government has picked 

winners and losers, this time putting our health and safety at 

risk. 

 

The story in today’s StarPhoenix, “Ambulance gaps found,” 

highlights this issue. Ambulance employees in Saskatoon are 

alarmed the province has chosen to ignore the needs of the 

province’s land ambulance services and paramedics in the 

budget despite warnings there are urgent public safety risks that 

need to be addressed. There were a group of paramedics from 

Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, here just a few weeks ago, explaining 

to MLAs their concerns, and they have met with the Ministry of 

Health in the fall to ask the government to heed 

recommendations from a report this minister commissioned in 

2008. 

 

Right now in Saskatoon, there are an increasing number of zero 

alerts, which means there are no ambulances or paramedics 

available to respond to emergency calls in Saskatoon and area. 

Zero alerts are happening for more than 40 minutes a day on 

average, which equates to 11 full days a year. There are no 

ambulances available to respond to emergency calls because all 

ambulances and paramedics are often attending to existing calls 

or delayed transferring patients at hospitals. These zero alerts 

are especially dangerous in emergencies such as heart attacks, 

serious accidents, and respiratory distress when minutes can 

mean the difference between life and death. 



6998 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

The minister said he would respond to these recommendations 

in the 2010-11 budget, but the government has yet to supply 

funding on any of these 19 recommendations. 

 

According to these paramedics, EMS [emergency medical 

services] is in a real crisis. This government has chosen to fund 

STARS, a helicopter-based ambulance service, to the tune of $5 

million in this budget, as the minister said, “to supplement our 

existing air and ground ambulance services.” Well it sounds 

like our ground ambulances need more than supplementing 

right now, Mr. Speaker. In our conversation with these 

paramedics, they were totally in favour of STARS and 

acknowledged it was one of the government’s promises, but 

they want people to understand that road ambulance services 

are the core of our system and need to be fully functioning as 

citizens expect first. 

 

For example, in Saskatoon right now there is no helipad, and 

there will not be one until 2015 with the building of the 

children’s hospital. So people from rural areas can be 

transported to Saskatoon via helicopter, but they will be sitting 

at the airport right now waiting for the ground services 

ambulance to pick them up. Hopefully STARS won’t land at 

the airport at a time of a zero alert. STARS may be a good idea, 

but it doesn’t fix the entire ambulance system, and this 

government has ignored major concerns of land ambulance 

providers to the detriment of our citizens. 

 

As a mom of young children who has often the opportunity to 

be in contact with many other young parents, I would be remiss 

if I didn’t talk about child care. In this budget this government 

has promised 500 new child care spaces to the tune of $2.1 

million. Mr. Speaker, this is not enough. I’m coming from the 

perspective . . . I’ve been an at-home mom and I’ve also been a 

mom who has worked outside of the house. I’ve needed child 

care, and I’ve not needed child care. I’m a big believer that 

there’s multiple ways to support a family, again that 

multi-pronged process or a vision. It’s not either family cares 

for the children or the state. It’s not an either/or. It can be both. 

And I think our NDP policy document talks a bit about a 

multi-pronged strategy to support families. 

 

The reality is we are about 28,000 spaces behind Manitoba, and 

Manitoba doesn’t think they’re where they need to be, and we 

are the lowest in the country according to a recent YWCA 

[Young Women’s Christian Association] report. Unless we 

have real investment in this area, we will continue to lag so far 

behind and fail our children and their parents. 

 

I also just have to point out when you increase spaces, you also 

have to increase the resources to support these spaces. The 

spaces have been increased, Mr. Speaker, but the government 

positions that support the licensed child care spaces haven’t. So 

if a child carer has a question or an issue or needs help with 

something around regulations, the response time from the 

ministry is far longer than it should be. So our children and 

those who care for them are not getting what they need to do 

their jobs well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked a bit about housing and a bit about 

health and safety and supporting families. I’d like to take a few 

minutes to discuss the budget for the Ministry of Tourism, 

Parks, Culture and Sport. In particular, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

talk a little bit about heritage, an area this government on the 

surface seems to have supported in the budget with an increase 

to the Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation, which undoubtedly 

they appreciate. I want to go to the document, the plans for 

2011-12 that outlines this ministry’s key priorities . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I would 

ask members if they have a debate they want to get involved 

with other members that they either go either behind the bar or 

find another location so that we can hear the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. The member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So again I want to 

talk a little bit about heritage. So we look to this government’s 

plans for 2011-2012 and look at the key priorities: “identify 

ways to strengthen practices in heritage conservation,” and, 

“support heritage stewardship and heritage conservation in 

Saskatchewan.” How about funding the Heritage Foundation to 

what they really need? And how about — and this is the most 

important one, I think, or a biggie — not simply signing off on 

the de-designation of a heritage property because it will make 

renovations easier and because perhaps another minister or the 

Premier told you to make it happen. 

 

I’m referring specifically, Mr. Speaker, to the whole mess of St. 

Peter’s and Carlton Trail. Last spring, last spring, Mr. Speaker 

. . . We talk about supporting heritage. Let’s not de-designate a 

heritage property at the whim of some renovations happening 

when the support could be provided to make those renovations 

happen and still stick to the heritage guidelines. At St. Peter’s 

last year . . . Well The Heritage Property Act states that the 

minister can de-designate without consultation, but it also 

suggests that a minister could consult. I wonder what the people 

in the ministry were recommending to the minister? I would bet 

that it wasn’t to go ahead and de-designate without 

consultation. 

 

This was a total mess at St. Peter’s. An elevator has been added, 

and not that the elevator isn’t necessary, but it could have been 

done in a heritage-sensitive manner. And before they even got 

to the windows, Mr. Speaker, the property was de-designated as 

a heritage property. The people in the community had no say 

over this. The minister just expediated the process when asked 

to do so, who knows by whom. Was it the Minister of 

Advanced Education? Was it the Premier who had this request? 

Because I can tell you I’m sure the ministry wasn’t asking for 

this. Who thought this was a good idea? This was coming from 

a previous . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, to ask leave for introduction 

of guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Greystone has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6999 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of the Assembly I’d like to 

welcome Ms. Zeba Ahmad to her Assembly. She’s back. She 

was just here a few days ago. She makes a terrific contribution 

in the corporate community. She’s working with John Hyshka 

at Phenomenome and obviously she’s known across the 

province for her commitment to community development and 

philanthropy. And we just want to say how much we appreciate 

her efforts, especially in Saskatoon but extending well beyond 

that. 

 

And I had the honour of running against her in the last election. 

It was a very dignified campaign, and it was difficult for me. 

 

An Hon. Member: — We were rooting for Zeba. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — And my colleagues say that probably it 

was touch and go on their support which way it was going. But 

all kidding aside, Mr. Speaker, we just want to say how pleased 

we are to have her in her Assembly, and I’d ask all members to 

join me in welcoming Zeba Ahmad to the Legislative Assembly 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So as I was saying, 

the people in the community had no say over the de-designation 

of St. Peter’s as a heritage property. The minister sped up the 

process when asked to do so, again by who knows whom. It 

wasn’t the Minister of Advanced Education or the Premier who 

thought this was a good idea. And as I was just saying, this was 

from a previous minister who stated in estimates that he had a 

great interest in built heritage. Goodness help the person or 

program who becomes of interest to the same minister next 

time around. 

 

[16:45] 

 

I also want to talk about the once-thriving film and television 

industry. In a budget document for TPCS, Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport, the plans for 2011-2012, one of the key 

actions was “building on the work of the film industry task 

force.” Well if you want to build on the work of this task force, 

you should start by listening to the recommendations and 

consider implementing them. 

 

The industry just a year ago was reeling from a recession, and it 

still hasn’t recovered, and the loss of a key pillar of the film and 

television industry when we had the SCN [Saskatchewan 

Communications Network] fading to black, then privatization 

last year. So the film and television industry had to believe in 

this task force process that was launched last spring and was set 

to report in October. They were positive and optimistic, and the 

government led them to believe they could believe in it. 

 

It was incredibly collaborative effort. I mean, this is how 

consultation should be done and work should be done. It was 

collaborative between the government and the film industry 

leaders. And it wasn’t just about asking the government for 

money, but it was about how do you grow, how do you 

continue to support and grow an industry that has provided so 

much out-of-province investment, jobs to our skilled youth, and 

much to be proud of? 

 

Then the report came out in October, and the film and 

television industry hoped for and expected action. They were 

told that they had to wait for the budget despite the fact the 

industry was asking for the immediate implementation of 

no-cost items, like enhancing the series incentive and simply 

restating the existing tax credit relative to how other 

jurisdictions are marketing theirs. They waited for the budget, 

Mr. Speaker, and this government didn’t deliver. 

 

Manitoba, a similar province, spends about three times as much 

on their film agency as we do at SaskFilm. This includes equity 

and development funding. We didn’t see any sign of this in the 

budget despite the fact there should have been some savings 

from the privatization of SCN. There was about $3 million 

actually, Mr. Speaker, that could have been put back into the 

ministry to support arts and cultural organizations, including the 

Sask Arts Board, including SaskFilm, including more to the 

Heritage Foundation. This $3 million from SCN could have 

been rolled back into the same ministry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the things that the film industry is concerned about, last 

spring the ministry announced a Saskatchewan series incentive 

which waives the rent on our sound stage for a pilot for the first 

year of the series. This was great and it brought the film 

InSecurity here, but the film industry has been asking this 

government to enhance or expand this to other productions. 

This came out of the task force report that the government was 

an active participant in. It doesn’t cost a thing, particularly if 

the sound stage is sitting empty, which it is. 

 

And I think that that leads to some concerns that this 

government is not supportive of the film and television industry 

and hasn’t been in this budget. And I know this is speculation 

and fear, but people are thinking that this sound stage is sitting 

empty so in a short year or two the government can say, oh 

well, that’s clearly an NDP white elephant, and let’s sell it to 

private investors. Whether or not that’s the case, that’s how 

people are feeling, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The reality is the film and television industry saw five 

consecutive years of production values well over 60 million. 

Then the recession hit, and it tanked, and it hasn’t recovered. 

Last year’s production values dropped to 17 million, a 70 per 

cent drop, and are expected to be even lower this year. Other 

jurisdictions, including Manitoba, stepped up to the plate last 

year to support their film industry to help them remain 



7000 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

competitive, and it has paid off in increased production, jobs, 

retaining skills and talent — all these things the government 

says it wants to do. 

 

So this is not the budget that the film and television industry 

had hoped for. And quite contrary to this government’s stated 

desire to attract and retain skilled young people, this inaction 

means we’ll be losing more young people. 

 

I just want to, I know my time’s coming to a close here, Mr. 

Speaker, but I just want to touch on the cultural and arts sector 

in general. So arts organizations all got a 1.5 per cent increase 

across the board. So the reality is, Mr. Speaker, everyone, all 

these organizations are getting squeezed. This 1.5 per cent 

increase basically covers off human resources obligations, 

increases in things like rents and other annual costs, and it isn’t 

really going to the organizations. 

 

And we have to look to a government here who last spring 

announced a policy that they’re very proud of and one that we’d 

anticipate they’d put legs on it. That’s the Pride of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the first cultural policy they’ve 

said in 20 years that they’ve touted and seem to be very proud 

of. But this budget doesn’t seem to be putting legs to this 

policy, Mr. Speaker. Rather then you’re seeing a trend towards 

special, we’re all seeing a trend towards special initiatives. 

They’re going away from providing core service delivery in, 

again, that comprehensive way and going towards one-off 

initiatives. 

 

Again for me, going back to my comments about the need for a 

vision, again this isn’t a big vision and a long-term plan that I 

see this government using or embarking upon with the arts 

sector. If you think, if this government thinks one-off programs 

are going to be enough to implement policy, we should be very 

afraid for our arts. So again overall funding to arts 

organizations in constant dollars is not keeping pace, and our 

arts and culture organizations are suffering, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So winding down here, I’ve spoken a bit about housing, about 

health and safety care, and about some issues from Tourism, 

Parks, Culture and Sport. I think that the thing that stands out 

for me about this budget is how could you have access to so 

much revenue, almost $11 billion, and manage to produce such 

an uninspired budget lacking overall policy vision? So for this 

reason, I will be supporting the amendment, and I will be voting 

against the budget. As well actually that’s not the only reason. I 

don’t believe that this budget addresses the needs of the people 

of Saskatoon Riversdale or the rest of the province. So again I 

will be supporting the amendment and will be voting against 

the budget. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m very pleased to rise in my place on behalf of the 

people of Weyburn-Big Muddy and speak in favour of the 

budget, in favour of the ’11-12 budget and against the 

amendment put forward by the opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to be serving the people of 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. It’s a great honour — as I think we all 

will agree that it’s a special honour for a four-year term of 

government — to be one of only 58 people in the entire 

province of Saskatchewan, 1,055,000 people and growing, and 

to have the honour with 57 other people from across the 

province to be able to stand and speak on behalf of the people 

that I represent. 

 

So I want to first of all begin by thanking the constituents of 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. And I look forward to a vigorous 

campaign in the hopes of returning to this place after 

November. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to also join with colleagues that have 

spoken before to thank first of all my constituency assistants. 

Mr. Speaker, members, many members on this side of the 

House will know Marcie from my office. She has been the 

constituency assistant for the MLA for Weyburn-Big Muddy 

for over a decade now, nearly 11 years, Mr. Speaker. And 

Marcie continues to do an incredible job in my absence, but 

also in serving the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy and the 

people that contact our office. 

 

We have a very busy constituency, Mr. Speaker, and it’s such a 

valuable asset to have somebody like Marcie that helps our 

constituents. As well, Mr. Speaker, over the last couple of 

months we have added some part-time help to our office, and 

Sheila has been a very quick learner to the office of an MLA, 

Mr. Speaker, and does a very good job on behalf of the 

constituents that I have to serve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank my ministerial staff here in 

the office as Minister of Environment, Mr. Speaker. Kelly and 

Krista work out front and they do a tremendous job each and 

every day, Mr. Speaker. And I certainly appreciate the hard 

work that they put in on my behalf and on behalf of the 

Ministry of Environment, as well as Drew and Cam who work 

for me, Mr. Speaker. And they are just a tremendous asset to 

me as minister, Mr. Speaker. And coming into this role, it’s a 

very steep learning curve, and so it’s been very helpful for me 

to have their capable assistance each and every day. And I just 

want to express my appreciation to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well to the ministry staff, my deputy and all of 

her executive team and all of the people, nearly 1,000 people 

that work for the Ministry of Environment throughout the 

province, Mr. Speaker, they have been . . . work very hard each 

and every day for the people of Saskatchewan. As well, Mr. 

Speaker, I also have responsibility for the Watershed Authority, 

and I’ll speak a little bit about that later, as well as SaskEnergy 

and SaskWater. And I just want to offer my thanks to those 

organizations and to the management, and in the case of 

SaskWater and SaskEnergy, to the board that oversee the 

management and oversee the good work that they do in this 

province each and every day, Mr. Speaker. And so I want to 

thank all of them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to also as well thank my family and thank 

my extended family for all of their support. It certainly means a 

great deal to have your family behind you and supportive of 

something that, you know, we never know how long we’re 

going to be in these positions. And so they’re demanding 

positions on our time, and so it’s very . . . Obviously none of us 

could do this without the support of our families. And, Mr. 

Speaker, of course I do want to thank my wife, Amanda, for all 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7001 

of her love and support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members and my colleagues will know that, Mr. 

Speaker, members will know that my wife’s a musician. She’s a 

very talented musician, a singer and a songwriter. And, Mr. 

Speaker, members will know that . . . I think in the Throne 

Speech there’s a quote that, when I think of my wife, it sticks in 

my mind and it goes something like — and I said this in my 

Throne Speech reply — that she wasn’t where she was, she 

wasn’t where she was going. But she was on her way. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, little did I realize that just over the last few 

months since the Throne Speech, she has sure been going on 

her way and has been very successful. In fact, Mr. Speaker, if I 

could just take a moment and just recognize her hard work as 

singer and a songwriter. She recorded her first album of her 

own music, and that was released in late December. One of her 

songs has been picked by Sask Music to be on their compilation 

CD [compact disc] of Saskatchewan artists. And in fact that 

song in late April will be released to national airplay on radio 

stations across Canada. So, Mr. Speaker, she’s had a very 

successful trip here recently to Nashville where she did some 

songwriting and some recording. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m very, 

very proud of her, and her biggest, biggest fan. And I think the 

best is yet to come, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, as we’re looking to this spring, and if I 

can just briefly talk about some of the work that we’re doing as 

government, I think everybody knows that last year was a very 

wet year for the province, and this year and this winter has been 

a very . . . We certainly had a lot of snow all across the 

province and we were starting to, Mr. Speaker, worrying a little 

bit about what the spring may hold, and if we have a very quick 

start to the spring, there could be a lot of water all over the 

place. But as people will know, you know, we’ve had snow 

over the last couple of days throughout the province and so 

well, we’re worrying about a quick spring. I think a lot of us are 

thinking let’s just get on with it, you know, this winter has 

dragged on long enough, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to recognize the work of the Watershed Authority. 

Mr. Speaker, as we identified over the winter that this could 

possibly be a very wet spring, Mr. Speaker, the Watershed 

Authority quickly put in place a program to help municipalities 

and communities and individuals across the province, a $22 

million program, a cost-sharing with municipalities, Mr. 

Speaker. And I want to thank, Mr. Speaker, the Watershed 

Authority for all of their work. In fact over 200 individual farm 

landowners have already applied to the program, 124 

communities, Mr. Speaker, have put their application . . . 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 5 p.m., the Assembly will recess 

until this evening at 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 Apology to the Speaker 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6969 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6969 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6969 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6969 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6969 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6970 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6970 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6970 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6970 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6970 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6970 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6970 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6999 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6970 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6971 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6971 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6971 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 2011 Wall of Fame Inductees 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6971 

 Ambulance Firm Recognized 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6972 

 St. John Ambulance Celebrates Anniversary 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6972 

 Colorectal Cancer Awareness Month 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6972 

 Saskatchewan Curlers Win Silver Medal 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6972 

 Support for Housing Programs 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6973 

 Housing News Release 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6973 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Financial Management of Crown Corporations 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6973 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6973 

 Agreement with Saskatchewan Medical Association 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6975 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6975 

 Support for Emergency Shelters 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6976 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6976 

 Monitoring of Government Website Content 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6977 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6977 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Power Generation Partnership 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6978 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6978 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Private Bills 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6979 

STATEMENTS BY THE SPEAKER 

 Ruling on a Point of Order 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6979 

 Privilege 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6980 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6980 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6981 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6984 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6987 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6990 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6993 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6996 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7000 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


