




















































Hansard: December 06, 2011


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 2A  TUESDAY, DECEMBER 6, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 13 

 December 6, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I take great pride in being able to introduce to you and 

through you and to the rest of the members of the Assembly a 

group of 28 grade 6 and 7 students from St. Angela Merici 

School in the constituency of Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley. They 

are here with their teacher, Mr. Kevin Kuntz. 

 

St. Angela‟s is a wonderful school with great students and staff, 

and I will be meeting with them later on this afternoon. So 

please, everyone welcome these wonderful students from 

Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, seated in your gallery I notice a third-year 

business student of the University of Regina and one of my 

constituents, Nicole Lang, also daughter of Iris Lang who 

serves us so honourably from the Clerk‟s office here. I would 

like to welcome Nicole to her Assembly. She‟s, as I say, a 

third-year business student but also an accomplished curler 

from a provincial perspective, a national perspective, and I 

believe representing Saskatchewan internationally in Turkey 

last year. So I ask all members of this Assembly to join with me 

in welcoming Nicole Lang to her Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to 

all members of this Assembly, in the west gallery is Carlene 

Schmaltz from Carrot River. Carlene is a diabetic nurse and will 

be speaking on behalf of the Canadian Diabetes Association this 

evening in Room 218. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to mention that Carlene‟s 

husband, Cory, is a coach of the famous Carrot River Wildcat 

football team that have won four six-man provincial titles in the 

last 11 years. 

 

I would like all members of this Assembly to please welcome 

Carlene to her Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I‟d like to take this opportunity to introduce a number 

of individuals that are seated in the west gallery, the 

government gallery, Mr. Speaker. They‟re here, many of them 

will be here to probably follow along with an announcement 

we‟ll be making later on this afternoon.  

 

But in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, or in the west gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, are people from the Canadian Diabetes Association: 

Warren Wagner who is the regional director from 

Saskatchewan; Connie Abram, the executive director for 

Western Canada; Brie Hnetka who is the manager of public 

program and services; Ken Orban, community engagement 

coordinator. Leah Domoney is the coordinator of public 

programs and services. Faith Rowland is account manager. 

Lauren Suchan is the coordinator of public programming and 

services. Peter Dickinson, northern regional volunteer 

coordinator; Clint Davies, the southern regional volunteer 

coordinator. Tristan Banyay is the leader of training in 

Saskatoon, and Carlene Schmaltz is the nurse diabetic educator 

for Carrot River, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They‟re here, as I say, to follow along with perhaps an 

announcement that will be coming later on this afternoon 

regarding diabetes. And also I‟d just like to take this 

opportunity while I‟m on my feet to introduce two others: Beth 

Kidd who‟s the senior manager of external relations for 

AstraZeneca, and Bill Gowen who is the manager of patient 

access and strategic partnerships for Sanofi Aventis, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I‟d like all members, all members, of this Assembly to welcome 

these guests to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming the many individuals that he just read 

out, welcome them to the Assembly and thank them so much 

for the important work that they do in our province helping 

individuals and building a healthier Saskatchewan for many 

families and for many individuals. So it‟s good work that they 

do, and I‟m very pleased that they‟re here to join us today. 

 

In particular I‟d like to say a special hello to one individual, and 

that‟s Mr. Tristan Banyay, who is a constituent of Saskatoon 

Massey Place, a recent graduate of Bethlehem High School and 

is enrolled at SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology] in the youth care worker program, 

involved in many volunteer pursuits including the Diabetes 

Association. 

 

So with that special introduction as well as a welcome to 

everyone, I‟d ask all members to join me in once again 

welcoming this group to the Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Seated 

in the west gallery is a constituent of mine and a friend for some 

time. He‟s also president of the Saskatchewan Stock Growers 

and no stranger to this Assembly. Harold Martens is here, and 

I‟d ask all members to welcome Harold to his Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for post-secondary 

education and Immigration. 

 



14 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2011 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of the Assembly, I‟d like to 

introduce Mr. Kyle Addison, past president of the student 

association of the University of Regina. While he was president, 

he worked diligently on behalf of the interests of students and 

continues to do so as he continues to play an informal 

leadership role on that campus. And I‟d ask all members of the 

Assembly to join me in welcoming Mr. Addison to his 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for CIC 

[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan]. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I notice that 

my wife and daughter, Ali McMillan and Gracie, have just 

joined us today. So I would like all members to help me 

welcome them to their legislature. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Responsible and Effective Opposition 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s an honour to rise 

in the Assembly today as the Leader of Her Majesty‟s Loyal 

Opposition. Last month‟s election was a tough one for my 

party. It‟s difficult when promising candidates are not 

successful and when hard-working MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] lose their seats. 

 

On this side of the House, we know that there are many lessons 

for us to learn and that we have much work to do in order to 

renew and rebuild our party. But make no mistake about it: 

Saskatchewan people deserve a responsible and effective 

opposition for the next four years, and that is what we will work 

hard to provide. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan bestow a great responsibility on all 

of us by electing us to this Assembly. Whether we are on the 

government benches or on the opposition benches, the people 

have sent us here to do an important job — to make life better 

for people today and to build a stronger Saskatchewan for 

tomorrow. 

 

I want to sincerely welcome all newly elected members and I 

want to congratulate all those who have been re-elected. There 

is much work to do in order to make life better for people and to 

build a stronger province. We in the official opposition are 

ready to do our part, and we will continue to hold the 

government to account and stand up for what matters to 

Saskatchewan people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 

Plains. 

 

National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence 

Against Women 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, December 

6th is the National Day of Remembrance and Action on 

Violence Against Women in Canada. Established in 1991 by 

the Parliament of Canada, this day marks the anniversary of the 

murders in 1989 of 14 young women at l‟École Polytechnique 

de Montréal. This event was absolutely horrifying to the nation 

due in part to the fact that Canadians pride themselves on being 

a peaceful nation as well as a country that recognizes gender 

equality. 

 

As well as commemorating the 14 young women whose lives 

ended in an act of gender-based violence that shocked our 

nation, December 6th represents an opportunity for Canadians 

to reflect on the phenomenon of violence against women in our 

society. 

 

But first and foremost, Mr. Speaker, our thoughts should be 

with the families and friends of the victims whose sudden and 

shocking death rendered a profound loss for all Canadians. 

Together we can say no to violence and collectively empower 

women with strength and courage to change their lives. On this 

day, I ask that all members of this Assembly join me in taking a 

moment to think about the Canadian women and Canadian 

society that has been affected by violence. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 

is the National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence 

Against Women. The Parliament of Canada designated this day 

in 1991 to commemorate the 14 young women who were 

murdered at l‟École Polytechnique de Montréal in 1989 simply 

because they were women. 

 

December 6th is a day to remember these women and to 

acknowledge all Canadian women for whom violence is a daily 

reality. Violence against women is a serious issue in all 

communities across Canada, but today I want us to take a 

particular note about violence against Aboriginal women. 

 

As of March 21st, 2010 the Native Women‟s Association of 

Canada gathered information on 582 cases of missing or 

murdered Aboriginal women and girls from across the country, 

and they believe there are many more undocumented cases. In 

Saskatchewan there are 61 documented missing and murdered 

women and girls. Seventy-seven per cent of these missing and 

murdered are under the age of 31 — lives cut short often well 

before they‟d even got a chance to start. These women and girls 

are mothers, daughters, sisters, friends, and they are part of our 

communities. We must work together to stop this violence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m asking my colleagues in this Assembly to 

reflect on this issue and all the lives damaged or lost by 

violence and to commit to working together to end violence 

against women and girls in Saskatchewan and all across our 

country. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Canadian HIV/AIDS Awareness Week 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, across 

the country the week of November 24th to December 1st marks 

Canadian HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency virus/acquired 



December 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 15 

immune deficiency syndrome] Awareness Week. It‟s an 

occasion to raise awareness surrounding HIV/AIDS issues 

nationally and on international observance of World AIDS Day. 

 

The focus of AIDS Awareness Week is to increase awareness of 

HIV/AIDS, reduce the discrimination faced by those infected or 

affected by HIV/AIDS, and to promote safer sex practices. 

World AIDS Day is especially important this year as we 

commemorate two milestones: the 30th year of HIV, with the 

first reported case documented in 1981, and the Canadian AIDS 

Society 25th anniversary of responding to the epidemic. AIDS 

Awareness Week is important to the people of Saskatchewan as 

it brings a light to the stigma and discrimination surrounding 

HIV/AIDS issues and the way it causes barriers to effective 

HIV/AIDS prevention and care. 

 

Fear of discrimination may prevent people from seeking 

information, treatment, and support or from acknowledging 

their HIV status. Currently there are approximately 60,000 

Canadians living with HIV/AIDS, and it‟s estimated that 25 per 

cent aren‟t aware of their status. Every day thousands of 

Canadians still face HIV-related stigma and discrimination. 

 

I would like this Assembly to recognize the Canadian AIDS 

Society that encourages all Canadians. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Multiculturalism Week 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. November 20th to 

26th marks Multiculturalism Week in Saskatchewan. 

Multiculturalism Week is a time to celebrate how the riches of 

all cultures in the province contribute to our strength, growth, 

and unique quality of life. 

 

We are so fortunate to enjoy such a diverse cultural population 

throughout our province. Multiculturalism has become a way of 

life for the people of Saskatchewan, whether it is our rich 

history of First Nations or the various cultural backgrounds for 

many people that now call our province in Canada their home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in each of the past four years the Saskatchewan 

immigrant nominee program has increased its nomination 

target, resulting in nomination of over 11,000 newcomers since 

2007. Including family members, our government has invited 

over 30,000 newcomers to Saskatchewan since coming to 

office. 

 

One of the true strengths of our province is multiculturalism 

because it shows that we are a society that cherishes cultural 

diversity and values and inclusion while at the same time 

seeking to preserve fundamental Canadian values. This is vital 

to expressing the type of province and place Saskatchewan is to 

other countries and helps us create strong bonds with nations 

across the world. Mr. Speaker, I am proud to live in the new 

culturally diverse Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Saskatchewan Manufacturing Week  

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d ask this 

Assembly to join me in recognition of the Saskatchewan 

Manufacturing Week which was held just last week. 

 

With many markets around the world in uncertainty and 

governments looking for ways to spark growth, Saskatchewan 

has embraced a week aimed at innovation and developing the 

next generation of businesses. The focus of the week is to 

celebrate Saskatchewan‟s manufacturing expertise, the 

successes our businesses and communities are achieving, and to 

highlight the training and career opportunities that are available 

to Saskatchewan‟s vibrant and innovation manufacturing sector. 

 

Manufacturing is one of the three major wealth-generating 

sectors in our province, as we export about 80 per cent of what 

we manufacture. Mr. Speaker, our economy is very much 

export-based, and the prosperity and growth that we are 

currently experiencing has a lot to do with the companies across 

the entire province that design, build, and market their 

Saskatchewan products all around the world. The ingenuity and 

skill of over 30,000 people and an abundance of resource 

wealth have driven the growth of Saskatchewan‟s 

manufacturing and processing industry with shipments almost 

$11 billion annually. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like this Assembly to join me in 

applauding our manufacturers who are recognized all around 

the world. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 

 

Potash Mine Announcement 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A new era has 

officially arrived in our great province of Saskatchewan. The 

long-awaited announcement of a solution potash mine north of 

Moose Jaw in the Bethune-Findlater area has been announced. 

This is the first new potash mine to be built in the province in 

over 40 years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The K+S supervisory board announced its approval of the 

German company‟s plan to proceed with the Legacy Project 

which will include construction of a $3.25 billion solution 

potash mine. As this will be the first greenfield potash mine to 

open in over four decades, the Legacy Project will implement 

new and innovative environmental standards, technologies, and 

techniques. 

 

The mine, Mr. Speaker, is expected to begin production in 

2015. It is anticipated to require as many as 1,100 construction 

workers by 2013 and will employ more than 300 people at the 

peak of its productivity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there will be approximately 6 million employment 

hours in construction alone. Ground-breaking investments such 

as this, Mr. Speaker, are the direct result of our province‟s 

stable royalty structure. In the words of Moose Jaw Mayor 

Glenn Hagel, this is a good day. It‟s a good day. We on this side 

of the House couldn‟t agree more. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



16 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2011 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

The Government’s Program 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday‟s Throne Speech was 

full of half measures. At a time of record revenues and record 

spending and at the beginning of the government‟s brand new 

mandate, many Saskatchewan people were expecting something 

more, something better, something visionary. When will the 

Premier recognize that there needs to be more than half 

measures and when will he recognize that the province deserves 

a long-term plan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me just say at 

the outset, congratulations to the hon. member on his new 

position as Leader of the Opposition, and congratulations to all 

members for being elected to this Assembly, especially 

members who‟ve been elected here for the first time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re very proud of the Speech from the Throne 

that was presented yesterday in these chambers, principally 

because that Speech from the Throne did lay out a long-term 

vision for the province, as did our platform. But even more 

significantly, I think at least in the immediate term it indicated 

that this government would continue to do the things that it said 

it would do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in our first term in government we worked very 

hard to keep the promises we made to Saskatchewan people. 

This particular Speech from the Throne indicates that that‟s 

exactly what we intend to continue to do. Mr. Speaker, we 

made reasonable and affordable promises to the people of the 

province in the election campaign. It‟s our intention to keep 

them and that‟s the plan the Speech from the Throne laid out. 

 

The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, that doesn‟t disguise the fact that 

there are many gaping holes in this government‟s agenda, and 

the Throne Speech yesterday left many things out. The Throne 

Speech said hardly anything about agriculture, nothing about 

the environment, nothing on energy, nothing on homelessness, 

very little for municipalities, whether they‟re urban or rural. 

And I could go on and on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What does the Premier have to say to all those people who were 

expecting that these important issues would be addressed by the 

government in this Throne Speech? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne 

seeks to build on the record of the government over the last four 

years. Mr. Speaker, that record includes a five-year, quarter 

billion dollar housing program that‟s currently in place, that 

will deliver 4,600 new entry-level units, that‟s built 850 new 

affordable units and currently 1,100 more affordable housing 

units in construction. 

 

It‟s a record that includes greenhouse gas legislation, Mr. 

Speaker — something our government actually implemented 

where the previous New Democratic administration failed to do, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

It includes revenue sharing, historic revenue sharing for the 

municipalities of this province — something they had asked for, 

for well over a decade. And it includes of course a long list of 

other campaign commitments we made and kept in the previous 

four years. 

 

The Throne Speech seeks to build on that record, and is shaped 

by our vision for a province that will lead this country in 

economic growth, that will attract new citizens to 

Saskatchewan, and see continued population growth in the 

province as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we on this side and all of the 

people of Saskatchewan understand that the Sask Party won a 

big mandate in the election. The very makeup of this House, the 

way we‟re sitting here makes it abundantly clear. The 

government has the power to do as it pleases and now 

Saskatchewan people have high expectations of that Premier 

and of that government. Unfortunately, the Throne Speech left 

them wanting. 

 

It lacked in overall vision. It was full of half measures, and 

there were glaring omissions. This, of all throne speeches, 

should have laid out a four-year vision, maybe even a 10- or 

20-year vision for all Saskatchewan people about where we‟re 

going to go, rather than just some statements for a select few. 

So again, what does the Premier have to say to all those people 

who are being left out of this government‟s agenda? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again it‟s the same 

question, and we‟ve just dealt with it. We have also before the 

Assembly not just the Speech from the Throne but a Legislative 

Assembly, this configuration, which indicates that we were 

busy for the last four years dealing with the issues of 

Saskatchewan people, making sure we were working hard on 

those who were not participating in the economic growth as 

much as we would like. That‟s certainly part of the record of the 

government, and a successful one based, I think, not just on the 

results of the election but on the face of the matter, the facts that 

are before us in this Assembly today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we campaigned on a very clear set of ideas for 

Saskatchewan. The Throne Speech laid out, repeated all of 

them. Why? Because we‟re going to do the things we said we 

would do. We‟re a government that keeps its promises. 

 

Early on in the Speech from the Throne, though, it spoke of a 

Saskatchewan that would be 1.1 million people by 2015, a 

Saskatchewan that would eliminate its General Revenue Fund 

debt. If your population is growing and your debt is being 

reduced, it means it‟s in part certainly been fuelled by a vision 

for growth in this province, backed up by a plan for growth that 

now has us leading the country. 

 



December 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 17 

Mr. Speaker, I think people weighed in on the 7th of November 

as to not only the vision but the individual plans of the 

government. We‟re going to work very hard to continue to earn 

what happened on the 7th of November, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Child Care 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday‟s Throne 

Speech included an ad hoc approach to child care and no 

long-term vision or plan. More spaces are a start, but we have a 

long way to go to ensuring all families have the supports they 

need to be the best possible parents and the best possible 

employees or students. 

 

To the minister: will the government commit to working with 

families, service providers, educators, and other stakeholders to 

develop a real and meaningful plan for early learning and care 

rooted in Saskatchewan families‟ values and needs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Child care is 

extremely important for our province, especially now more than 

ever before because our province is growing. So this is an 

important service that we need for our families, and we‟ve been 

quite aggressive in developing child care in our last term. It was 

a promise that we made at the last election and a promise that 

we kept and surpassed quite significantly. We increased child 

care spaces in this province by over 35 per cent in four years. In 

our election, we promised 2,000 more spaces. We will keep that 

promise, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We inherited a dismal mess in child care. It was neglected for 

far too long and in fact, that member‟s past colleague, Pat 

Atkinson, said, “. . . because I agree there has been a significant 

ramping up of child care in our province.” And she was talking 

about this government‟s initiatives, not her own. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, with all due respect to the 

minister, more spaces is not a plan. Many members on that side 

of the house are parents and grandparents and would know 

first-hand how hard it is for families to find high-quality, 

affordable child care that meets their needs. For far too many 

families, that is an impossible task. 

 

To the minister: how can the government possibly believe that 

2,000 additional child care spaces spread out over the next four 

years is possibly enough to support families today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s not only 

a plan but it‟s steps towards a solution. Quite frankly, we need 

to expand spaces around our province. And I know a good 

friend of mine constantly says that the way to judge future 

behaviour is to look at past behaviour. 

 

She is representing a party that when in government had a 

decline in child care spaces over some of the years. They 

absolutely neglected the child care spaces within this province, 

and we inherited a dismal inventory of child care spaces. We‟re 

addressing that as we have spaces available, as we have 

community organizations that can run those spaces. We are 

putting as many as possible within school facilities as school 

divisions are gearing up. Mr. Speaker, we are doing it 

responsibly and aggressively across the entire province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, right now if a family with one 

child makes one penny over $1,640, they are no longer eligible 

for the full child care subsidy. You know what that means, Mr. 

Speaker? It means a single parent working full-time, earning 

barely more than minimum wage, is not eligible for full child 

care subsidies. To the minister: if affordability is in fact a 

priority for this government, will they agree to review and 

overhaul our subsidy system immediately? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, we have put a number of 

supports in as a government across different ministries for 

parents of children. And one thing that‟s very, very significant 

is the number of lower income families that we‟ve taken 

completely off of the provincial tax roll whatsoever. Mr. 

Speaker, in the Ministry of Social Services, we‟ve increased the 

Saskatchewan employment supplement significantly for single 

parents with children, and rental supplements as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are looking at all of these continuously. And 

we‟ll evaluate, but we need to have availability of spaces and 

that is what we‟re working on as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Just to emphasize again, availability of spaces 

is not just the only part of a child care system. Mr. Speaker, 500 

spaces a year is incrementalism, at its best. We‟re very near the 

bottom of the pack in all kinds of measures in Canada for child 

care. We need more than incremental change. 

 

To the minister: when will the government actually take this 

issue seriously and develop a real plan, a plan for supporting 

families? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said before, in 

four years we increased the inventory of child care spaces 

within our province by over 35 per cent. The plan that was, that 

we inherited, quite frankly was we had Saskatchewan with 

8,850 spaces while our neighbouring province of not . . . or very 

similar population had 26,000 spaces. That is how serious that 

the NDP [New Democratic Party] party took child care spaces 

when they were in government. So now to talk about it as if it‟s 

a huge priority and they‟re appalled, then she should talk to her 

past colleagues and find out why there was such a neglect to 

that particular area within our province. 



18 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2011 

We are trying to expand spaces in a responsible manner where 

we can have the workers in place, the space in place, the 

organizations to run the child care spaces. Last promise, we 

surpassed it significantly. We‟re going to continue on an 

aggressive path. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Housing 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Yesterday‟s Throne Speech included several half measures on 

the issues of affordable housing, and one of those measures is to 

extend the notice period for rent increases in some rental units. 

While we obviously don‟t think that goes far enough to protect 

renters, we want to have whatever increased protection we can 

get out of this government in place as soon as possible. To the 

minister: when will we see this legislation brought forward? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 

question. The legislation will be introduced this session so that 

it can be voted on in the spring. If the members opposite choose 

to spend less time on debate, perhaps it could be voted off 

before Christmas. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the answer, and we‟ll talk more about standing 

committees and things like that. But what I want to talk about 

right now is the tenants assistance initiative that the Throne 

Speech raised yesterday, and essentially that talked about 

voluntary rent control. And again we don‟t think such an 

approach is the right answer, but we‟re keen to see any 

improvements because the status quo is clearly not working for 

far too many people. And I‟m curious to know, Mr. Speaker, 

are there any examples of a voluntary tenants assistance 

initiative being successfully implemented anywhere in Canada 

to date that actually benefits renters? Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we commend the 

Saskatchewan Rental Housing Industry Association for their 

initiative in doing this. They are unique in Canada in doing this. 

The purpose of the expanded notice will give renters a greater 

period of time to deal with a transition from one property to 

another or to adjust their finances accordingly. It adds a great 

deal of stability. 

 

I can advise the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, that this 

program that‟s put forward by the rental industry will 

accomplish three things: one, it will give the opportunity for 

tenants and landlords to meet to determine how things are to 

work out, whether the rent increase is fair or reasonable, and 

perhaps persuade either or one of them that the situation should 

be otherwise. 

 

It also gives the opportunity to refer tenants to other landlords 

that may be able to find more affordable accommodation. And 

we understand that that process is under way and is working. 

 

It will also give the opportunity to refer tenants, where 

appropriate, to either the Rentalsman, Social Services, or other 

agencies where they may be able to find housing. 

 

I think we should note, Mr. Speaker, that the average rental 

increase in Saskatchewan right now is 3 per cent and often less. 

And I understand from talking to officials with the Rental 

Housing Industry Association that a number of landlords have 

cancelled rent increases and that some of them in Saskatoon are 

actually looking at modest decreases in rent. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I take 

note of that last answer, especially the part about landlords 

cancelling some rent increases, because my question I raise now 

is about Sask Housing. And we know that many Sask Housing 

tenants have received significant rental increases over the last 

year. And these are supposed to be affordable housing units, 

and in fact many exceed the cost of living that the minister has 

referred. And this is extremely challenging for those on low and 

fixed income. 

 

To the minister: does Sask Housing Corporation already belong 

to the landlords‟ group or can we expect Sask Housing to be 

among the first to sign up for voluntary tenants assistance 

initiative so that its tenants can finally experience a bit of relief? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minster for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, and to the member 

opposite, thank you very much for the question. He noted that 

Sask Housing is committed to safe, affordable housing, and our 

tenants continue to pay rent that‟s based on their income. Some 

tenants are really, are eligible for a rental supplement and some 

of them are eligible for the shelter allowance. And combined 

they add up to about 100 per cent of the average market rent, 

and it‟s 110 per cent for persons with disabilities. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, right now Sask Housing affordable rents are 

set at approximately 10 per cent below the market rents, and 

they‟re adjusted periodically. So if there‟s an issue, Mr. 

Speaker, I assure the members opposite, and everyone, that 

we‟re going to make, we‟re going to ensure that we can provide 

housing to the people of the province that are under Sask 

Housing Corporation as affordable as possible. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I do find it 

odd in that last answer from that minister that now you can 

qualify for rent supplements to live in Sask Housing units. This 

is a new thing that‟s kind of different. And some in the private 

market are very well deserved, but Sask Housing units, a 

supplement to live in there, that‟s kind of unusual. 

 

But I want to say that yesterday‟s Throne Speech said that the 

government would listen to ideas, including those put forward 

by the official opposition, and we appreciate that. As is 

abundantly clear on this side of this House, we are very 



December 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 19 

concerned to make sure renters are protected from high rent 

increases, and we‟d like to see much more done in that regard. 

And we recognize that the half measures put forward by this 

government is better than no measures at all. So until the 

government listens more closely to our ideas, we‟re keen to see 

their proposals get going, as the minister said earlier, and 

because tenants need to see urgent action. 

 

To the minister: will he refer this voluntary measure to a 

standing committee so that the public can be fully consulted and 

sound legislation can be drafted as soon as possible? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, during the election the 

Premier made statements that we thought it was appropriate to 

add some stability. And we felt that by increasing the notice 

period from six months to a year, which seemed to be well 

received during the election, that this would add a significant 

amount of stability to this. We‟ve chosen to do that. We‟d like 

to see the legislation in place as quickly as possible so that 

we‟re able to give that additional measure of security to tenants 

in our province. 

 

It would not be the intention to have public hearings or a 

standing committee on this. This is a commitment that we made 

during the election. It‟s part of the platform of this government 

and, Mr. Speaker, it is our intention to move forward with the 

legislation on that basis. 

 

If the members opposite have comments they wish to make, we 

certainly have indicated that we‟re open and receptive and 

would welcome any input that they choose to have. And, Mr. 

Speaker, no, we‟re not going to go through any public hearings. 

Our intention is to introduce the legislation and have it passed 

and in place so that it may most effectively deal with the 

situation that will give renters the most benefit in our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I‟d like to recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Third Party Surgery Delivery 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s clear to almost 

everyone in the province that there was a very clear conflict of 

interest with the awarding of contracts for the private surgical 

centres in the province. Most people share this view; however, 

the CEO [chief executive officer] of the Regina Qu‟Appelle 

Health Region does not have this view. My question to the 

minister: does he believe that there was a clear conflict of 

interest with handling of the surgical care contracts? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — First of all I‟d like to congratulate the 

member opposite on being named the Health critic. I hope that 

we can cultivate, as I did with the last Health critic, a very busy 

and . . . a very busy relationship, Mr. Speaker, over the next 

number of months, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Regarding the third party delivery, Mr. Speaker, of surgery in 

our province, it has been a true success story, Mr. Speaker, with 

having third party deliverers in the province, no one paying out 

of pocket, no one queue-jumping, but adding to the capacity of 

surgery that we do in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen the surgical wait times drop 

significantly over four years. People waiting 18 months . . . 99 

per cent of all surgeries are done within that 18-month period; 

96 per cent of all surgeries are done within 12 months, Mr. 

Speaker. Our goal is three months: 76 per cent of all surgeries 

are being done within three months in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, a far cry from what we took over, the longest wait-list 

in Canada, from the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do appreciate the 

minister‟s words. They truly do warm my heart when we talk 

about the relationship that we can have going forward. 

 

But I did ask a question in there about the conflict of interest 

around the surgical centres here in Regina. My question, Mr. 

Speaker, to the minister — yes or no — does he believe that 

there was a clear conflict of interest with the awarding of the 

contracts? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I would imagine the 

member opposite is aware that right now the Omni Surgery 

Centre, which was under contract previous to Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Health Region, is in the process of a court case 

regarding the awarding of the new contract to the Surgery 

Centres Inc. from Alberta, Mr. Speaker. And as a result it 

wouldn‟t be appropriate for me to comment on the direct case 

around Omni. 

 

But what I will say, Mr. Speaker, is that we are very pleased 

with the new surgery centre that will be operating in the 

province in the near future. It will continue to reduce the 

wait-lists that we have seen come down significantly over the 

past four years. And, Mr. Speaker, you just have to talk to 

people that have been through one of these surgery centres, 

whether it‟s Omni, whether it was the Saskatoon surgery centre, 

how pleased they were with the service they received from 

those private providers — but more importantly, how quickly 

they were able to get their surgery. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When most thinking 

people in the province can see that there‟s a very clear conflict 

of interest with the awarding of the new contract, it‟s puzzling 

why the minister would not recognize this conflict of interest 

himself. My question to the minister: when was he made aware 

of the conflict of interest, and why did he choose not to act? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m not 

quite sure what the member is alluding to as far as a conflict of 

interest. The Omni Surgery Centre and the Saskatoon surgical 

centre in Saskatoon were awarded the contract for the 



20 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2011 

Saskatoon Health Region and the Regina Qu‟Appelle Health 

Region. An RFP [request for proposal] went out to all 

companies across Canada. An RFP went out and companies 

could bid. The successful bidder was the Surgery Centres Inc. 

out of Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now certainly Omni and Saskatoon aren‟t happy with that, and 

they have avenues to pursue that, Mr. Speaker, if they so 

choose. I don‟t know if that‟s the conflict that he‟s trying to 

allude to, Mr. Speaker, because quite frankly there was no 

conflict. It was an RFP, an open process. If the two centres 

aren‟t happy with it, then they can pursue whatever measures 

they want to pursue. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, instead of choosing to pursue a 

path that would build capacity within the public system, the 

minister chose a path that is fraught with problems. One such 

problem is the $10 million lawsuit that the health region now is 

facing, Mr. Speaker. My question to the minister: with this 

lawsuit now under way, a $10 million amount, where is the 

minister planning to find the $10 million? Is this money being 

set aside now? And if it is being set aside now, how is that 

affecting patient care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I 

mentioned in my previous answer, it wouldn‟t be appropriate 

for me to comment on something that is before the courts, Mr. 

Speaker, and I certainly won‟t be commenting on it. 

 

But what I will comment on, Mr. Speaker, is the people of this 

province never want to go back to the NDP under the longest 

wait-lists in Canada, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they‟ve chosen 

to look forward, Mr. Speaker. They‟ve chosen a government 

that looks at other options, Mr. Speaker, to provide the best 

patient care that we can in this province. If it‟s a third party 

deliverer, no queue-jumping, no paying out of pocket, they are 

quite happy to see that, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if we ever go 

back to the NDP days again, we‟ll face the longest wait-lists in 

Canada — absolutely unacceptable. 

 

The Speaker: — At this time I would like to ask for leave to 

revert back to introduction of guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you. I was remiss in not doing an 

introduction earlier and that is Nicole Lang, seated in the 

Speaker‟s gallery, the daughter of our Clerk at the Table, Iris 

Lang. Nicole is a university student in business at the U of R 

[University of Regina], and she represented Saskatchewan at 

national curling championships as well as representing Canada 

and the University of Regina at the World University Games in 

Turkey last January the 11th. I would ask members to welcome 

her to her Assembly. 

 

[14:15] 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d ask leave to 

introduce a guest. 

 

The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has asked leave 

to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my pleasure today 

to introduce one of our former colleagues, Sandra Morin, who 

is behind the bar. And she‟s here today to help us in the 

question period. And we know that we have many colleagues 

from over the past number of decades who continue to work 

with us as we move forward, in the same way that members 

opposite have many colleagues that are no longer present here. 

But it‟s very nice to have Sandra here, and we ask that all 

members welcome her. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Support for People Living with Diabetes 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s my great pleasure today to stand before my fellow 

members of the Assembly to announce our government is 

following through on our election commitment to provide more 

support to Saskatchewan residents living with diabetes. First I‟d 

like to again recognize Ms. Connie Abram, executive director 

for the Canadian Diabetes Association, responsible for Western 

Canada, and Warren Wagner, Saskatchewan regional director of 

the Canadian Diabetes Association and their team leaders I 

recognized earlier. They are strong advocates and key partners 

for our government to address diabetes-related issues. They are 

here with us today to celebrate the important changes we are 

making to benefit many Saskatchewan residents living with 

diabetes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, diabetes is a concern in this province. Our 

government is introducing two enhancements to help those with 

diabetes better manage their disease. In addition, we are 

providing significant financial assistance to the families 

affected by diabetes. 

 

Effective immediately, two long-acting insulins, Lantus and 

Levemir, will be listed in the Saskatchewan formulary as full 

benefits. This means patients do not need to meet medical 

criteria to receive coverage. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, on January 1st the insulin pump 

program will expand to cover young adults with type 1 diabetes 

up to the age of 25. Saskatchewan is a leading province in 

covering the full cost of an insulin pump and providing 

assistance with the cost of pump supplies as determined by an 

individual‟s level of coverage under the drug plan. This 

coverage expansion means that more residents with type 1 

diabetes will not need to purchase insulin pumps at a significant 

out-of-pocket expense. This is especially important for young 



December 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 21 

people at a time when they are attending post-secondary 

education, starting their careers, or beginning their lives 

independently. Mr. Speaker, these pumps cost up to $6,300 

each, with an additional $250 in monthly pump supplies. In 

total we are investing $2.5 million to help individuals and 

families better manage their condition. 

 

We have worked closely with the Canadian Diabetes 

Association to get their first-hand feedback on the changes we 

are announcing. I want to thank them for their input. Mr. 

Speaker, we believe these two measures will put patients first 

and help enhance the quality of lives for people with diabetes. 

 

Today I am very proud to be a member of our government as 

we continue to keep our promises and move our province 

forward. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to 

begin by thanking the minister for sending across his remarks 

earlier on in the day. And once again, I would like to say a 

special thank you and a welcome to all of the individuals from 

the association. I know they do tremendous work throughout 

the year, over a number of years, and it‟s good to have them 

here today adding to the discussion, as I know later on in the 

day we‟ll be meeting with them for a reception. 

 

Diabetes is a condition that affects many people in our 

province. We all know of individuals in our families or simply 

constituents that we know of who live with diabetes. We know 

that it is a condition that if managed properly the quality of life 

and health for individuals can be greatly increased, as well as, 

Mr. Speaker, we can decrease many of the long-term costs if 

diabetes is managed properly. 

 

So when reading this news today, Mr. Speaker, I can think of 

conversations I have had with people . . . Oh, I guess in 

listening to this news today from the minister, I can think of 

conversations I‟ve had with people and how these changes will 

be a positive, have a positive benefit for many people in the 

province, Mr. Speaker. So that is a good thing whenever we can 

increase benefits for Saskatchewan people and provide a better 

quality of life for them. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, at this opportunity I want to thank the 

association for the work that they have done in bringing 

forward their cause, bringing forward their concerns on a level 

of advocacy but as well as a level of education, Mr. Speaker, to 

allow all people in the province, whether they be elected 

individuals in this Assembly or simply individuals in the 

community, I would like to thank them for the educational 

initiatives that they do to improve the wellness of so many 

people in the province. 

 

So with that, I would conclude my remarks and say I look 

forward to our discussions later on in the day. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

Fighting the Mountain Pine Beetle Infestation in Alberta 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I‟m pleased to notify this Assembly that this government has 

taken an important step in the ongoing battle with a significant 

forest pest, the mountain pine beetle. This is a tiny beetle that 

has had an enormous impact. The mountain pine beetle 

outbreak in British Columbia has killed huge tracts of that 

province‟s lodgepole pine forest. In the last five years, two 

major flights of beetles have crossed the Rocky Mountains, 

spreading the mountain pine beetle to the east, more than 

halfway across Alberta. 

 

Recent research has confirmed what scientists have long 

suspected, that the mountain pine beetle can survive in Jack 

pine. This means that Jack pine forests across northern 

Saskatchewan, indeed right across the country, are at risk unless 

all jurisdictions continue to co-operate to prevent or 

significantly slow the beetle‟s spread further east. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to report that Saskatchewan will be 

contributing $150,000 to the fight against the mountain pine 

beetle in the province of Alberta. This funding will be part of a 

multi-year agreement with the Alberta government that will 

allow us to co-operate even more effectively and provides a 

framework that will enable other jurisdictions to join us to 

address this national issue. 

 

This funding will support control operations in areas of Alberta 

that pose the most risk to Saskatchewan‟s northern forests. Our 

dollars will help Alberta to even more aggressively . . . in their 

removal programs. And we will continue to support research 

and modelling to better target future program efforts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this agreement builds on a long history of 

co-operation between our two provinces on forest, insect, and 

disease issues and will further enhance collaborative 

management for the entire region. Early detection and rapid 

responses are critical to protecting Saskatchewan‟s forests. 

 

Starting in 2008, our government invested $200,000 per year in 

the monitoring and early detection program. For 2011-12 

budget year, this has been increased by $155,000 to enhance 

surveillance, research, and public education in co-operation 

with Alberta. 

 

The focus this year has been on surveying for beetles in the 

Northwest where it is more likely to cross over from Alberta, 

and in the Cypress Hills Provincial Park where the beetle is 

currently present. Our contribution to research, for example 

beetles that are now infecting jack pine trees, has increased and 

is now at $40,000. The Parks ministry is also spending money 

in the neighbourhood of $50,000 this year on removing infected 

trees in Cypress Hills, ones that Environment has identified in 

their survey. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, in the 2011-2012 budget year the Ministry 

of Environment has increased its pest and disease budget by 

$1.5 million to over $2.1 million. Mr. Speaker, the province is 

committed to addressing this significant threat to 

Saskatchewan‟s forest. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 



22 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2011 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

certainly want to thank the minister for his information that he 

forwarded to my office. And I‟m also very pleased to respond 

on behalf of the official opposition. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a very serious matter and there‟s no 

question that aggressive action is needed — very aggressive 

action — as we can see the devastation from the pine beetle in 

BC [British Columbia]. We fear what happens in BC and now 

in Alberta is certainly on its way to Saskatchewan and that this 

government must take a very aggressive position, and action, of 

course, is warranted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a lot of people are asking, many people in 

different sectors, is what exact measures are being taken to stop 

this threat. Mr. Speaker, there‟s no question that more than ever 

the forestry sector needs this kind of protection. The tourism 

industry, the cabin owners and many people that live off 

northern lands and lands throughout Saskatchewan, they need to 

be assured that this matter is being taken care of and that there‟s 

real action to fight the pine beetle problem, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as well it‟s also important to point out to the government, 

and certainly to the minister, that this pine beetle infestation and 

threat is something that should not be used as an excuse to 

clear-cut large areas of forest, nor should it be used to not fight 

forest fires that threaten many of our lands and many of our 

communities. No question in my mind, Mr. Speaker, that this is 

a very serious issue, and I thank the minister for raising it today 

and highlighting this issue throughout all of Saskatchewan. 

 

And that‟s why it‟s important to ask the question to what 

measures are being taken today and certainly in the future as the 

budget is being announced. This opposition, and certainly 

myself as a critic, are looking forward to seeing what more is 

being done to battle this serious threat to many of our lives 

when it involves the land and forestry, Mr. Speaker. And the 

pine beetle issue must be addressed as I mentioned earlier, and 

we‟ll certainly be looking at the budget to see what measures 

the minister and this government is taking to fight back. Thank 

you very much. 

 

ELECTION OF DEPUTY SPEAKER 

 

The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, 

pursuant to Rule 43, it is your duty at this time to elect a 

member to serve as Deputy Speaker and Chair of Committee of 

the Whole. I now ask the Clerk to initiate proceedings. 

 

Clerk: — Members, pursuant to the procedure specified under 

Rules 42(1) and 45(4), the following member has declared his 

intention to stand as a candidate for election to the office of 

Deputy Speaker and Chair of Committee of the Whole, Mr. 

Glen Hart, the Hon. Member for the Legislative Assembly for 

Last Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, it is 

my duty to inform you that you have elected Mr. Glen Hart, the 

Hon. Member of the Legislative Assembly for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood, as your Deputy Speaker and Chair of 

Committee of the Whole. 

 

Why is the member on his feet? 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to take an opportunity to 

reply to being elected Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked leave to respond to the 

election of Deputy Speaker. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to thank all members of the Assembly for placing their trust 

in me. Sometimes when you are elected to a position by 

acclamation, you often wonder does everybody really support 

you or is it a position that people say . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . and so on, but I will take it as that I have widespread 

support from all members. And I will look forward to their 

co-operation when I am called to sit in the Chair, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It‟s important that, as you said yesterday, Mr. Speaker, that the 

person in the Chair deals with the Assembly in a non-partisan 

way that enforces the rules and the traditions of the Assembly 

that the members themselves over the years have put in place. 

And I certainly intend to do that to the best of my ability. Ever 

since I‟ve entered public life I‟ve only ever made one promise: I 

will do my best. And that‟s the promise I make today to deal 

with all members in a fair and non-partisan way. And if I fail in 

that, in doing so, it‟s my failing; it‟s not a failing of the position 

that you have elected me to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also take this opportunity to congratulate 

you on your election to the position. And I certainly agree with 

the comments that you made yesterday, and I have summarized 

them very briefly. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Before I take my seat, Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I didn‟t 

congratulate and thank the member from Moosomin for all the 

good work that he did in the Chair in our last legislature. It is a 

tough position to be the Speaker, hopefully a lot less tough to be 

the Deputy Speaker, and I know the member from Moosomin 

did a great job in that position. And I think we as all the 

members of this new Assembly certainly owe him a vote of 

thanks for the work that he has done in the past. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, before I sit down, I‟d certainly be 

remiss in thanking my colleague, the member from Arm River, 

for the great job that he did as Deputy Speaker of the last 

Assembly. He certainly had the respect of the House. He 

certainly conducted himself in a non-partisan member. And I 

was going to say that there‟s large shoes for me to fill. But on 

reflection, I‟m not intending to go out and buy any western 

boots, Mr. Speaker, because the member from Arm River is 

very fashionable in the western dress. 

 

And so again I would just like to thank him for all the work that 

he has done, and I certainly will be calling upon him for advice 

in the future. So once again, Mr. Speaker, thanks to all the 

members for placing their trust in me. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 



December 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 23 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave of the 

Assembly to make a motion with respect to Deputy Chair of 

committees. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked leave to make a 

motion regarding Deputy Chair of committees. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Appointment of Deputy Chair of Committees 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That Ms. Christine Tell, the hon. member for the 

constituency of Regina Wascana Plains, be appointed to 

preside as Deputy Chair of committees of this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has moved: 

 

That Ms. Christine Tell, member for the constituency of 

Regina Wascana Plains, be appointed to preside as Deputy 

Chair of committees of this Assembly. 

 

Is the motion agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Why is the Government House 

Leader on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — To ask for leave to make a motion 

regarding session timelines. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked 

leave to make a motion regarding House times. Is the leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Government House Leader. 

 

Assembly Adjournment 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That when this Assembly adjourn at the end of the sitting 

day on December the 15th, 2011, it shall stand adjourned 

at a date and time set by Mr. Speaker upon the request of 

the government and that Mr. Speaker shall give each 

member seven clear days notice, if possible, of such date 

and time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved: 

 

That when this Assembly adjourn at the end of the sitting 

day on December 15th, 2011, it shall stand adjourned at a 

date and time set by Mr. Speaker upon the request of the 

government and that Mr. Speaker shall give each member 

seven clear days notice, if possible, of such date and time. 

 

Is the motion agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

thought I was ready to make this speech, but until I got final 

coaching instructions from my two colleagues immediately in 

front of me, I knew I wasn‟t quite ready. 

 

Anyway I don‟t know how many times, Mr. Speaker, over the 

course of my lifetime in Regina that I‟ve climbed the steps of 

this Legislative Building and walked through those two doors at 

the front. I know it‟s a number of times, but there was no time 

more special than on the morning of November the 8th when I 

walked through those doors as a member of the elected 

Assembly. And you know, each day since, each day since that 

day has become more special as I realize the enormity of the 

responsibility and the trust that the people of Douglas Park have 

given me to move forward over the next four years. So thank 

you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me begin by saying I am very excited to be 

here, and I‟m truly honoured to be a Member of the Legislative 

Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan representing the 

constituents of Regina Douglas Park and to have the privilege 

of being asked to move the Speech from the Throne 

commencing the twenty-seventh legislature of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate your election as Speaker of 

this Assembly. I think my first conversation with you was when 

I was trying to accumulate 20 signatures on my nomination 

paper to be nominated as the candidate in Regina Douglas Park. 

I was provided with a list of party members in Douglas Park, 

and I saw a family of four living in one household, and I 

thought I hit the jackpot: one stop, four signatures, and it‟d be 

over. So I bravely made the phone call, and who should answer 

the phone but Mr. Speaker. And I have to say that I didn‟t quite 

get the response that I thought I was going to get. And so I was 

a little taken aback. But you did clarify you didn‟t want to be 

seen favouring one candidate over another, and I thank you for 

that. Mr. Speaker, your tenured service to this Assembly is 

obviously well known and respected. We know that this 

Assembly will be very well served with the highest standards of 

fairness and integrity, knowledge and experience. 

Congratulations. 

 

I want to offer my congratulations to all the members of this 

House on both sides and particularly the new members. We are 

reminded, Mr. Speaker, by the words of Sir Winston Churchill, 

that the worst form of government is democracy except for all 

others. We know, Mr. Speaker, that democracy is about the 



24 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2011 

people and that democracy will therefore be only as strong as 

the people who step forward to participate in this process — 

people such as everyone in this House, people who have 

earnestly and unselfishly put themselves in a position to make a 

difference in the lives of their fellow citizens. Without people 

like all of you present today, we have no democracy. Mr. 

Speaker, I salute everyone. 

 

Multis e gentibus vires, our provincial motto — through many 

peoples, strength — defines this day and our province. Having 

taken my place in this Chamber for the first time, I have to say 

that I am truly humbled by the experience. As a young boy 

growing up in Regina and in Regina Douglas Park, this 

building, these grounds, the lake, the old bike paths, the black 

bridge, the boat club on the island, Wascana pool, the museum 

— all were my playground. We would play in this building. My 

grandson calls it Auntie Mel‟s castle and wonder what went on 

behind the doors of this room or that room. And we were in awe 

of the very important men and women who walked through 

these doors. For me to have now been chosen to serve the 

people of Douglas Park and to sit in this Chamber is truly a 

humbling experience and a time that I will cherish. 

 

I also want to congratulate our Premier, the Deputy Premier, 

and members of this cabinet. Mr. Speaker, when I look around 

this side of the House, I‟m extremely confident with this team 

of women and men from the Saskatchewan Party who have 

been chosen by the people of this province to form government 

for a second term. And I am very proud to be a part of this team 

and of government. 

 

I heard it many times, Mr. Speaker, time and time again while 

on the door: how confident our people are with our leadership, 

with our vision, with our plan to complete the mission. Not 

fancy, not complicated, simple, straightforward, principled, and 

responsible — those values, Mr. Speaker, define our people 

and, I‟m very proud to say, define our leader. 

 

Our vision, Mr. Speaker — a secure and prosperous 

Saskatchewan leading the country in economic and population 

growth while providing a high quality of life for all — has not 

changed and, based on our record from our first term in office, 

for me more reality than vision. The Throne Speech articulates 

our plan to continue to move forward. It is a straightforward, 

fiscally responsible plan to improve the lives of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had a great time campaigning in my old 

neighbourhood, many great visits with faces from the good old 

east end days. And in typical east end fashion, I was reminded 

bluntly, yes, Russ, this is the new Saskatchewan. And yes, 

Russ, we are moving forward. And yes, there is a great attitude 

today, but remember, Russ, remember where you came from 

and respect those who came before you. 

 

These sentiments, Mr. Speaker, are at the core of our value 

system. They are established for us by our parents, our omas 

and opas, our kohkoms and mushoms, our babas and gidos. It‟s 

our job to make sure we are moving forward but to do so in a 

manner that is respectful and done with a sense of service. And 

in that way, Mr. Speaker, we‟ll be sure to honour and respect 

the contributions of all those who have contributed before us. 

It‟s a good time to be from Saskatchewan, and we will move 

forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to thank some of the people who helped 

get me to this point. First I want to thank the people of Regina 

Douglas Park. A famous Alfred, Lord Tennyson quote states, “I 

am a part of all that I have met.” Mr. Speaker, this quote speaks 

volumes for all of us in Saskatchewan. I am very honoured that 

the people of Douglas Park have decided that they would like 

one of their own to represent them. I was born and raised in the 

constituency, attended St. Augustine School, Little Flower 

Church, Campion College high school, the University of Regina 

— all in Regina Douglas Park. 

 

And Regina Douglas Park is absolutely rich with history, 

culture, and characters. Most of you are aware that where we 

are sitting is almost the centre of the constituency. I say almost 

because we all know that culture . . . because we all know that 

the centre, the heart of all our constituencies is the people. 

Indeed Douglas Park is home to our legislature, the Royal 

Saskatchewan Museum, l‟Edifice de la Reine, the sound stage, 

the Saskatchewan Science Centre, SIAST, the First Nations 

University of Canada, the University of Regina, three high 

schools, five elementary schools, Wascana Centre Authority, 

the longest bridge over the shortest span of water, and Liebel 

Field, and more — rich with landmarks and rich with history 

but richer still because of the people. 

 

And of the people, Mr. Speaker, let me elaborate. Douglas Park 

was home to the first wave of eastern European immigrants. 

Romanians, Ukrainians, Polish, and Germans made Douglas 

Park their home. Much of Douglas Park came to be known as 

German town. My grandfather was instrumental in establishing 

the German-Canadian club. My Ukrainian grandfather helped 

build the Ukrainian church in Toronto Street. And so Regina 

was impacted. 

 

In 1957 another wave. I think I was 11 years old. We welcomed 

families fleeing the Hungarian revolution. I was fascinated. 

What was a revolution? Why were these kids so scared? Why 

were they so quiet? Why didn‟t they know how to play baseball 

or football? And I was profoundly impacted. 

 

In 1978 I was teaching school at Davin Elementary School in 

Regina, and we welcomed Vietnamese refugees fleeing a 

war-ravaged Vietnam and an oppressive regime. One day I was 

out for a run and bumped into two of my students on the path 

around our lake in front of the bandshell. They were on their 

bellies, leaning over the retaining walls, scooping from the lake. 

Kien Ba Du and Vin Tran — I remember them well. What are 

you doing, boys, I asked. Fishing, Mr. Marchuk. Fishing for 

what? They didn‟t know the English word but in French came a 

response: l‟écrevisse, Wascana Lake crayfish. Kien Ba Du 

stood up and opened up a plastic bag teeming with Wascana 

Lake crayfish — makes good soup — and I was impacted. 

Today Kien Ba Du is a very successful real estate developer in 

Toronto and has been able to provide a great, great deal for his 

family, and I was impacted because I met him. And today 

Regina and Douglas Park is home to families arriving from the 

Philippines, Iran, Iraq, India, and Pakistan. We will all be better 

because we will meet them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I campaigned in this constituency, it became 

very clear to me how we owe who we are to those we have met. 



December 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 25 

Each little piece that we inherit from those we meet makes us 

stronger for the encounter and, Mr. Speaker, I could not be 

more proud. 

 

Special thanks of course to my wife, Karen, my sister Lois and 

her husband, Brian, who worked tirelessly during the campaign; 

my brother Pat and Sharon, his wife; my sons, Chris and Cam, 

for their support; and of course my girls, Michelle and Mel. To 

my campaign team, a team made up of individuals that came 

out of every nook and cranny to help, a team that believed in 

me, believed in what we were doing, and believed that we could 

do it, that we could win Regina Douglas Park — and do it we 

did. A team that got the job done — it was they who never quit. 

Every night they would show up totally energized and, Mr. 

Speaker, I was impacted. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, here‟s the deal, really simple and really 

straightforward. The deal is we have a vision. We have a plan. 

We have a team and we have a leader who will get the job done. 

These are exciting times for the people of Saskatchewan. That‟s 

the reality. This plan is outlined in the Speech from the Throne, 

this fiscally responsible plan. Our promise, Mr. Speaker, is the 

instrument that will realize that vision and truly seal the deal. 

 

Saskatchewan and of course the people of Regina Douglas Park 

spoke loud and clear on November the 7th. And now, Mr. 

Speaker, we must produce. And produce we will, just like the 

government of the last legislature — 140 promises made, 140 

promises kept. We will keep our promises. This Throne Speech 

articulates exactly how the lives of the people of this province 

will be enhanced. It demonstrates that we listen. It demonstrates 

that we care. And make no mistake, this government cares. 

 

We care about seniors. We are a government committed to 

treating our seniors with dignity and respect. Mr. Speaker, 

Douglas Park has a high demographic of senior citizens. There 

are more than 15 seniors apartment complexes in the 

constituency of Douglas Park. Thirteen of 21 voting stations, 

almost two-thirds, were located in seniors complexes. Mr. 

Speaker, they spoke. They spoke loud and clear and I listened to 

people who contributed so much to this great province and to 

whom we owe such a great deal. We heard what they said. 

 

This plan articulates how we will enhance the lives of our 

seniors. We will build on what we accomplished last term, Mr. 

Speaker. Last term, this government helped low-income seniors 

by more than doubling the maximum benefits available through 

the seniors‟ income plan, a plan that saw no change during the 

previous 16 years. As outlined in this plan, our government will 

take the next step, providing further assistance to seniors by 

increasing benefits by over 40 per cent over the next four years. 

By 2015, seniors‟ income plan benefits will have tripled 

compared to 2007. This plan recognizes that many low-income 

seniors don‟t receive any income beyond the federal and 

provincial benefits. This plan will introduce a new seniors 

personal care home benefit that will subsidize the difference 

between a senior‟s monthly income and the cost of their 

personal care home space. 

 

As well, as well as these initiatives to seniors, consider the 

reduced provincial debt, income tax cuts, more police making 

our communities safer for seniors, more nurses and doctors, 

shorter surgical wait times, increased revenue sharing with 

municipalities helping to keep utility rates as low as possible, 

which directly affects fixed-income seniors. And you see a very 

significant recognition on the part of this government of the 

contributions of our seniors, and we will continue to listen. 

 

We care about education. Again, Mr. Speaker, the Throne 

Speech clearly describes our plan for education: 181 per cent 

increase in K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] school 

infrastructure funds; a third of all Saskatchewan schools 

improved. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I am particularly pleased with two new 

elementary schools in Regina Douglas Park, Douglas Park 

Elementary School and Arcola Community School. I have seen 

the designs for these two buildings, and I have been watching 

them go up. These are wonderful additions to our community, 

to our educational community and to our community in general, 

and will serve to deliver programs in ways that facilitate the 

different learning styles and dynamics of delivering a first-class, 

publicly funded education to every child that enters the 

building. 

 

Infrastructure funding at St. Andrew School for the construction 

of an elevator, making the building fully accessible. All positive 

signs of growth in the confidence that people have in the 

direction we are heading. Again, as I campaigned in my own 

neighbourhood, my old neighbourhood, I saw houses just like 

the one my dad built when he came home from the war on little 

25-foot lots being remodelled or replaced with new — 

rejuvenating a great, fantastic neighbourhood. Young families 

excited about their neighbourhood and of course a new school. 

 

There is more to be considered in terms of this plan‟s 

commitment to education. Add in an active families benefit to 

help parents with their young people‟s extracurricular activities 

— healthy bodies, healthy minds — a graduate retention 

program to keep our graduating students at home, the 

Saskatchewan advantage scholarship for graduating grade 12 

students to help defray the cost of tuition, Saskatchewan 

advantage grant for education savings, making it easier for 

parents to save for their children‟s . . . for the cost of their 

tuition, the Saskatchewan advantage grant for education 

savings, making it easier for parents to save for their education, 

a 30 per cent increase in on-campus child care spaces, making it 

easier for parents to get their post-secondary education, and by 

supporting a philosophy that is critical to closing the gaps in 

student outcomes. 

 

This government has created 115 pre-kindergarten programs. 

Pre-kindergarten programming is vital in assuring that, as much 

as possible, children come to school ready to learn and are at 

relatively the same level of readiness. Further, Mr. Speaker, in 

order to meet the growing demand for skilled tradespeople, over 

35,000 training opportunities exist — $95 million will be 

provided for training opportunities this year, and a budget of 

over $21 million for adult basic education. Mr. Speaker, clearly 

we care. Clearly we care about education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we care about the needs of persons with physical 

and intellectual disabilities, and we care about responding to the 

needs of Saskatchewan‟s most vulnerable. Mr. Speaker, I‟d like 



26 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2011 

to read into Hansard an article that appeared in the November 

28th edition of the Leader-Post, an article written by Ms. Judy 

Hannah, Chair of the Saskatchewan Disability Income Support 

Coalition. And I quote: 

 

The Saskatchewan Disability Income Support Coalition 

(DISC) is pleased that the plight of people with disabilities 

became an issue during the recent provincial election. 

 

DISC and its 38-member organizations have been 

advocating for more support for people with disabilities 

since current income programs only provide a meager $26 

a day for all expenses including food, shelter, and 

medicine. This leaves people with disabilities living in 

poverty in addition to struggling with the barriers imposed 

every day by their disability. 

 

We are pleased that Premier Wall made this issue the 

largest announcement in his party‟s platform. 

 

We look forward to working with the government on 

increasing the number of people eligible for the 

Saskatchewan Assured Income for Disability (SAID) 

program as well as increasing the benefits that it provides. 

SAID operates independently from social assistance and is 

meant to be responsive to the unique needs of people with 

disabilities. 

 

With SAID, people with disabilities do not need to 

reconfirm their disability every year, and they are free 

from the stigma of receiving welfare. 

 

The government will expand coverage to persons with 

disabilities living outside residential care — about 7,000 

people — bringing the total number of people on SAID to 

around 10,000. It also plans to increase benefits by $150 a 

month to individuals in residential care, $350 to single 

persons living outside residential care, and $400 a month 

to couples living outside residential care over the next four 

years. It‟s a good start for assisting those currently 

struggling to make ends meet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of being a teacher, an educator 

for almost 40 years. I interacted with a lot of people, served in 

many capacities, and learned a great deal. We are about serving 

people, and when serving people I learned this: I learned that 

sometimes it is hard to do things right, but that it‟s even harder 

to do the right thing. I firmly believe that this government — 

my government — will be doing the right things for the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview: 

 

That an humble address be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor as follows: 

 

To His Honour the Honourable Gordon L. Barnhart, 

Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty‟s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 

Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 

session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 

gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 

address to us at the beginning of the present session. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 

Douglas Park, seconded by the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview: 

 

That an humble address be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor as follows: 

 

To His Honour the Honourable Gordon L. Barnhart, 

Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty‟s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 

Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 

session assembled, humbly pray that Your Honour for the 

gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 

address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

congratulate you on your new position and also acknowledge 

the years of service that the member from Moosomin had put 

in. We appreciate the work that you have done. I would also 

like to acknowledge that we are in Treaty 4 territory. 

 

Good afternoon, colleagues. I would like to sincerely thank you 

for your warm welcome and congratulate those who have been 

re-elected for another four years and congratulate the new 

MLAs. I am extremely honoured and consider it a privilege to 

serve the good people of Saskatoon Fairview. It is quite 

overwhelming to sit in this Chamber which has such a rich 

history. And I would like to acknowledge Joan Beatty for her 

past public service and being the first Aboriginal female MLA 

in Saskatchewan and paving the way for other First Nation 

females such as myself. 

 

I would also like to thank my dear friends and family, most 

notably my daughter Denaya who, without her I do not think I 

would be in the position I am today. She has made me want to 

be a better person and a role model and has inspired me to go 

places I would never have thought possible. I am still in 

disbelief that I have gotten through an undergraduate degree, 

gotten an M.B.A. [Master of Business Administration], and 

now in a Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] program. I can now add 

elected Saskatchewan Member of the Legislative Assembly for 

Saskatoon Fairview to that list. 

 

It is still quite amazing to me that people from all walks of life 

can be elected members of all levels of government even though 

I was born and raised here. I am like many other people in 

Saskatchewan who have been raised in core areas of the city as 

well as living in rural areas and also on-reserve. I have also 

lived in a residential school for seven years like my mother and 

grandmother did. So I was the third generation to attend these 

schools. I was affected by the social pathologies that affect 

many who have grown up the same way I did, yet I was able to 



December 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 27 

get through them. And once I put my mind to succeeding in 

academics, I did. I knew I wanted a better quality of life, and in 

Saulteaux we call it . . . 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Saulteaux.] 

 

This term means the ability to make a living using what is 

provided for physical, material, and economic survival of the 

people. These teachings relate to self-sufficiency provided the 

individual direction and guidance for achieving self-worth, 

dignity, and independence. Self-worth, dignity, and 

independence are overarching principles that relate to many 

people in our province — seniors, our youth, our First Nations 

and Métis populations, and our new immigrant populations. 

 

The constituency that I serve, Saskatoon Fairview, is made up 

of a diverse population that range from young families to 

seniors and also has a growing population of newcomers to 

Canada. This clearly reflects our government‟s commitment to 

ensuring that not only do we have a diverse population, but we 

have enough people to help grow our economy. 

 

Since coming to office, our government has nominated 11,000 

newcomers to this province. When you include family 

members, we have invited approximately 30,000 newcomers. 

To support the influx of newcomers to our province, this 

government has directly invested over 27 million towards 

settlement and retention initiatives since coming to office, 60 

per cent increase since 2007. 

 

Saskatoon Fairview is in the west end of Saskatoon and is made 

up of hard-working people who want a good quality of life. 

These families have directly benefited from the tax breaks that 

this government has given to low-income earners. I would like 

to remind this House that our government has removed 114,000 

low-income earners from the tax rolls. 

 

Income tax release has benefited everyone in this province 

especially those who no longer pay any provincial income tax. 

While tax breaks are welcome, the character of the people of 

this province is such that no matter what obstacles are put 

before us as a Saskatchewan people, we can have success in our 

lives. Education and training is the surest route out of poverty 

and towards the good life. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in another language.] 

 

My experience are a testament to this. 

 

[15:00] 

 

This government has dedicated 2.8 billion to Saskatchewan‟s 

post-secondary system over the past four years and our 

government has recently announced the Saskatchewan 

advantage scholarship. Beginning in 2012, every new 

Saskatchewan high school graduate will be eligible to receive 

up to 2,000, a maximum of $500 in any single year to be 

applied towards tuition fees at any Saskatchewan 

post-secondary institution or recognized training course. 

 

Our government has also announced the Saskatchewan 

advantage grant for education savings which will match up to 

10 per cent of the annual contribution to a child‟s RESP 

[registered education savings plan] account to a maximum of 

$250 annually. Policies such as these will ensure that families 

and students benefit from the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, the face of Saskatchewan has changed in the 

past four years and we can be proud to say we are from this 

province. 

 

I would like to talk a bit about responsibility and how important 

it is to take responsibility for actions and for others. This is first 

and foremost what we are expected to do as public servants. 

 

Not too long ago, Saskatchewan was considered a have-not 

province and this is the state of the province that I was born into 

and had grown up in. Like many other Saskatchewan exports, I 

had left to pursue other interests, but like many I had returned 

home again. 

 

Jonas Salk has said that good parents give their children roots 

and wings. I am going to use this analogy, but let me explain 

the process as it relates to Saskatchewan. Roots tie us to the 

ground and wings help us fly away. The process is this: a 

nurturing environment must be prepared for roots to grow and 

they give plants stability. You continue to nourish the plant to 

make it stronger. 

 

This can be tied for the economy in Saskatchewan. And 

according to Statistics Canada‟s revised estimates released on 

November 7, 2011, Saskatchewan posted a GDP [gross 

domestic product] of 63.3 billion in 2010 and an increase of 9.6 

per cent from 2009, and it ranked second among the provinces 

in terms of percentage growth. 

 

The Royal Bank of Canada forecasts Saskatchewan‟s real GDP 

will grow by 4.3 per cent in 2011 and 4.1 per cent in 2012, the 

highest rates of economic growth among the provinces for both 

years. RBC expects employment to grow by 1.7 per cent each 

year on average, or about 5,000 jobs in 2011 and 13,000 jobs in 

2012. 

 

Saskatchewan‟s average weekly earnings including overtime 

increased by 6.9 per cent in September 2011 compared to 

September 2010, while the national average is 1.1 per cent. 

Saskatchewan‟s average weekly earnings of $906.22 in 

September ‟11 was the second highest in Canada. I would say 

that the economy is being nurtured for sure. 

 

We in Saskatchewan are very blessed and fortunate to have the 

stability in the economy that we do have. We are blessed to be a 

resource-rich province and to experience the economic and 

population growth. However my prayers are with those who are 

suffering as a result of the global economic turbulence. The 

prolonged financial troubles throughout the global economy 

remind us that we must make responsible decisions to ensure 

the vitality of our provincial economy. 

 

Now let me get back to the wings part of the analogy. The 

biggest export we had in the past was our young people which 

was really unfortunate. I was one of those who left to pursue 

and I had come back. The ones who came back are well trained 

in their fields of employment to help us develop capacity in our 

human capital. 

 



28 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2011 

I come back to the word responsibility. This government is 

responsible to the people of Saskatchewan. This government 

has put measures in place to mitigate the threat of economic 

instability by being fiscally responsible and realistic. I would 

like to reference the Throne Speech, and I quote: 

 

Through a . . . commitment to its Saskatchewan 

Advantage Growth Plan, my government will foster 

population growth and nation-leading economic 

performance. 

 

Key to this plan are continued debt reduction, balanced 

budgets, competitive taxes and promotion of global trade. 

 

My government will also pursue stable natural resource 

royalties designed to encourage further investment. 

 

The vision of this province, as outlined in the Throne Speech, 

charts a course that is both bold and responsible. This vision 

includes a province of 1.1 million people by 2015, a province 

that is steadily eliminating its general revenue debt, a place 

where young people get the best education and opportunities, a 

place where seniors are treated with dignity and respect, and a 

place where people with disabilities get the best care and 

support available. This vision of Saskatchewan is one that we 

can all be proud of, and certainly we are already on that path. 

 

The latest economic indicators certainly demonstrate this 

province is moving forward. For example, our population is 

now at an all-time high at 1,057,884. It has grown by 13,856 

people in the past year, making Saskatchewan the third-fastest 

growing province in Canada. The province‟s population has 

now increased for 21 consecutive quarters, and in the past five 

years Saskatchewan has grown by over 65,000 people — the 

fastest and most sustained period of population growth in 

decades. 

 

More importantly, new employment numbers show that 

524,200 people were employed in November 2011, the 

second-highest level of employment on record for the month of 

November. There were employment increases in construction; 

retail and wholesale trade; finance, insurance and real estate 

services; and public administration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to humbly thank the people of 

Saskatoon Fairview once again for their confidence in my 

ability to serve them and represent them in this House. 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I second the motion to accept the 

Speech from the Throne. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

want to stand today and offer my comments in relation to the 

Throne Speech and certainly the fact that it‟s been a bittersweet 

moment for us on this side of the Assembly, obviously. And 

while it‟s sweet for us in terms of the nine that have returned as 

MLAs, I want to take this moment to congratulate the previous 

speaker as a First Nations woman. And certainly I understand 

that there are also Métis MLAs on the opposite side, and I also 

want to point out that we commend them for their effort and for 

putting their names forward and standing for election and, of 

course, becoming a member of this Assembly. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to very quickly say that the Speech 

from the Throne certainly supports what we have been saying 

all along — that this government really has no vision and no 

plan for the future. 

 

I found the Speech from the Throne very flat. I found the 

Speech from the Throne very visionless and really lacked a lot 

of the substance that people were expecting from this 

government, Mr. Speaker. As you walk into the Assembly with 

49 members strong, you should really have a vision set out. You 

should have a bold statement. You should have a number of 

things that you want to identify very quickly as what you‟d like 

to see done. And, Mr. Speaker, we have not seen any of that 

action or any of that indication at all. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to share with the members out 

there listening to the Speech from the Throne and certainly the 

response for it, that in politics, on election night when I was 

contacted, they spoke to me about some of the importance of 

making sure that we came to the Assembly and that we spoke 

for the people that we wanted to speak for. And that‟s of course 

all the constituents that we have. 

 

When you look at some of the communities that we come from, 

First Nations or Métis communities, there is a large gap in some 

of the things that people have enjoyed in Saskatchewan for 

years; like decent housing, like employment, like training 

opportunities, and the list goes on. The list goes on. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we see nothing from this government for the past four 

years. And over the next four years nothing in the Throne 

Speech to indicate that they‟re going to change their mind on 

any of those things and addressing some of those things, Mr. 

Speaker. And that‟s a crying shame. 

 

And I want to steal a line if I can, because obviously it‟s 

important that I recognize the line was said at one time and I 

kind of converted it a little bit because the original line was 

along the lines of, this isn‟t a good country for any of us unless 

it‟s a good country for all of us. But in reality, I want to convert 

that to the Saskatchewan perspective when I want to tell people 

that this isn‟t a good province for any of us unless it‟s a good 

province for all of us. 

 

And I want to point out that as an Aboriginal member of this 

Assembly, that the proof is in the pudding when you go home 

and you see that First Nations enjoy paved roads like many of 

the other people do. That you see Métis communities have 

decent housing, that they‟re free of mould and free of 

overcrowding, Mr. Speaker. That you don‟t see some of the 

First Nations and Métis people that are travelling to the city pay 

rents that are so high that they had to make a choice between 

rents or food. That you see that young people that are trying to 

start off can‟t afford daycare and rent at the same time, Mr. 

Speaker. And these were some of the issues that the Throne 

Speech didn‟t address. They didn‟t address any of those issues, 

and we know that there are thousands of people suffering under 

those circumstances in this province right now. 

 

So the Speech from the Throne didn‟t address any of those 

issues, Mr. Speaker, and that‟s why it was a flat speech. It was a 

visionless Throne Speech, and it certainly wasn‟t one that was 

inclusive of all people of Saskatchewan. 

 



December 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 29 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what I‟m going to tell the people that 

certainly supported the opposition this past election, and of 

course I want to thank all those back home that did support me: 

my wife and my family, my friends, the great community of 

Buffalo Narrows, Beauval, La Loche, Turnor Lake. These are 

communities that are really very supportive, and I want to thank 

them for their kindness and for their support. 

 

But what I‟ll tell the people that have stood by the NDP all 

these years, Mr. Speaker, as we criticize this Throne Speech 

that our time will come. There‟s no question about it in my 

mind that at this stage of the game, with all the politics, the 

to-and-fro in politics, that obviously the Saskatchewan Party 

won a clear mandate. They won a clear mandate, and as New 

Democrats we have to accept that and understand that. Our job 

is now to point out over the next four years the inequality, the 

challenges, and certainly the problems that they will face. It‟s 

important for opposition to keep government in check on some 

of these fronts, and you‟re going to see evidence of that as the 

days go on in this Assembly. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll tell the people that are out there — our 

members, the people that support the NDP over the years — I 

will tell them that our history is richer. And while the fruits of 

our labour, our early labour as the government is now enjoyed 

by other people, Mr. Speaker, it was something that we had to 

do, Mr. Speaker. We had to do this, Mr. Speaker, for the good 

of Saskatchewan and for the good of all of our people, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So while it is frustrating as New Democrats to sit by and watch 

others enjoy the economy we built or the money that was left in 

their coffers, it is something that we had to do, Mr. Speaker. 

And we graciously accept that responsibility then, and we have 

to accept the consequences of being in opposition now, but the 

benefactors of that, Mr. Speaker, are the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And that‟s why it‟s important to point out to the people out 

there listening, to our members, is to have faith because the 

fight will go on, Mr. Speaker. The fight will go on to recognize 

the values of those people that want to make sure we have 

opportunity for all in this province and not just a chosen few. 

That is what we stand for. That is our mantra. And we will 

never stop that fight, Mr. Speaker. We will never stop that fight. 

 

And I want to point out that over time the richness of our party, 

the history of our party has shown that we are going to continue 

fighting for what is socially right and economically feasible for 

our province, Mr. Speaker. That‟s one of the things that people 

out there have always maintained within our movement. And I 

want to point out that substance is much greater than simple 

style. And the reason why? Because substance will give you a 

long-term plan. Substance will give you a vision that is fair, and 

substance is intelligent, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s why it‟s 

important to point out to the people out there that yes, the NDP 

has substance. And there‟s no question that they‟ve done the 

hard work, and it had great leaders that provided great style, 

Mr. Speaker. And time will go on. Time will go on and you will 

see the changes, the changing landscape, and of course the 

changing people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned at the outset that our vision for a 

fair Saskatchewan, an inclusive Saskatchewan, and a greater 

Saskatchewan involves all aspects of life. Now whether it‟s 

something like a decent home to live in or whether it‟s safe 

roads to travel on or whether it‟s affordable child care or 

whether it‟s a post-secondary learning opportunity, these must 

be afforded to as many people as we can, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we‟re seeing as a result of the Throne Speech and the 

action of this government that there are huge gaps. There are 

huge gaps. And, Mr. Speaker, as time goes on, people on the 

other side of the Assembly will recognize those gaps. And as 

they will soon begin to realize, as they soon will begin to realize 

that they aren‟t addressing those issues, they will begin to 

wonder why. They will begin to wonder why, Mr. Speaker. It‟s 

because it was never the intent of this government to deal with 

those issues. All it has been about is to gain power and to keep 

power. And they‟ll do anything in their path or anything within 

their grasp to do to make sure they maintain that power. And 

people will be used and people will be forgotten, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:15] 

 

There is no question from our perspective that as an opposition 

we‟re going to have an amendment to this Throne Speech. 

We‟re going to talk about those issues that are important to 

people. And yes, Mr. Speaker, we will continue speaking from 

this Assembly. And we will not blink, Mr. Speaker. We‟ll 

continue speaking hard. We‟ll be telling the people of 

Saskatchewan the mistakes that those guys will surely make and 

we‟ll certainly hold them to account. 

 

Now as I mentioned to the members out there during the 

election night, yes, it‟s similar. It‟s much the same, the 

circumstances were much the same when we had a great win in 

1991. I think the NDP at that time had 55 seats or so and the 

Conservative Party were down to about 5 seats. And things 

change, Mr. Speaker, over time. And right now the ebb and 

flow of politics, it‟s their time. They‟re doing well. They‟ve got 

49 members. But there are going to be challenges for them 

because no longer can they count on the money left to them 

behind by the NDP. But now the pressure as a result of some of 

the commitments that they made during the campaign must be 

met as they indicated. And the question we have is, where is the 

money going to come from? Mr. Speaker, where is the money 

going to come from? 

 

So we‟ll be watching them and certainly point at the people that 

while it‟s their time — certainly as a result of the second term 

that they‟ve got — that the people of Saskatchewan will be less 

forgiving. And they‟ll be watching very carefully what this 

government does not only with the resources, but to make sure 

there‟s a fairness in how they approach all the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I will tell the people, the New Democrats 

out there, the people that have supported our party, that there‟s 

no question that the fight will go on in this Assembly. There‟s 

no question that we will ask for your loyalty and your 

resilience. That‟s important for us to know that it is out there, 

that we will govern for all and in our time of our deepest need, 

and the time for the most resilience from our members and the 

movement that we have, is now. And I point out that we need 

the amount of information that they have. We need their 



30 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2011 

volunteerism. We need their support. We need their guidance. 

Now is the time to step forward to make sure that this 

movement continues to build and rebuild, Mr. Speaker, as we 

seek to have a new leader within the New Democratic Party of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I will point out, Mr. Speaker, that as I listened to the 

Throne Speech, it was pretty bland. It was visionless, and there 

was huge gaps. That‟s the general frame of mind that I saw and 

I certainly perceived the Throne Speech from. Nothing there 

about anything as dramatic as people were expecting. There was 

huge expectations. They got the clear mandate to govern and, 

Mr. Speaker, their Throne Speech fell flat. It fell flat. And what 

is going to happen, Mr. Speaker, they‟re only a few bad budgets 

away from being defeated, Mr. Speaker. If they have major 

problems with their budget, as we suspect they are going to 

have in meeting all those demands, then guess what? The ides 

of March will come. Mr. Speaker, the ides of March will come. 

 

And secondly, Mr. Speaker, they are only a few years away 

from the next election, and there‟ll be a few opportunities for 

them to make mistakes. And as we look at the makeup of their 

caucus, you know they‟re going to have to make all the 

expectations of their caucus. They have to be met because some 

people come there with aspirations and dreams and plans. And 

guess what? Those dreams and aspirations and plans will be 

dashed because at the end of the day it‟s about one thing, and 

that‟s retaining power. It‟s not about being fair. It‟s not about 

being representative. It‟s not about being responsible to all 

segments of our province. It‟s all about power, Mr. Speaker, 

and that‟s the unfortunate reality that people within that caucus 

will soon learn and soon realize. 

 

So in my few closing comments I want to tell the people out 

there that are listening today that there are nine of us here in the 

Assembly, nine strong members. But, Mr. Speaker, we have 

many thousands of people that support this movement. We have 

many capable historians within the party that can add to the 

fight within this Assembly, that we know that as nine people we 

are not alone. We‟re inspired by our history, which is rich in 

service of this province and this country as well. We also have a 

history that talks about some of the services provided to many 

parts of the province of Saskatchewan. And I can tell people 

that we have been fair. We have been consistent. We have been 

visionary as a party, and that certainly that history will hold us 

together. And all of this time, what do we need in terms of a 

message to our people is to stay resilient and to stay focused 

and to stay strong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are looking for a fight in this Assembly. We‟re 

going to continue, we‟re going to continue looking for that 

fight, Mr. Speaker, and we‟re going to build. From nine 

members we will build, from nine seats will we build on an 

optimism. And inspiration will guide us, not catcalls from the 

opposition or from the opposite side, Mr. Speaker, and that‟s 

what‟s important. That‟s what‟s important. 

 

Certainly as a newly elected MLA I can tell the assembled 

masses across the way that we‟re looking for a fight. And 

they‟re only a few mistakes away from losing support that 

they‟ve gained under the premise of all these promises that 

they‟ve made. They‟re only a few mistakes away, Mr. Speaker, 

and mark my words, those days will come. Those problems will 

come. The challenges will come. And we in the opposition are 

going to make sure we watch, we wait, we learn, we listen, and 

we see what‟s going to happen to them. And right now 

arrogance seems to be their theme, and that‟s exactly what we 

anticipated would be the case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think it‟s important for people out there to know one thing: 

is that keep that confidence, keep that spirit alive because we 

are coming back. It is our low time at this stage of the political 

world, but we will come back. And there‟s no question when 

we come back we‟ll come back with a vengeance. And that 

vengeance will be a good vision and a proper plan for the 

people of Saskatchewan that‟s inclusive of all people, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So one of the things I want to point out in terms of my final 

comment is that I have an amendment to the original motion. 

And it reads as follows: 

 

That all words after “Assembly” be deleted and the 

following words be substituted: 

 

does not support the Speech from the Throne because of 

its failure to move Saskatchewan forward in becoming a 

fairer, greener, and more inclusive province. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member from Regina 

Elphinstone. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The motion for amendment as 

presented is out of order, based on a ruling of March 2nd, 1962 

by Speaker Wood. Mr. Speaker ruled the said amendment is out 

of order on grounds that it did not add words to the address in 

reply. 

 

It takes a very simple change to accommodate the amendment 

as presented by the opposition. So by striking out “That all 

words after „Assembly‟ be deleted and the following words 

substituted,” striking that out and including in the amendment: 

 

The following words be added after “present session”: 

 

And that this Assembly does not support the Speech from the 

Throne because of its failure to move Saskatchewan forward 

in becoming a fair, greener, and more inclusive province. 

 

Moved by the member for Athabasca. And seconded by the 

member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

I recognize the member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

guess if that‟s what it takes to get a reference to a ruling by then 

Speaker Everett Wood from 1962, the Lloyd government and 

what would have been then the Thatcher opposition leading the 

Liberals, so be it. Anyway I thank members of the House for 

the accommodation and the Speaker for making sure that the 

amendments can go forward as intended. 

 

I guess what I‟d like to say first off, Mr. Speaker, entering into 

this debate, standing on my feet in this Chamber for the first 

time after the election, I‟d like to say thank you very much to 

the people of Regina Elphinstone-Centre for once again 



December 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 31 

expressing their confidence in my ability to take their concerns 

forward to this Assembly. It is often said, but it doesn‟t get any 

less true for saying it, Mr. Speaker, it‟s a humbling thing to go 

out amongst your neighbours, friends, and constituents and to 

ask for their support and to ask for a mandate from them to 

come to the legislature to speak of something of the issues that 

they are concerned about. 

 

So again in the case of this election, Mr. Speaker . . . When I 

was first elected in a by-election in February of 2001, I got a 

little bit over 56 per cent of the vote. It‟s seen some ups since 

then, Mr. Speaker, but this one it‟s back to 57 per cent. So again 

you learn some lessons. You go up, you go down sometimes in 

this business. But I guess, as has been said, the people when 

they make a decision in an election, they‟re always right. And 

I‟m sure the member from Indian Head-Milestone is happy to 

hear me say that. 

 

But that‟s what I‟d said on election night, Mr. Speaker, and I 

say again, obviously for our side, the people have sent the 

Saskatchewan New Democratic Party a fairly strong message. 

They‟ve sent a fairly strong message to the members opposite. 

And I think it‟s obviously falling to us in the opposition to do 

two things: one, we‟ve been entrusted with the job of holding 

this government to account, to being Her Majesty‟s Loyal 

Opposition. And we will strive diligently to hold this 

government to account, to guard against the arrogance that can 

creep in with the kind of numbers involved in this Assembly, to 

guard against the kind of missed decisions or the wrong 

decisions that can be made with the guarding of the public 

purse, and to guard against legislation that is wrong-headed, and 

where possible, Mr. Speaker, to put forward measures to 

improve those actions on the part of this government. 

 

Today of course is the anniversary of the massacre at École 

Polytechnique, and there‟s some excellent statements given 

earlier about that, and today many of us wear the white ribbon, 

Mr. Speaker. And the white ribbon comes out of a campaign 

that was specifically targeted towards men to do what they 

could do about ending violence against women. One of the 

founders of that campaign was Jack Layton, who passed away 

earlier this year, Mr. Speaker. And one of the things that Layton 

was often fond of saying is that it‟s, and for a federal New 

Democrat obviously this is a pretty important thing to keep in 

mind, it‟s not just about opposition, but it‟s about proposition. 

And as we are best able to, Mr. Speaker, we‟ll not just oppose 

this government, we‟ll not just critique, we‟ll not just criticize, 

we‟ll not just aim to hold them to account as we are able. We 

will hopefully bring forward proposition as well to put forward 

that better alternative as we see it. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And as we talk to the people of Saskatchewan about what the 

Saskatchewan New Democratic Party needs to get right, what 

we need to do better, how we need to better connect with the 

hopes and dreams and the issues that Saskatchewan people hold 

dear and how that translates into how they cast their votes at 

election time, that‟s something that we‟ll be keeping firmly in 

mind as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Having said thank you to the people of Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre, I would like to say congratulations to those 

who also sought election in Regina Elphinstone-Centre. Bill 

Stevenson ran for the Sask Party and mounted a very vigorous 

campaign, and I know some of the people in this building that 

worked very hard on that campaign. I congratulate them on a 

vigorous affair. And I also congratulate Ingrid Alesich who ran 

for the Green Party. I congratulate both of them for doing their 

part in the democratic process and for mounting what, for the 

most part, were vigorous, well-fought campaigns. 

 

So, again, Mr. Speaker, as I then turn to the campaign that we 

mounted in Regina Elphinstone-Centre with the NDP, we of 

course don‟t get here by ourselves. And I really want to thank 

the people who worked tirelessly on the campaign. I want to 

thank my family, and I particularly want to thank the folks that 

spent many, many hours doing what they could to work with 

me to ensure that I had this privilege to stand forward in this 

legislature once again. So I‟ve got, as is often said, you have 

debts to pay in this business of public service, and I will not 

forget the people that were so kind to me and so generous with 

their time and effort and supports in this campaign. 

 

I want to say congratulations to you, Mr. Speaker, for assuming 

the role of Speaker in this Chamber, and already here comes 

your brand new Deputy Speaker. Congratulations to the both of 

you. I‟ll try not to drag you into the debate, but you‟ve sought 

these jobs as servants of this legislature, not of one side or the 

other but of the legislature, and it‟s delegated authority from the 

people. So I wish you well in doing those jobs, and of course 

we‟ll be there to provide our advice when we think you‟re 

doing well and, I‟m sure, when we think you‟re not doing as 

quite as well. 

 

But I also want to thank the outgoing Speaker, the member 

from Moosomin. I think he‟s an honest man and obviously not 

just long serving in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, but was an 

excellent servant of the legislature as a whole. Made some very 

difficult decisions that I think probably were obviously tough to 

make, but I think he made them and called them as best he saw 

them in accordance with his conscience and with the 

precedents, and we commend him for that. We commend him 

for being a good servant of the people and a good servant of this 

legislature. So we thank him for his service. 

 

I guess, you know, now . . . I was teasing my colleagues earlier 

that the, you know, finally the enlightened reign of Deputy 

Speaker from Last Mountain-Touchwood has begun, and well I 

won‟t get into it, but . . . Anyway I‟d like to say, I‟d like to say 

thanks as well to the member from Arm River-Watrous for his 

service to the legislature. And obviously you‟ve got some big 

boots to fill there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I‟m sure you‟ll do 

just fine. But thank you as well to the member from Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Obviously we‟re in a very interesting period as the New 

Democratic Party of Saskatchewan. We‟ve seen historically as a 

movement — my colleague from Athabasca talked about this 

— we‟ve seen our ups and we‟ve seen our downs. We‟ve been 

party to some pretty heavy victories in this province, and we‟ve 

also suffered some stunning defeats. And of course one of the 

things that is oft quoted, it was Douglas when he was defeated 

in this town in the federal election of 1963, I believe or ‟62, 

when he first contested as the federal leader of the New 

Democratic Party and of course he‟d gone from being premier 



32 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2011 

of the province of Saskatchewan to running in a federal 

campaign where he lost his seat on the east side of Regina. And, 

you know, from those days he‟s come to emerge in history as 

someone worthy of being voted the greatest Canadian in an 

exercise that was held by the public broadcaster, CBC 

[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation], not a few years ago. But 

on that night of defeat he said, you know, “lay me down and 

bleed a while,” quoting an old Scottish proverb, after Culloden, 

but “lay me down and bleed a while and then rise and fight 

again.” 

 

And his message then was one of determination and to carry on. 

And I guess in that spirit, Mr. Speaker, when I first saw this 

seating arrangement I thought it looks like a bit of a battleship 

over there and it looks like we‟re a bit of a canoe pulled up 

alongside that battleship. But we‟ll be paddling hard and we‟ll 

give it a game effort in terms of the trust that the people have 

put in us to hold this government to account and to do this job 

with nine and to make them a mighty nine to hold that 

government to account. 

 

I want to say as well that I‟ve got some new responsibilities in 

this House and one of those is as House Leader. And I want to 

thank the Clerks for their advice and their tutelage thus far. I‟m 

getting sharpened up on the job. I‟ll be doing that job with the 

member from Nutana who‟ll be the Deputy House Leader for 

the opposition and I very much enjoy working with her and I 

look forward to the contribution that she has to make, not just as 

an MLA in this Assembly, but across the piece. I think she 

brings a lot to the job and we‟ll hear more from her shortly, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I also want to say congratulations to the Government 

House Leader on his appointment, moving up from Deputy 

House Leader into the new Government Deputy House Leader 

as well. We look forward to working with them. And obviously 

this is a place of conflict and oftentimes heated, passionate 

debates but . . . And obviously there‟s a certain mandate or 

prerogative on the part of each of the House business teams on 

each side to look for that advantage to, you know, put forward 

your cause as best you can. But for our side we commit to 

communicating as squarely and as honestly as we can and being 

plain dealers and if we can keep those lines of communication 

open and to keep the process from creeping into these things. 

 

I think always when if the process becomes the debate and not 

the policy or the ideas themselves, that‟s a poor service to the 

people in a democratic process. So we‟ll try to do our part, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, in making sure that we keep those dealings as 

straightforward and as open and productive as possible. 

 

In the campaign, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there were a number of 

issues that were as plain as the doorsteps I stood on and as the 

kitchen tables I sat at. It‟s obvious that there are many people 

that are not benefiting from this boom, and that in fact, as prices 

rise, they find it harder to make a go of things. 

 

I think of a woman who‟s — my colleague from Saskatoon 

Centre was talking about Sask Housing prices earlier — who is 

living in a so-called affordable housing unit in one of the 

apartments in Regina Elphinstone-Centre where the price is 

$600 for rent and was going up. And she had $750 in income, 

and the hardness of her putting that . . . keeping body and soul 

together and in addition in her case, dealing with a pretty 

significant health challenge. 

 

You know, I‟ve never seen so many people actually break down 

and cry as I have on the campaign trail this time, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And it wasn‟t because these are . . . You know, these 

are people that are trying as hard as they can to hold ends 

together, to make ends meet. And they are finding it harder and 

harder to do that. 

 

So if the economy isn‟t working for all of us, then we‟ve got 

work to do, Mr. Speaker. If it‟s not as fair and as inclusive as it 

needs to be, then we‟ve got work to do. And we see that, not 

just with people struggling with poverty, but in different regions 

of the province where there‟s very little mention of them in this 

Throne Speech, where there was very little mention of them and 

their hopes and dreams and their situations on the campaign 

trail. 

 

So again, you know, I was raised in the Baptist church, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And one of the things we learn there is that as 

you treat the least of these, so you treat me. And that of course 

was translated in later days into the principle that a society is 

known by what it does for the poorest among us. And I think as 

a province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we‟ve got a lot of work to do. 

And I think that the plan put forward in this Throne Speech and 

the platform put forward by the members opposite in this 

campaign, with all due respect, doesn‟t do the job. It needs to 

do better. We as a province need to do better. 

 

We need to do better if one of the key indicators that, you 

know, we haven‟t heard from that side, is if it‟s food bank 

utilization rates going up by 20 per cent over one year, ‟09 to 

2010, that‟s a big problem. And that‟s a key indicator to my 

mind in terms of what we‟re not doing right as a society and an 

economy in terms of bringing people in. 

 

If the rent is going up 34 per cent over the past four years in the 

city of Regina, I‟m glad to hear that, you know, as mentioned 

earlier in question period that there are landlords considering 

voluntarily decreasing the rents. But honestly, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that‟s not what we‟ve seen on the ground. That‟s not 

how it‟s played out. 

 

So we‟ve got a lot of work to do as a province, and obviously 

we‟ve got a lot of work to do as an official opposition in 

holding this government to account and pointing the way 

forward to a better state of being for the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

A couple of last things I‟ll say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

congratulations to those who were re-elected and 

congratulations to the new members that were elected. We‟ve 

already heard two excellent speeches, excellent contributions on 

the floor of this House from the member from Regina Douglas 

Park and the member from Saskatoon Fairview. And I guess for 

the other rookie members, both on that side and on this side, 

they‟ve set a pretty high bar in terms of the contribution that 

they‟ve made already to the proceedings in this place. So 

congratulations for that. I‟ll also be looking very closely, or 

listening very closely to see if the member from Regina 

Coronation Park quotes any Jerry Lee Lewis in his first address. 

But perhaps we‟ll wait to see if that plays out or not, Mr. 



December 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 33 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Anyway, the last thing I‟d like to say is this, when this Throne 

Speech . . . when we had the last Speech from the Throne at the 

start of the new government, it‟s always an interesting day of 

pomp and circumstance and the imagery that represents this 

province. And at that time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the 

people that participated in the proceedings in December of 2007 

was the elder, Isador Pelletier. And he passed away late last 

week, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and his wife of 50-plus years, Joan, 

she passed away not long after him. And I guess Isador gave us 

good counsel at the launch of the last Throne Speech, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of do what you can for the people. And it‟s 

not about what you do for yourself, but it‟s what you do for the 

people. And I think Elder Isador is a proud member of Pasqua 

First Nation and is someone who gave literally decades of his 

life in trying to bring people together and to promote 

understanding and to bring forward something of that cultural 

and linguistic renaissance that we need in this province. He will 

be missed, as will Joan. But their legacy is a formidable one, 

and it certainly reaches into this House as well. 

 

But I do think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we‟d do well to heed 

the prayers that were lifted up at that time and to see if we can‟t 

do something better for the people than is being offered here in 

the Throne Speech today. 

 

But in that regard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting the 

amendment and I will be voting against the Throne Speech. 

And I await the other interventions from all members but with 

particular interest for the new members. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

[16:00] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed an 

honour to stand in this Assembly and deliver my first speech as 

the elected member for Regina Northeast. 

 

Let me initially say that I want to join colleagues on both sides 

of the House and congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on your 

election as our Speaker. You, sir, have served your constituents 

of Cannington with honour and dignity for many years, and the 

confidence shown by your legislative colleagues in electing you 

as Speaker is a testament to your experience, knowledge, and 

fairness. I know that you will preside over this Chamber with a 

fair but firm hand. 

 

Let me also offer my congratulations to the hon. member from 

Moosomin who served this Legislative Assembly so admirably 

the last four years. While I wasn‟t here while the hon. member 

was Speaker, I watched as he served the people of this province 

in that chair. 

 

I also want to congratulate all members who have been elected 

to this Legislative Assembly. Whether you are a returning 

member or a new member such as myself, it is a privilege to 

serve the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I rise here today to offer my support for this 

Throne Speech, I am mindful of all those people who were so 

instrumental in helping me get here today. If you‟ll indulge me 

for a minute, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to thank a few of them for 

their incredible generosity, advice, hard work, and support. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, I want to humbly thank the people of 

Regina Northeast. They have entrusted me with their most 

cherished democratic right — their vote. I will forever be 

grateful for that vote, and I will never take anything for granted 

when it comes to the high expectations and standards of the 

people of Regina Northeast have set for us as a government and 

for me as their elected representative. I‟ll say more about the 

people of Regina Northeast in a minute, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Premier for his leadership, his 

example of service with humility, his constant reminders to all 

of us that we are here to serve all of the citizens of 

Saskatchewan, and his unwavering support of each of us, the 

women and men who make up the government caucus. Mr. 

Speaker, I heard a quote recently whereby former Alberta 

Premier Peter Lougheed always reminded his caucus that they, 

meaning his government members, were not in power but that 

they were the trustees of the public trust. And I firmly believe 

that that sentiment is exactly how this Premier leads this 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank all of the members of our caucus 

who assisted me in our campaign in so many different ways. 

They came out and door knocked with me. They provided 

advice and support and attended fundraising events. In 

particular, I want to thank the hon. member for Kindersley, the 

Minister of Energy and Resources, who has been a source of 

wisdom, advice, and support for me as well as a good friend for 

many years. I literally would not be standing here today were it 

not for him. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that every member here claims to 

have had the best campaign team in the province, but I am here 

to put that debate to rest as I truly did have the best campaign 

team in the entire province. And I will be forever grateful to 

them for the incredible effort they put forward to ensure that we 

had a successful campaign. I won‟t get into names, Mr. 

Speaker, as I will surely forget someone, but suffice to say that 

while I joke about having the best campaign team in all of 

Saskatchewan, I was and am truly blessed by having these 

women and men come into my life over the last two years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to pay tribute to my main opponent 

from the NDP in this election, Mr. Dwayne Yasinowski. 

Dwayne worked extremely hard and he is a formidable 

candidate. I have gotten to know Dwayne a little bit better over 

the campaign and since the campaign. He is a husband, a father, 

and a gentleman who is passionate about his party and his 

beliefs. And I want to publicly thank him for a vigorous hard 

fought but clean campaign and wish he and his family well. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank my family and friends. I 

am the second eldest of six children to Mike and Lenora 

Doherty who still reside on the family farm in my hometown of 

Rose Valley, Saskatchewan. And I am extremely fortunate to 

have the love and support of my parents, my brother, four 

sisters, and their families, and a circle of friends who have 

enriched my life beyond what words can describe. I simply 



34 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2011 

want to say thank you to all of them. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, during the course of the last 18 months I 

have had the wonderful and unique opportunity to meet 

thousands of residents of the Regina Northeast constituency 

right on their doorstep. While not everyone supported our party, 

I can honestly say that the citizens of Regina Northeast were 

engaged in this recent election as they shared with me their 

ideas, their concerns, their hopes, their criticisms, and their 

stories. These amazing Saskatchewanians challenged me, 

humbled me, humoured me, questioned me, and many of them 

shared very personal, touching stories. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I met a lady who shared with me her journey 

through life living with MS [multiple sclerosis] and all the 

challenges that go with that, and how proud she was that our 

Premier and this government were prepared to take a leadership 

role in trying to find some solutions, if only symptomatically, 

for this dreaded disease. 

 

I also had the opportunity to visit with a woman who is a foster 

parent and who has parented a total of eight foster children over 

the last number of years. She shared with me how difficult 

being a foster parent is and why our government needs to 

ensure that we pay attention to those issues that don‟t tend to 

register very high on the political agenda. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also had a number of discussions with men and 

women who are unionized workers in a variety of jobs. These 

folks are passionate about their province, and we had very 

respectful conversations about how we need to keep moving the 

province forward. We didn‟t always agree, but these visits were 

some of the most memorable and impactful on me, and I truly 

appreciated their views. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the sentiments that I heard the most, time and 

time again, while door knocking were comments around how 

much people in Regina Northeast just wanted the government to 

keep doing what it was doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it didn‟t matter if I was visiting with people in 

Uplands or Creekside, Glencairn or Glen Elm, Eastview or 

Parkridge. The message was very consistent. Keep looking for 

ways to reduce taxes in a fiscally responsible way. Keep 

investing in our health care system to reduce surgical wait 

times, hiring more nurses and attracting more physicians to our 

province. Keep building and repairing our highways. Keep 

hiring police officers to reduce crime and make our streets safer 

for our kids. Keep helping those most vulnerable, particularly 

our seniors. Keep investing in education by building and 

repairing more schools, offering programs like the graduate 

retention program, and finding ways to make post-secondary 

education more affordable. Keep investing in more child care 

spaces, keep bringing more people to the province, and keep 

bringing our kids home. Keep looking for ways to help out the 

small-business owner so they can expand their operations and 

hire new people. Keep providing an environment that is 

attractive for investment. Keep your word on royalty stability 

because when we in Saskatchewan shake hands on a deal, we 

keep our word. Keep paying down debt, and most importantly, 

Mr. Speaker, keep governing with integrity, humility, and 

grace. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Regina Northeast told me that those 

are their values, and those are the values they were going to 

vote for. And because of the fact those were exactly the values 

of the platform that our party campaigned on, the people of 

Regina Northeast and in fact the people of Saskatchewan, 

virtually in every constituency across this province, in large 

urban centres and in smaller rural communities, spoke loud and 

clear on November 7th and voted for this Premier and this 

Saskatchewan Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the election of November 7th is behind us, and the 

people of this province were presented with two very 

fundamentally different platforms to consider and ultimately to 

vote on. The people chose our platform in overwhelming 

numbers. They said in no uncertain terms that they liked what 

this Premier was offering, and they also said that they trusted 

him to do what he said he would do. That is a rare commodity 

in the political world these days, Mr. Speaker — trust. The 

people that I spoke with for the last 18 months said it over and 

over again, whether they supported our party or not, that they 

believed the Premier when he said something. He and this 

government have a solid track record in actually doing what 

they said they were going to do, and that in turn has resulted in 

a level of trust between this government and the citizens of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in keeping with that theme and that track record of 

making promises and keeping them, this Throne Speech has 

outlined exactly how this government is going to govern in its 

second term. They are ambitious goals, to be sure. But they are 

not done as an end to themselves, but as a means to make 

Saskatchewan the best place in Canada to live, to work, to start 

a business, to get an education, to raise a family, and to build a 

life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are not just words put down on a piece of 

paper that rhetorically sound nice. They are the guiding lights 

for how this Premier and this government will act, the record of 

the government in its first term, the campaign platform that was 

just presented and voted on by the people of Saskatchewan, the 

vision of the Premier and this government for what we would 

like Saskatchewan to be — things like a population of 1.1 

million people by 2015, to become debt free, a province where 

young people have the best educational and career 

opportunities, treating our seniors with dignity and respect, a 

province that leads the nation in quality of life for people with 

disabilities and where we care for those in need, a place where 

communities will be safer, health care will be better, and 

surgical wait times will be shorter. These are the tenets of that 

bond of trust that exists between the citizens of Saskatchewan 

and this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some 11 years ago I was one of those individuals 

who left this province because of work. There wasn‟t a day that 

went by that I didn‟t think of my home province. And when the 

opportunity arose for me to come back, it was a simple 

decision. When I got back here three years ago, almost three 

years ago, this was a different province. You could see it in the 

people, you could sense it in the community, and you could 

literally feel the level of confidence growing among everyone, 

young and old, urban and rural, north and south. 

 

It was a feeling that we finally had a government that believes 



December 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 35 

our best days are yet to come, a government that believes that 

we can compete with anyone on the face of the planet, a 

government that chooses optimism over pessimism, a 

government that‟s not afraid of new entrepreneurs bringing new 

businesses to our province, a government that believes it‟s okay 

to try new things to solve old problems, and a government that 

recognizes that it does not have all the answers, admits when it 

makes a mistake, and a government that keeps its word. That is 

what the people of Saskatchewan voted for on November 7th, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said at the beginning of my remarks, I am 

truly humbled by the trust that the people of Regina Northeast 

placed in me. And as we embark on this new journey in my life 

together, there are some things that I know right now. I will 

make mistakes; there‟s no doubt about that. I will experience 

highs and lows, untold joys and unexpected sorrows. I will 

make many new friends of all political persuasions and meet 

extraordinary people along the way. I will learn new things 

about myself and, more importantly, I will learn life lessons 

from so many others. I will surely disappoint some, but I hope 

that the values instilled in me by the models of behaviour of my 

parents will continue to guide me on this journey and act with 

integrity, a sense of humour, and always ensuring that I do what 

is in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I, along with so many others who helped, worked 

very hard to get here. Now that we are here, there is work to do, 

and I will continue working hard to contribute to that vision of 

making Saskatchewan the best place in Canada. And in order to 

do that, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the amendment, 

and I will be supporting the Speech from the Throne. Thank 

you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s an honour and a 

privilege to enter the Speech from the Throne debate on behalf 

of the people of Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve been thinking about the first time I visited 

this Chamber, and it wasn‟t in 1957 like my colleague from 

Regina Douglas Park. My first time at this building was my 

grade 5 trip in 1993, and I remember walking up to this building 

and thinking it looked like a castle. And after we had our tour, 

we saw all the marble in the building and all the shiny floors 

and the pictures and we all got to go and have lunch at the MLA 

dining room. And before we came up to question period, 

because we were going to be able to watch the Assembly from 

the Speaker‟s gallery, we were told a few things by our teacher. 

And one of the most important was, be respectful, pay attention, 

and above all else, be quiet. So you can imagine my surprise, 

Mr. Speaker, once question period got under way. Here is a 

group of grown- ups doing the exact opposite of what we‟ve 

been told not to do. They were shouting, talking over top of one 

another, and they never raised their hands once. We were 

amazed. In a word, it was awesome. 

 

[16:15] 

 

When I got home that night, when I got back to the farm at 

Rush Lake, I proudly ran into the house and said, mom, dad, 

I‟m going to be a politician. They looked a little surprised, 

because who wants their 10-year-old to be a politician? And 

they said, well why would you want to be a politician? And 

without missing a beat I said, who wouldn‟t want a job where 

you could talk whenever you wanted to? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I felt that exact same childlike sense of wonder the 

first time I walked up the stairs of the legislature as an MLA 

after the people of Walsh Acres gave me the honour to 

represent them on November the 7th. 

 

Over the last few years, I‟ve had the opportunity to work in this 

building, firstly in the government process and cabinet 

planning, and over the last two years I‟ve been working in the 

caucus office as the director of research. And I‟ve had the 

opportunity to work with the men and women who I‟m now 

proud to call colleagues. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it‟s nice to look 

around and see a few familiar faces from that first class trip in 

1993. You are one of those faces and so is the member from 

Moosomin and the member from Kindersley, and I‟m proud to 

call them colleagues as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to congratulate you on your election as 

Speaker of the legislature. I‟ve had the opportunity to get to 

know you over the last few years, and I‟m sure you‟re going to 

do an excellent job. 

 

Before I get too far into the response to the Throne Speech, 

there are a lot of people that I need to thank for having the 

opportunity to rise in this historic Chamber and give this 

response today. 

 

First and foremost, I must thank my wife, Larissa. She‟s the 

most amazing woman I know. And she‟s been with me every 

step of the way from when we decided to run and get the 

nomination, straight through till the results came in on election 

night. She actually may have been the only person in 

Saskatchewan more nervous than myself. 

 

Next I need to thank the good people of Walsh Acres for giving 

me the opportunity to represent them. I‟m humbled by the 

support that they‟ve given not only me but this government. I 

feel very privileged and honoured that they entrusted me to be 

their voice in the legislature. 

 

The next people I need to thank are my campaign team. Mr. 

Speaker, I may be a little biased, and me and my seatmate may 

have words over this, but I believe I had the best group of 

volunteers in the whole province. And without this wonderful 

group of men and women, there‟s no way that I‟d be here today. 

And I know it‟s not enough and it sure won‟t be, but to each 

and every one of them I just want to say thank you. They put in 

many hours. They worked hard, tireless hours from signing 

letters to writing notes to licking envelopes to going out door 

knocking with me. And I also want to thank my caucus 

colleagues who made the time to come and door knock with 

me. It is greatly appreciated, and your help meant the world to 

us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before we get into the Throne Speech, I‟d like to 

take a few minutes to . . . [inaudible] . . . where we‟ve been to 

where we are today, and then go on to where we‟re going to go 

into the future. 



36 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2011 

Mr. Speaker, today in Saskatchewan more people than ever are 

calling our province home. Our population is at an all-time high 

of 1,057,844. And I firmly do believe that we‟ve grown by 

13,856 people in the past year. And I do believe people vote 

with their feet and people are seeing Saskatchewan as a place to 

come and have economic opportunities, and that is seen in our 

population growth. And I think that does say a lot for our 

province in this time of economic uncertainty all over the 

world. 

 

Today in Saskatchewan our economy is leading the nation, and 

it‟s predicted to lead the nation again next year. 

 

And this is something that we‟ve learned recently, is that 

Saskatchewan‟s average weekly earnings, including overtime, 

increased by 6.9 per cent in September compared to September 

2010. The national average increased by 1.1 per cent. 

Saskatchewan‟s weekly earnings are $906.22, which is the 

second highest in Canada. And that‟s something where . . . I 

remember years ago that Saskatchewan always used to be 

seventh, eighth in weekly earnings, and that‟s something that 

we have changed. And I believe because we are second now — 

we are ahead of Ontario — it‟s another reason why people are 

seeing Saskatchewan as a place to come to and have some 

opportunities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today in Saskatchewan, surgical wait-lists are 

getting shorter, and our government made the commitment, by 

2014, to ensure that no one waits longer than three months for 

surgery. Today in Saskatchewan, people with disabilities have 

the SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability] 

program which allows them to have an income support 

program. And today in Saskatchewan, one-third of our schools 

have been repaired or renovated, and there are more than 3,400 

new child care spaces. 

 

Something that has been important to us and me — I‟ve been a 

recent graduate from the University of Regina — and you see 

this all over the province, is that our post-secondary education 

system has seen record investments. Student loan limits have 

been increased, and new student housing is being built. 

 

Today in Saskatchewan, taxes are lower. Income taxes, 

education property taxes, and small-business taxes have all been 

reduced in our first term as government. 

 

And last but not least — because this is one of the things that 

we‟ve heard on the doorstep the most over our campaign — 

was today in Saskatchewan, debt has been reduced by 44 per 

cent and the budget is balanced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to get back to post-secondary education for a 

moment, we made a campaign commitment that we were going 

to try and make post-secondary education more affordable. And 

beginning in 2012, we‟re going to provide up to $2,000 over 

four years to new high school graduates to reduce the cost of 

post-secondary tuition in Saskatchewan. Now that‟s $500 a year 

that‟s going to go towards people being able to afford 

education. And it‟s something where I know, going to 

university, is that having an extra $500 throughout the year does 

mean a lot to us, and it allows people to perhaps not eat Kraft 

Dinner every day, which is something where me and my 

roommates did a lot of. 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, to make post-secondary education more 

affordable, we‟re going to match up to 10 per cent of the annual 

contribution to a child‟s RESP account to a maximum of $250 

annually. This is in addition to basic Canada education savings 

grants. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are parents here that are saving for children‟s 

education and this makes it a little more, a little more money in 

the bank account for parents that are looking to ensure that their 

children have a better future right here in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is one more thing that I‟d like to talk about 

post-secondary education and that‟s the graduate retention 

program we put in place in our first term. And this is one of the 

reasons why I did get involved in public service, is that when I 

graduated . . . Well first of all my sister, my sisters and brother 

graduated. They all left this province because they didn‟t see 

economic opportunities and they didn‟t think that Saskatchewan 

was the place where they wanted to start their lives. 

 

And that stuck with me throughout my whole life actually 

because I remember being on the farm and loading up the trucks 

where my brothers and sisters . . . and they left all over North 

America, and I wondered, what‟s going to happen when I 

graduate? And in 2000 when I graduated high school, I couldn‟t 

believe that half of my graduating class all left. And my friends 

all went to Alberta and they all went to Medicine Hat and they 

went to Calgary, and I couldn‟t understand why people didn‟t 

want to stay in our province. And then I realized they just didn‟t 

see the opportunities there and they couldn‟t make a go of it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, our graduate retention program has attracted 

young people back to this province in droves. And I have to say 

that my brother‟s back in Lloydminster. He‟s on the 

Saskatchewan side so he is back in Saskatchewan. And I‟d like 

to say that a lot of my friends are coming home too. And that 

means a lot because I think it‟s great to have families, to bring 

families back together and that‟s something that the graduate 

retention program has done. And then we‟ve expanded it to 

have graduates come from all over Canada and we‟re going to 

have more young people in our province which is a great thing 

to see. 

 

Mr. Speaker, next, on the doorsteps in Regina Walsh Acres I 

talked to many seniors and they had questions and concerns, 

and I was proud to see that part of our campaign did deal with 

some of the questions seniors did have. And over our first term 

we dealt with the senior income plan and that‟s something that 

people found was very useful to them. And it‟s good to see that 

we‟ve made commitment to increase the senior income plan 

some more and increase the maximum senior income plan 

benefit to $80 per month or almost $1,000 a year annually. Next 

we‟ve . . . The Saskatchewan senior income plan provides 

benefits to low-income seniors including a monthly income 

supplement and access to extended health benefits. 

 

Our next commitment during the campaign was provide the 

senior in personal care home benefit, a $3,000 annual benefit to 

low-income seniors residing in personal care homes beginning 

next year. Mr. Speaker, seniors helped build this province. They 

were the pioneers and we believe that giving them the best 

quality of life after their retirement is something that‟s very 

important to this government, and I‟m proud to say that we‟ve 



December 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 37 

been moving forward on these issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another challenge that comes with growth is 

affordability. And being a younger person in our caucus, I know 

that some challenges that young people face is the first home 

that they‟re going to buy for them and their family. And during 

the campaign we made this commitment and we reiterate during 

the Throne Speech of the first-time homebuyers tax credit. And 

we‟re introducing a new $10,000 tax credit for the first-time 

homeowners, saving them $1,100. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve gone through this recently with finding a 

new home and every little bit does help. And I believe that 

getting the young people into homes faster also frees up some 

rental properties, and that‟s a situation that is another challenge 

of growth. And I believe that this first-time homebuyers tax 

credit is going to do just that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in our first term, the Saskatchewan Party 

government reduced the small-business tax rate by more than 

4.5 per cent to 2 per cent. This is the third-lowest 

small-business tax rate in Canada. And I believe this is one of 

the reasons why our economy has continued to move forward. I 

do have friends and I‟ve referenced my brother before, but his 

wife started up a clothing company in Lloydminster. And I 

believe this has something to do with creating an environment 

where young people believe that they can make a go of it in 

business, and I think that is the job of the government to make 

sure that people do have some chances and opportunities. And I 

see these opportunities within the province to take a chance and 

start up a business and become successful entrepreneurs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know it‟s getting on, but I would like to talk 

about our government‟s investment; our government‟s 

four-year highway investment of over $2.2 billion is the largest 

in the province‟s history. We‟ve fixed over 6000 kilometres of 

Saskatchewan highways that has been improved over the past 

four years. And you can see these results right here in Regina. 

You can see it by the completion that we announced of the 

Lewvan interchange a couple of weeks ago, and also the Pinkie 

interchange that has been started. And there is some 

construction right in Walsh Acres on 9th Avenue North that‟s 

going to be twinned. And that‟s something where people, on the 

doorstep people have said, you know, traffic is getting a little 

more congested in Regina Walsh Acres. And I said, well we‟re 

going to see if we can get something done about that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s been some historic investments to build 

and repair Saskatchewan schools over the last four years. Since 

2007, over one-third of all Saskatchewan schools have 

benefited from repairs, renovations, or new school buildings. 

Thirty-eight major school capital projects are completed or 

under way. Five hundred and eighty smaller school capital 

projects have been undertaken across Saskatchewan, and our 

government have created more licensed child care spaces in 

four years than the NDP government did over 16. 

 

Since 2007, under the Saskatchewan Party government, the 

number of licensed child care spaces has increased by 35 per 

cent. Mr. Speaker, on-campus child care spaces have increased 

by 30 per cent and 115 pre-kindergarten programs have been 

created since 2007, an increase of nearly 75 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the . . . [inaudible] . . . the Saskatchewan 

Party the most is our commitment to tax reduction. An average 

Saskatchewan family of four, after our first term in government, 

will pay no taxes on the first 45,500 of earned income. And 

that‟s the highest tax rate income threshold in Canada. A 

single-income earner will pay no income tax on the first 

$17,580 he or she earns. Over the past four years, a family of 

four that makes $50,000 annually has paid 8,000 less in taxes 

than they would have under the former government‟s regime. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I think that‟s something important because at 

the heart of what we believe — I believe personally — is that 

people know what best to do with their own money. And the 

more money we can put into people‟s pockets, I think is the 

better thing for all residents of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will also lower taxes for persons with 

disabilities and caregivers. The supplement for disabled 

children has more than doubled from $4,095 to $8,563. The 

disability tax rate has increased from $7,021 to $8,563. Mr. 

Speaker, this goes with our vision from the Throne Speech, and 

our vision that simply says Saskatchewan will be the best place 

in Canada to live, to work, to start a business, to get an 

education and to raise a family and to build a life. Mr. Speaker, 

this includes people with disabilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is one project that has happened over the last 

four years that‟s close to my heart. It is something I worked 

very closely with with the former member from Melfort, and 

that‟s the STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] program 

that we‟re bringing to Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan Party government has dedicated $5 million this 

year to purchase two Shock Trauma Air Society medical 

helicopters, and these . . . I‟ve been able to visit the bases in 

Grande Prairie and I‟ve visited the bases in Calgary. Mr. 

Speaker, these people are committed to saving lives and I . . . 

It‟s something where you go into their bases and you go and 

you meet the people and you meet the pilots and you meet the 

emergency crews and they are so committed and they‟re so 

happy to get to work. And it‟s something where it‟s an amazing 

organization that Dr. Powell and Linda have created. And it‟s 

something where, being from rural Saskatchewan, I realize 

when accidents happen, you‟re sometimes further away from 

help than you‟d like. And when you see those helicopters in the 

air, you‟re going to know that you‟re getting first class 

emergency services as soon as they hit the ground. 

 

And I know that they‟re going to work closely with the 

emergency services that are in place already and it‟s going to be 

a great part, a great system, and they‟re going to save a lot of 

lives in this province. And that‟s something that the former 

member from Melfort is very proud of and it‟s something where 

I was very honoured to be a part of that, part of that system 

moving forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne lays out our 

government‟s vision over the next four years — balanced 

budget, reduced debt, maintaining a competitive tax structure 

and using our prosperity to make life more affordable in our 

province and taking the actions to ensure that Saskatchewan 

residents enjoy the highest quality of life in Canada. 



38 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2011 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, these, the above reasons, will be why 

I‟d be supporting the motion put forward by the member from 

Regina Douglas Park. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to recognize a member but I 

can‟t name the entire caucus so . . . Yes, pick one at random. 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand before this 

Chamber for the first time as a newly elected MLA and I‟d like 

to begin by thanking the constituents of Coronation Park for the 

privilege of this honour. And I‟m humbled, proud, and grateful 

for the opportunity to respond to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Throughout the campaign and in the last few weeks, I wondered 

how to possibly pay back the generosity of my friends, family, 

volunteers, donors, well-wishers and constituents. They told me 

I owe them nothing; just do a good job, help this province, 

serve the people, make us proud. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to say thank you. In 

particular, I‟d like to recognize the work of my campaign 

manager, Rob Nicolay, my election day Chair, Lisa Danyluk; 

office manager, Amanda for their integrity, humour, strategic 

and organizational excellence. 

 

I‟d also like to thank my campaign team, made up of stellar 

community members and for which their tireless service never 

stopped. And I‟ll take a liberty here, and I‟m sure my 

colleagues will start to heckle, but here goes the list: I‟d like to 

thank Kim and Dick, Karl, Lynn, Liz, Barb, Scott, Bill, Dustin, 

Naomi, Dwayne, Colin, Karen, Megan, Wendy, Sara, Tami, 

Kevin, Keith, Liz, Lisa, Rebecca, Terry, David, Jolene, and 

Nicole, plus the numerous others who lent their support. 

 

Thanks to my campaign team. You know what you did. A 

group of people who are incredible, experts and diverse in their 

own fields, who are the epitome of diverse, not divisive; open, 

not closed; vigilant, not complacent; thorough, not careless. In 

the words of Teddy Roosevelt, “Far and away the best prize life 

has to offer is the chance to work hard at work worth doing.” 

 

Why did I run? It‟s because I can contribute to this province. I 

also know I trust the leader of our government. He‟s earned my 

respect and the respect of voters in my constituency and across 

the province. How did he earn this respect? By keeping his 

promises. He‟s a leader that inspires me to do my best. His 

leadership and the government‟s message resonated and 

inspired the people of this province. 

 

I went into this wondering, what do I really know about 

campaigning? Well listening is a big part of it. I listened and 

learned from the people of Coronation Park. I heard them. The 

needs of this constituency are diverse and complex. I don‟t 

think any of us here believe we have all the answers, but I have 

spent my life listening to the needs of those who didn‟t enjoy 

the same advantages as I had, and I have dedicated my career to 

finding answers of those in need. That‟s what I do best, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the word hope is a concept that touches us all. The 

constituents of Coronation Park hope their children‟s future will 

be better than their own. They told me they want opportunity, 

the same opportunity that comes with growth. They want this 

province to be a great place. 

 

I think back to when I was in Bulgaria having the angioplasty, 

or the liberation procedure as it‟s more commonly referred to. 

And that was a reminder to me about how important hope really 

is. When the Premier led this country and announced clinical 

trials for MS while I was in Bulgaria, all the other patients 

around me from all over the planet and Canada said, your 

province is awesome; I wish I had your Premier. I came back to 

this province from that adventure with renewed hope in myself 

and my province. 

 

Change is not easy, and community development, housing 

affordability, purposeful employment are major issues. We have 

a solid commitment to addressing housing issues through the 

Saskatchewan advantage housing plan and the target of 4,600 

new entry-level housing units. 

 

I intend to spend the next four years honouring the strong work 

ethic and sense of community in Coronation Park and use it as 

inspiration to find solutions to the challenges faced by those in 

Coronation Park and the province. Roadblocks exist that may 

slow our progress to making Saskatchewan better, but they will 

not stop us. We as a government want to look back after four 

years with the knowledge that the province is better than it is 

today. 

 

My mother, family, friends, Street Culture Kidz, and I have 

always been of the belief that I can make a difference. And I‟m 

grateful and honoured to have the opportunity to represent the 

citizens of Coronation Park. 

 

I believe in community and the power of working together. 

How did we win? We worked hard, plain and simple. We 

knocked on doors. We phoned. We listened to the people. We 

heard opinions on both sides of many debates. I was told people 

want opportunity for their families. They want things to be 

better for them. They want to find a good job in a thriving and 

safe community. These are needs that can be met, and it is a 

privilege to assist in providing this service. 

 

The new Saskatchewan of today is better than the one of 

yesterday. I agree with the Premier that there is still work to be 

done. I will do my best to deliver to this Assembly the needs of 

the people of Coronation Park, to improve the lives, and 

continue to encourage growth within the many communities 

that make up the constituency. 

 

Leading up to being sworn in to the legislature, I‟ve been in the 

news. Over the last few years I‟ve been an advocate as the 

poster boy for MS. MS is what I have, but it‟s not who I am. 

However, having MS has taught me a number of things about 

myself. It‟s taught me the importance of never giving up and to 

let others in similar circumstances know that there is hope. As a 

person with a disability, I was especially pleased to see the 

attention paid to disabilities in the Throne Speech and in the 

actions the government has taken to date. 

 

My father came to this country and settled in Regina where he 

met my mother. My father was one of the founders of the 

Saskatchewan crippled children and adults, the precursor to the 



December 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 39 

Wascana Rehab Centre. Both my mom and dad worked 

together with polio patients. So although I did not intend to take 

on this challenge, I have been prepared for it through the 

example my parents set for me as a child. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see hope for people with disabilities in the 

Throne Speech. The vision statement of “It should be a place 

where one can find the best services, the best supports, the most 

dignity and the most opportunities” is the road map, specifically 

the expansion of Saskatchewan assured income for disability 

program, providing benefits to up to 7,000 additional 

individuals living outside of the residential care system. 

Maintaining independence and self-sufficiency is so important. 

 

It‟s a privilege to serve and ultimately to perform public 

service. This is what I believe that is actually a purpose. I see 

that purpose. It‟s a shame to work without purpose. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has a vision for the province, and 

they are admirable goals and aspirations. For all citizens in this 

province to be full citizens, to reach their full potential, they can 

only reach their full potential through opportunity. Our 

ministries and Crowns are responding to how best to educate 

and train a workforce to meet the needs of our growing 

economy and ensure that everyone can participate in that goal. 

 

The citizens of this province expect us to work with purpose 

and to work together in this Chamber for the greater good of all. 

Nobody wants us to go back to being a have-not province. We 

have come too far to fall back. Our constituents have entrusted 

this Assembly with a great honour, a great responsibility, and a 

great purpose. We have an educational, employment, and 

immigration system that gives all of us the tools and the 

purpose to ensure that Saskatchewan is and continues to be a 

have province. We are a place that the rest of the country and 

the rest of the world now picks as their destination of choice. 

 

The Premier has reminded us, reminded us that our seat is on 

loan. It was purchased with the blood of our soldiers. My father 

served in World War II in the Royal Medical Corps. He always 

said, find a job that you will be passionate about. My parents 

would say, we want your life to be better than ours. And my life 

has been pretty darned good. They would say, listen to people. 

Say what you mean. Mean what you say. Treat people with 

respect. Stand up for yourself. Stand up to oppressors and 

bullies. Leave every situation better than before. The person 

you are talking to presently is the most important person in the 

world for that moment. The task you are presently doing is the 

most important task in the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is that special place where decisions are made 

for the people, for the betterment of the province and the 

citizenry. We have the opportunity to be better, to do better. We 

have to. That has to be the goal: to always do better, to be 

balanced, to leave a great legacy. In four years, this province 

and the people need to be better off than they are today. We 

need to find answers to the difficult circumstances people find 

themselves in. We need to serve without expecting something 

back, just give in the truest sense of giving, not based on 

whether or not they can further your goals and what they can do 

for you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, labels such prostitute, gang member, homeless, 

welfare bum, crazy, delinquent, lazy, addict are damaging. Yet 

all have a story: most tragic, some inspiring. Nobody says, I 

want to be a street person. Nobody meets with their guidance 

counsellor and says, I want to be a crack addict. 

 

What can we do? Sometimes the smallest gestures make a 

difference. Engage in conversation with a street person. Say hi. 

Look them in the eye. I believe we can humanize homelessness, 

addiction, and other social issues and work to improve the lives 

of the province‟s most vulnerable. 

 

The reaffirming of this government‟s commitment to the 

Saskatchewan children and youth agenda in the Throne Speech 

is applauded, as well as continued support of promising 

initiatives like the Prince Albert community mobilization 

partnership. We need to continue to engage people in need and 

improve the health of our provincial community. The issues are 

complex, but those who are marginalized, disenfranchised, have 

important lessons to teach the province as it works to improve 

the lives of those in need in ways that can take advantage of 

new opportunities. 

 

I‟ve spent many years working successfully with youth at the 

far edges of our society, and the lessons I‟ve learned is that the 

most marginalized can be reached. The most disenfranchised 

can find inclusion. We have individuals and families with 

complex multi-sector needs, and they require a cross-ministry 

approach as articulated through the Sask children and youth 

agenda. This is an initiative that shows great promise, and the 

only way to advance these issues is through collaboration. 

 

[16:45] 

 

When I ran for city council years ago, street kids were my 

campaign team and, Mr. Speaker, in some of this past election 

as well. I told them it was important to vote, to be involved. 

Their response was, why don‟t you run? So they challenged me. 

And I did; I accepted their challenge. 

 

The Premier‟s leading but so are we. We are leaders as well. 

Our constituencies are depending on that. If you think you are 

leading, turn around and look behind you. See if anybody‟s 

there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as any parent can attest when dealing with their 

children, fair is not always equal. This election campaign was 

flooded with the concept of fairness. The concept of fairness 

does not mean that everybody gets exactly the same thing or is 

treated exactly the same way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will be judged by how many families left the 

welfare rolls, how many children are no longer hungry, how 

many quality jobs are created, how many seniors spent their 

retirement with dignity. Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech 

contains the road map toward something great, a destination 

where a have province enjoys continued development, 

immigration, and growth. But our legacy can go further. Its 

reach can also include improving the lives of the province‟s 

most vulnerable. To accomplish that, we need growth, and 

growth is not a dirty word. Opportunity, entrepreneurship, these 

are not dirty words. Some people worked long and hard, took 

the risk, and repeated the rewards. 

 



40 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2011 

And I‟ll quote Teddy Roosevelt again: 

 

It is not the critic who counts; not the man who points out 

how the strong man stumbles or where the doer of deeds 

could have done better. The credit belongs to the man who 

is actually in the arena, whose face is marred by dust and 

sweat and blood, who strives valiantly, who errs . . . 

because there is no effort without error or shortcoming, 

[but who strives to do the deeds], who knows the great 

enthusiasms, the great devotions, who spends himself for a 

worthy cause; who, at the best, knows, in the end, the 

triumph of high achievement, and who, at the worst, if he 

fails, at least he fails while . . . [doing] greatly, so that his 

place shall never be with those cold and timid souls who 

know neither victory nor defeat. 

 

Take the opportunities, do the work, make the personal changes 

necessary for your families to thrive. Go to school, train, be a 

role model, mentor. Coronation Park can be great. This 

province will be great. Look around at the newcomers to this 

province and how proud they are to be here and work, vote, 

contribute. I look around the Chamber and at the wealth of 

knowledge and experience. I think about the history of this 

Chamber and it‟s very, very humbling. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support the motion to move the Throne Speech. 

The hopes and dreams of our province are embedded within it. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure, 

Mr. Speaker, to enter the debate on the Throne Speech. I would 

like to start off, Mr. Speaker, by saying congratulations to Mr. 

Speaker for the role that you now take in the Assembly. I know 

you have a long history in this Assembly over a number of 

terms and have fulfilled a number of different roles here in the 

Assembly. I‟m sure this is a special time in your own career and 

I look forward to working with you as members of the 

opposition, and congratulate you once again on this 

achievement. 

 

I would also like to say congratulations to the Deputy Speaker, 

the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood, who I‟m sure 

will do a fine job as a I‟ve had the opportunity to work with him 

through committee and a few different interactions here in the 

House. I know he‟s well suited to the job and I wish him all the 

best as he fulfills the duty as Deputy Speaker. 

 

I would also like to say, having congratulated the Speakers in 

this Assembly, I would like to extend congratulations to all 

members, whether they are re-elected or elected for the very 

first time. Probably the very first time it‟s a bit more special. I 

suppose it‟s always special, but maybe a bit more memorable 

for the first time and to deliver the first speech in the Assembly, 

and it‟s a privilege to represent any corner of this province. And 

I do want to extend my congratulations to all members who 

have found their place to this Assembly following the election 

on November 7th. 

 

I also want to say a thank you, Mr. Speaker, and make a few 

remarks about all the individuals who let their names stand in 

the election but were not successful. In my own constituency, 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party candidate, Ali Muzaffar, and the 

Green Party candidate, Diane West, I‟d like to thank these 

individuals for allowing their names to stand in the democratic 

process for a clean campaign. And our democratic system 

requires individuals to let their names stand, to put their neck on 

the line so to speak, to put their reputation in the public domain, 

the public realm, and to have the people of a particular area 

make a judgment based on a number of factors. 

 

And so I do want to thank all of the individuals throughout the 

province who were willing to take that leap, recognizing that it 

is a sacrifice for their families, for their own individual career at 

times. And it can be an experience of ups and downs, as any of 

us in this room can attest to. 

 

The democratic process, Mr. Speaker, that I just spoke of 

requires people and it requires candidates. But the elections that 

occur in the province and throughout our country require a 

whole lot more people than simply the candidates. And this is 

something that I know every elected member here knows 

first-hand because while we may all work hard in a campaign 

and we may do our absolute best in the years prior to an 

election, without the dedicated support of all the people on the 

ground in our local area when we do seek election, our success 

. . . our efforts and all of our energy would not make the 

difference because it clearly is about having people and the 

team. 

 

I do want to say thank you very much to some of the people that 

were involved in my campaign, or I should say the campaign 

for Saskatoon Massey Place. Whether it was people that helped 

in the office, whether it was people that helped on election day, 

whether it was people that put up signs, whether it was people 

who donated some of their own financial resources to make it 

happen, Mr. Speaker, I very much am appreciative to all of 

these folks. 

 

I want to say a special thank you to my family, both immediate 

and extended, for their support throughout the process. As I said 

before, seeking election is something that is a family 

commitment much of the time. I know there‟s all sorts of 

different models for how elected officials conduct themselves 

but also involve their families in the process. But I have to say, 

I‟m very thankful and appreciative for the role that my family 

plays, whether that‟s my wife and our young daughter, Ingrid 

— she wasn‟t too hands-on in the campaign — but it was still a 

nice treat to be able to come home to her and thank my wife for 

allowing me to be gone so much over the summer and the fall 

period and really on an ongoing basis as well. 

 

I also want to thank my parents who are a tremendous support 

in so many ways. And I really do love them and appreciate 

everything that they have done for me over the years and the 

interest they‟ve shown in me and in my family. I appreciate that 

so very much. 

 

I also want to thank my campaign manager, Linsay Martens, for 

his role in the election period and outside of that as well for the 

commitment and the help that he showed in Saskatoon Massey 

Place for allowing success in that area for myself and for our 

party in Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 



December 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 41 

I‟m sure, Mr. Speaker, I‟m leaving many important people out. 

And I hesitate to get into naming specific people because I hate 

to omit or leave out anyone, but for all the individuals that have 

played in a significant role, given a word of advice along the 

way, provided some feedback, helped out in whatever way they 

were capable of and able to do, a heartfelt thanks to them from 

me and my family. I really do appreciate it a great deal, and I 

will do my best to live up to the expectations and the work and 

the energy that you placed into the campaign. 

 

The constituency of Saskatoon Massey Place, Mr. Speaker, is a 

very diverse constituency. I know that‟s probably a claim that 

many MLA‟s would make about their local area, but when you 

look at the makeup of Saskatoon Massey Place, I think it is one 

of the more diverse constituencies in terms of the types of 

neighbourhoods and the types of people that are present in the 

constituency. 

 

I know there are many constituencies that might lay claim to 

that suggestion that I just made. But, Mr. Speaker, when I think 

of many of my older neighbourhoods, starting on the eastern 

end of the constituency like Caswell and Mayfair and 

Westmount and going across into neighbourhoods of the 1960s 

like Hudson Bay Park and Mount Royal and Westview, going 

into the heart of Saskatoon Massey Place, Saskatoon Massey 

Place itself, and then some of the newer neighbourhoods like 

Dundonald and the brand new neighbourhood of Hampton 

Village, Mr. Speaker, which is included in the constituency of 

Saskatoon Massey Place, I think of how diverse the 

constituency is, whether it‟s a retiree living in Hudson Bay Park 

who built their own home with their hands or whether it‟s a 

young family in Hampton Village or whether it‟s a long-time 

resident in Mayfair. 

 

All of these individuals, Mr. Speaker, have different concerns, 

have different priorities, but they‟re united in their concern for a 

better Saskatchewan, for a stronger Saskatchewan, and a 

Saskatchewan where together we‟re able to achieve more and 

their individual families are able to live up to their own dreams 

and desires, Mr. Speaker. I know that‟s what all members of 

this Assembly share. We may have different views and 

suggestions of how we get to that goal, but is something that 

motivates, I think, all MLAs that find themselves in the 

Assembly here. 

 

When I think, Mr. Speaker, of those neighbourhoods, I think of 

the interactions and the discussions that I had with many 

people. I know every candidate who spends a good amount of 

time door knocking, whether that‟s in an election summer or 

whether that‟s throughout the year, we think of the interactions 

that we have with people because they guide our decisions. 

They guide our viewpoints on things. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think of the family that I visited with in Mayfair. 

And this is a working family; both partners have jobs but I 

would term them as working poor, Mr. Speaker. They pay an 

incredible amount in rent in their area. They struggle barely to 

get by. They have kids. They have a number of children and 

rely on a strong public school system in order to provide the 

best education for their children. But I think about how hard 

this family is struggling. And I think of a conversation where 

the father was brought to tears over the struggles that their 

family has faced in simply making ends meet and for his desire 

to provide the absolute best for his children, but despite 

working as much as he can, simply not being able to get ahead 

because of a number of barriers and concerns, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think of during the election talking with some young students 

who were particularly concerned about the environment, Mr. 

Speaker. I remember the conversations I had with them about 

their desire that we as a province look forward a number of 

years, how we as a province consider how we can expand our 

reliance and our use of renewable energy sources, Mr. Speaker. 

I think of these two young people when we examine the Throne 

Speech and examine the content that is there. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, to another conversation I had with a single 

mother who lives in the Massey Place neighbourhood in an 

apartment block, and how this woman was enrolled in school, 

had a young child and was scheduled to go back and do a 

practicum for her studies but, Mr. Speaker, did not have any 

suitable child care lined up despite starting her practicum in just 

a few days, did not know what she was going to do with her 

young child. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, of many of those seniors in 

neighbourhoods like Hudson Bay Park and Mount Royal who 

are living at home and want to live in their home because that‟s 

where they‟re happiest. But I think of a number of instances of 

conversations I had with individuals where one partner in the 

relationship has Alzheimer‟s or dementia and the burden and 

the stress placed on the other partner as they become the spouse 

but also the caregiver for that partner. And I think, Mr. Speaker, 

of conversations I had with these people on how a few supports 

in their home could make life so much better for them, reduce 

costs for the health care system and really provide a happier 

existence for both members in these marriages lasting many, 

many decades. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, also of the issue of HIV/AIDS, which 

affects many people in my constituency. I think of one CBO 

[community-based organization] that is active in my 

constituency, Mr. Speaker, and many constituents who visit the 

CBO for services. I think of the stress and the hardship that 

many of these individuals face as they encounter a challenge 

that many of us couldn‟t begin to imagine with how we would 

deal with it, that compounded, Mr. Speaker, by many other 

barriers and challenges that they may be experiencing in their 

life. So when I look at the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, I see 

what attention is paid to this issue and what sort of solutions, 

what sort of emphasis the government is placing on this issue 

for my constituents living in that area. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, also of Hampton Village, as I said, one of 

the newer neighbourhoods in Saskatoon where there are many 

families. And I think of the many, many conversations I had in 

Hampton Village around the need for a new elementary school 

in the community. I think about all the conversations that spin 

off of that discussion about traffic safety for their children as 

they‟re bused about, the sense of cohesiveness of a community 

and the need for a school in the community. So when I examine 

the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, this is yet again another factor 

that I consider. 

 

I think also, Mr. Speaker, about the issue of job training. We 

know, Mr. Speaker, that in the province right now there are 



42 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2011 

over 25,000 people who are unemployed and looking for work. 

And, Mr. Speaker, when I look in the Throne Speech, I look for 

evidence and examples of where there are successful job 

training programs, Mr. Speaker, and a desire to address many of 

the issues that are there. So, Mr. Speaker, when I look at this 

issue . . . 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after 5 o‟clock, this House is 

recessed to 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Ross .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 13 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................... 13 

  Bradshaw ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 13 

  McMorris ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 13 

  Broten .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 13 

  Wall .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 13 

  Norris ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 14 

  McMillan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 14 

  The Speaker ................................................................................................................................................................................. 20 

  Nilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 20 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Responsible and Effective Opposition 

  Nilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 14 

 National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women 

  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 14 

  Chartier ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 14 

 Canadian HIV/AIDS Awareness Week 

  Wilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 14 

 Multiculturalism Week 

  Wyant ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 15 

 Saskatchewan Manufacturing Week 

  Michelson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 15 

 Potash Mine Announcement 

  Stewart ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 15 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 The Government’s Program 

  Nilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 16 

  Wall .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 16 

 Child Care 

  Chartier ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 17 

  Harpauer ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 17 

 Housing 

  Forbes .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 18 

  Morgan ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 18 

  Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 18 

 Third Party Surgery Delivery 

  Broten .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 19 

  McMorris ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 19 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Support for People Living with Diabetes 

  McMorris ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 20 

  Broten .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 21 

 Fighting the Mountain Pine Beetle Infestation in Alberta 

  Duncan ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 21 

  Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 22 

ELECTION OF DEPUTY SPEAKER 

  The Speaker ................................................................................................................................................................................. 22 

  Clerk ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 22 

  Hart .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 22 

MOTIONS 

 Appointment of Deputy Chair of Committees 

  Wall .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 23 

 Assembly Adjournment 

  Harrison ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 23 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Marchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 23 

  Campeau ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 26 

  Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 28 

  The Speaker (ruling on amendment) ........................................................................................................................................ 30 



 

  McCall ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 30 

  Doherty ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 33 

  Steinley ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 35 

  Docherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 38 

  Broten .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 40 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


