




















































Hansard: March 15, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 31A  TUESDAY, MARCH 15, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6689 

 March 15, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce Mr. Hermann Sitz. 

Mr. Sitz is the consul general of Germany, based in Vancouver. 

And he is with us today along with the honorary consul here in 

Saskatchewan, Ms. Barbara Hoggard-Lulay. This is Mr. Sitz’s 

first official visit to Saskatchewan and it has provided the 

government an opportunity to discuss the relationship of 

Saskatchewan with Germany, to explore future opportunities 

and to see what potential exists between improving our good 

relationship that exists between Saskatchewan and Germany. 

And I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming the 

consul general of Germany to this Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to join with 

the Deputy Premier in welcoming here today the consul general 

from Vancouver, the Federal Republic of Germany’s Hermann 

Sitz who is with us here today. We had the pleasure of saying 

hello earlier. And Mr. Sitz is joined by Saskatchewan’s 

honorary consul to Germany, Ms. Barbara Hoggard-Lulay, and 

we are truly honoured to have both of them here today, Mr. 

Sitz’s first visit to Saskatchewan. And I know it won’t be his 

last, as the Deputy Premier has said. 

 

Of course Mr. Sitz has completed his foreign services training 

in 1980 and has had a wonderful experience, I think, in six or 

seven different countries around the world. And while, as I say, 

this is the first visit, he has promised to be coming back many, 

many times, and maybe even working with us and the 

Saskatchewan Liquor Board to get more German wines on the 

shelves in our Liquor Board stores. 

 

And on behalf of the official opposition, I just wanted to join 

with the Deputy Premier in welcoming our special guests here 

today, and also to say how proud we are of the relationship 

between the Federal Republic of Germany and Canada, and of 

course the province of Saskatchewan. And it’s my 

understanding that Saskatchewan has the largest proportion of 

German ethnic people of any province in Canada, and we’re 

very proud of that. So thank you for being here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Humboldt, the 

Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to you 

and through you, I’d like to introduce approximately 100 grade 

5 to 9 students from Monseigneur de Laval School and their 

teachers, as well as a group of 30 students from St. Pius X 

School and their teachers. As well we have a number of 

representatives from L’Assemblée communautaire fransaskoise, 

and these guests join us today as part of the celebration of les 

Rendez-vous de la Francophonie 2011. 

 

I ask all members to join me in welcoming this awesome group 

to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Merci, Monsieur le président. Au nom 

l’opposition officiele, je voudrais également souhaiter la 

chaleureuse bienvenue à tous les membres de la communauté 

francophone qui sont présents à l’assemblée aujourd’hui. 

 

Les Fransaskois et les francophones a travers le pays 

rassemblent ce mois pour les Rendez-vous de la Francophonie. 

Le thème cette année des Rendez-vous de la Francophonie est 

«Interagir pour s’enricher» qui souligne que la communication 

et l’ouverture de l’esprit sont les bases d’une société 

multiculturelle. 

 

Nous sommes très fièrs de tous vos efforts formidables pour 

faire avancer la communauté francophone en Saskatchewan et a 

travers le pays. Votre communatué est un véritable exemple de 

la devise de notre province, Multis e gentibus vires, qui signifie 

«Nos origines multiples, notre force.» Merci, Monsieur le 

président. 

 

[Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the official 

opposition, I would also like to extend a warm welcome to all 

the members of the francophone community who are present in 

the Assembly today. 

 

The Fransaskois and francophones across the country are 

coming together this month for les Rendez-vous de la 

Francophonie. This year’s theme for les Rendez-vous de la 

Francophonie is Interaction Leads to Understanding, which 

underlines that communication and a spirit of openness are the 

foundations of a multicultural society. 

 

We are very proud of all your remarkable efforts to advance the 

francophone community in Saskatchewan and across the 

country. Your community is a genuine example of our 

province’s motto, Multis e gentibus vires, “from many peoples, 

strength.” Thank you, Mr. Speaker.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the members, I’d like to 

introduce a constituent of mine, Bruce Penner, who is up in 

your gallery. Give us a wave, Bruce. Bruce and his family farm 

in the Saltcoats area and actually was a neighbour of mine for 

many, many years. So we all welcome him to his legislature, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — [The hon. member spoke for a time in German.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 



6690 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2011 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

introduce to you and to all members of the legislature, 23 grade 

5 and 6 who are sitting in the east gallery. They come from St. 

Pius X Elementary School. They’re accompanied by their 

teacher, Elizabeth Stevenson, and parents, Sarah Cooke, 

Blanche Bellerive, and Scott Degelman. I ask all members to 

welcome them here to the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d 

like to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

House, a group of people who’ve come to the legislature today 

to raise their concerns about the state of housing in 

Saskatchewan. Now some are sitting in the east gallery and 

some are in the Speaker’s gallery. 

 

But the group first I would like to introduce are the social work 

students from the University of Regina who’ve taken on this 

issue and really have found deep meaning in their work and 

their studies about this issue about housing, and have done a 

great job by facilitating this today. 

 

I’d like to introduce Serena Cataldo. She is the president of the 

U of R [University of Regina] social workers association. 

Serena. Alyssa Kaczmar, Andrea Goud, Irene Russon, Christina 

Cornwell, Holly Warkentin, Lisa Chapman, and Paul Thunberg. 

And they’ve called their project All Peoples’ Housing. It was 

just great to see them out today. 

 

Several groups actually came out in support of their work this 

morning. Terri Sleeva, on the floor of the legislature, is no 

stranger to many of us. She’s a very strong activist with the 

Queen City tenants association. Shirley Dixon is up in the 

gallery here from CUPW [Canadian Union of Postal Workers]. 

 

Here today as well, a couple of faculty members from the 

University of Regina, Dr. Marc Spooner and Dr. Garson 

Hunter. And Dr. Spooner, of course, is entering the political 

world as candidate for Regina Wascana. We have Chad Blenkin 

from Yorkton, and as well Dan Lindsay and Stella and Donna 

— many people who’ve come out today to show their support 

for this important issue. I ask all members to show a warm 

welcome to these folks to their legislature. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone, the Minister of Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much for the 

opportunity. To you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, we’d like to join the member opposite in welcoming 

all of the individuals and groups that he’s just referenced, most 

especially the faculty members and students from the 

University of Regina. We know how vital students are and 

faculty members are within the province of Saskatchewan, and 

we appreciate their ideas and their energy, especially as it 

pertains to social justice issues. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members 

to help us welcome these individuals to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to join my colleague in welcoming the consul general of 

Germany to what we typically refer to, in the Aboriginal 

culture, as a Treaty 4 territory. And I also want to welcome our 

guests from the French community as well. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in my own language of Cree I want to say: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

And I just mentioned in my Cree language that I’m pleased he’s 

here today as well as our French guests, and to say that there’s a 

lot of room in Saskatchewan. And I’ll tell all my people there’ll 

be a special visit to our territory, Treaty 4 territory. And 

certainly welcome you and your guests as well. Thank you very 

much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, seated in your gallery, I’m honoured to introduce 

Ms. Donna From who has served the fine constituents of Regina 

Rosemont for the past three years as constituency assistant, and 

continues to do so. Also joining Ms. Donna From today is Mr. 

David Wood, who serves our constituents in a casual capacity, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what I’d like to say about these two individuals and our 

entire office staff is that they serve our constituents with care 

and compassion and efficient advocacy. And they’re here today 

to observe the proceedings. Some of the discussion may be 

around affordability here today and around rent, cost of 

housing. And certainly they know first-hand the challenge of 

displacement of so many young families and seniors across our 

constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s my pleasure . . . I ask all members to join with me in 

welcoming these two very important members to their 

Assembly here today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, seated in the east 

gallery, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome Mr. Chad Blenkin and 

his wife, Ms. Mary-Anne Blenkin, and their son, four-year-old 

Miguel. And if you can give us a wave there, Miguel. They’re 

also joined by Chad’s mother here today, Ms. Laverna Blenkin. 

And for those of you that may not know Chad, Chad is the 

candidate for the New Democrats in Yorkton. He and his family 

certainly commit their time to work within the community from 

a social perspective, also from a perspective of business 

leadership, and certainly involve themselves in their church, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

They’ve joined us here today. They joined us to represent 

Yorkton as it relates to the rally that went on here today, as it 

relates to the cost of housing — certainly a pressure felt by 

many families, as Chad relates, in Yorkton, Mr. Speaker. So it’s 

my pleasure to welcome Chad and his family. I ask all members 

of this Assembly to join with me in welcoming them to their 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And while still on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured to also 

welcome, seated in your gallery, an individual that I’ve only 

met once but certainly left an impression on me, who’s already 



March 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6691 

been introduced here today. And I had the pleasure of being at 

the historic sunset ceremony in my constituency of Regina 

Rosemont at the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] 

depot this summer, and had the pleasure of meeting Mr. Bruce 

Penner, who was there with his wife, Mr. Speaker, who’s a fine 

agricultural producer in our province. I enjoyed our exchange 

here that day. It’s a pleasure to see him in this Assembly. He 

runs a livestock services program in Saltcoats, Mr. Speaker, and 

I noticed the Minister of Agriculture introduced him here today. 

And certainly I suspect that that individual would be wise 

counsel for the Minister of Agriculture as he deliberates the 

matters of the day. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I ask all members to join 

with me in welcoming Mr. Bruce Penner. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 

you, through you, and to all members of the Assembly, four 

young men that are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. And 

perhaps they could just stand or give a wave or something. 

They’re seated in the back row there. 

 

We have with us today Nathan Markwart, Don Keil, Drew 

Lubiniecki, and Trevor Holloway. These young men attended 

the rally for rent control this morning and are also part of a 

curling team. And their claim to fame is that they curled beside 

the Amber Holland team at the Callie Curling Club. Not with 

them, Mr. Speaker, but curled beside them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now Don Keil is a resident of Regina Lakeview and works at 

the inland port outside Regina, and he plays the position of third 

on the team. Drew Lubiniecki is a student at the University of 

Regina studying geology. And, Mr. Speaker, he’ll be writing a 

final exam this afternoon, and we wish him luck. And he plays 

second on the team. Trevor Holloway is a constituent of Regina 

Walsh Acres and is presently completing his master’s degree at 

the University of Regina, and is the skip of the 

soon-to-be-famous curling team, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’d like everyone to welcome these four young men to the 

Assembly and . . . Oh, and I would be remiss if I didn’t say, Mr. 

Speaker, that the gentleman accompanying them, by the name 

of Nathan Markwart, is my very able, capable, and dedicated 

assistant to not just myself but to the New Democratic Party 

itself. Mr. Nathan Markwart. And I do appreciate all the work 

that he does for us. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome them to the Assembly 

today. 

 

[13:45] 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today I 

rise to present petitions in support of affordable rents and 

housing for Regina. And we know, Mr. Speaker, that Regina is 

no longer an affordable place to live. And apartment vacancy 

rates have been less than 1 per cent for many years, housing 

prices have vastly been increasing, and during the past four 

years, Regina rents have increased by some 40 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the section that reads as follows, request that the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following 

action. We ask the Government of Saskatchewan to create 

an affordable housing program that will result in a larger 

number of decent and affordable rental units to be made 

available for the residents of Regina and the rest of 

Saskatchewan. We need the government to implement a 

process of rent control to better protect tenants and provide 

them with the rights and security. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I present these on behalf of some 600 residents of 

southern Saskatchewan. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Before I recognize our next 

presenter, I’d just like to remind our guests that you’re more 

than welcome to come to the Assembly, but we also ask that the 

guests not participate in any form in the debate on the floor. 

 

I recognize the member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to again present a 

petition on behalf of seniors in the province who wish to bring 

to our attention that the Saskatchewan Seniors Association, who 

have approximately 180 senior centres throughout the province, 

the vast majority of them in rural Saskatchewan, that these 

centres that provide so much needed recreation and social 

activities as well as important health programs and workshops 

and contribute to the enhanced quality of life for many of the 

seniors who use them, are being threatened with high rising 

costs of utilities, insurance, taxes, garbage disposal, etc., and 

they fear that over one-quarter of them may close. The closure 

of these centres will lead to deteriorating mental and physical 

health of seniors and will lead to additional stress on long-term 

care facilities and hospitals: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

cause the Government of Saskatchewan to provide the 

much-needed funding to assist seniors’ recreation centres 

to remain open and active within their communities. 

 

And these signatures are from over 40 people from Shell Lake, 

Springside, and Medstead. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition signed by constituents of Saskatoon Massey 

Place who live in Hampton Village, concerning the need for a 

new elementary school. 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 



6692 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2011 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes, including education property taxes; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to neighbouring 

communities to attend schools that are typically already 

reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

residents of Hampton Village. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again today to present a 

petition signed by residents of Saskatchewan, including 

members and supporters of Amnesty International, who are 

concerned about the effect that Bill 160 will have on the 

development of human rights law in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

withdraw Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public 

consultations, informed by a public policy paper, before 

any amendments to the Human Rights Code, the law that 

supersedes all others in our province, are even considered. 

 

And today the petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon, 

Regina, Swift Current, Yorkton, and Kindersley, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour 

to rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents 

from across Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

specifically to the two consecutive deficit budgets, the two 

years of debt growth, Mr. Speaker, all at a time with 

unprecedented highs in revenues, Mr. Speaker, this year coming 

at a consequence of loading our debt by $400 million, Mr. 

Speaker, and projected to grow by $4.2 billion over the next 

four years, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Arcola, Carlyle, and Redvers. I so submit. Thank you. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Affordable Housing 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I think 

we’ve all seen today from the crowd of people who’ve gathered 

here at the seat of their provincial government their frustration 

at the lack of initiative coming from this government when it 

comes to addressing surging rents and lack of affordable 

housing. Their concerns, like so many others in Saskatchewan, 

are about housing, housing at every level. Housing for the 

homeless, intelligent rent controls, assistance for new families 

trying to own a home — these are their worries. And 

democracy is in action here today with people motivated to 

action, asking their government to do something, anything, to 

help address this crisis. 

 

There is a link that runs through the issues like housing, rental 

costs, cost of living increases, frozen minimum wages, and the 

working poor. We know, for example, four years ago Sask 

Housing did not have waiting lists, and now the list has doubled 

to over 2,300 in the last two years. We need a provincial 

housing strategy that focuses on people, all people in all corners 

of Saskatchewan, and the right to safe, quality housing, a place 

they can call home. 

 

We call on the government to act now, not at the eleventh hour 

in June. Mr. Speaker, we have to keep in mind that democracy 

exists and is showing itself on our doorstep today while we 

work, and remember that answering the needs of the people, it’s 

our primary task. 

 

Mr. Speaker, rent is out of control, and we must bring it back 

into control. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

2011 Les Rendez-vous de la Francophonie 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to take a moment to acknowledge the proclamation of 

March 4th until March the 20th as les Rendez-vous de la 

Francophonie 2011 in Saskatchewan. For the last week and for 

the next five days, Saskatchewan’s francophones and French 

speakers are joining those from across the country to celebrate 

francophone culture and heritage right here in our province. 

 

For more than 100 years, we have benefited from the presence 

of French culture and language in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I 

am proud to be from a province that has a vibrant and active 

francophone community that contributes to the growth and 

vitality of our province, to the benefit of everyone who calls 

Saskatchewan home. 

 

With the belief that greater interaction leads to greater 

understanding, all Saskatchewan residents are invited to attend 

the numerous activities taking place across this province. 



March 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6693 

Festivities are held annually in March throughout Canada to 

promote French language and francophone culture to coincide 

with the International Day of La Francophonie on March 20th. I 

would encourage everyone, no matter their heritage, to take part 

in this cultural celebration. 

 

I am pleased to be able to rise today to highlight the importance 

of the francophone community to our province of 

Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Achievements of Saskatchewan’s Curling Teams 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

recognize the extraordinary achievements of this province’s 

junior men’s and women’s curling teams. 

 

Although our junior men’s team missed the podium, they did a 

fantastic job representing their country under very difficult 

circumstances. Team Moskowy advanced to the bronze medal 

game, finishing a very respectable fourth. Team Moskowy 

includes skip Braeden Moskowy, third Kirk Muyres, second 

Colton Flasch, lead Matt Lang, and coach Dwayne Mihalicz. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Canadian junior women’s team hails from the 

Nutana Curling Club in my constituency of Saskatoon 

Eastview, and we’re so very proud of the team. The team 

consisted of skip Trish Paulsen, teammates Kari Kennedy, Kari 

Paulsen, Natalie Yanko, and Dailene Sivertson and coach Bob 

Miller. The team’s hard work and great play paid off with a 

berth to the championship final against Scotland’s Eve 

Muirhead, who eventually won their fourth consecutive 

championship. In the end, the Paulsen rink comes home with 

the silver medal and the team made all curling fans in 

Saskatchewan proud. 

 

Mr. Speaker, although these two exemplary teams didn’t bring 

home gold, they are winners in the eyes of this Assembly and 

the people of Saskatchewan. These teams can look to the 

example of Team Holland, or should I say Team Canada, and 

look forward to all the opportunities in their future curling 

careers. In fact, Mr. Speaker, Team Paulsen is already looking 

ahead. In today’s StarPhoenix, when asked about the experience 

of playing in a championship, Trish Paulsen said, “The 

experience was well worth it and a valuable one for future 

events on the world stage.” 

 

I call on all members today to join me in honouring these 

amazing young Saskatchewan athletes. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Fundraising for New Curling Rink 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to tell this Assembly that the 

true community spirit is alive and well in the constituency of 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

In 2009, the village of Grayson’s curling rink could no longer 

be used due to structural damage. A committee made up of 

members from the area was formed called Grayson Grows. It 

was decided that a new three-sheet curling rink needed to be 

built as it serves many functions in the community. 

 

To date over $200,000 has been raised through a variety of 

efforts, including personal and corporate donations, a lottery, 

and by doing what this community knows best — farming. 

They grew a canola crop last year with donated land, seed, 

chemical, and equipment. Their efforts raised $66,000. 

 

The Grayson Grows committee even entered their project in the 

Pepsi Refresh online contest in the building neighbourhoods 

category for a chance at a $100,000 grant. They are currently in 

12th place and online voting closes April 30th. I encourage 

everyone to go to the Pepsi Refresh web page and vote for the 

Grayson Curling Club project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to give special mention to Laura 

Nelson, chairperson, and Mayor Neil Ottenbreit, Vice-Chair of 

the Grayson Grows committee, for their time and leadership on 

this project. In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to commend 

Grayson for coming together in the true Saskatchewan style and 

for moving forward with their curling rink project. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Consumer Rights 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is World 

Consumer Rights Day. First held in 1983, it’s become an annual 

reminder of the need to protect the basic rights of all 

consumers. One of those most basic rights, Mr. Speaker, is the 

right to be able to expect accuracy in advertising. That’s a 

protection the Sask Party government has not extended to 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

To make life more affordable, they promised gas tax relief to 

give consumers a break at the pumps when the price of oil gets 

too high, Mr. Speaker, but then they broke that promise. And 

the Sask Party hasn’t protected consumers from rising utility 

rates either since abolishing the NDP’s [New Democratic Party] 

lowest cost utility bundle. Under this government, SaskPower 

increased its rates by 8.5 per cent in 2009, and in August 2010, 

SaskPower bills went up by another 7.5 per cent to 8.5 per cent. 

In less than 20 months, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan consumers 

were paying almost 20 per cent more for their power. 

 

And there’s been no protection for renters either. Rents are 

rising across the province along with the price of gas, utilities, 

food, and other necessities, so families find it harder and harder 

to afford basic shelter, and the food bank use is growing. And 

yet, Mr. Speaker, the government refuses to offer these families 

any protection from the unregulated market by considering an 

intelligent next generation of rent controls. 

 

After all these failures to protect the rights of Saskatchewan 

citizens as consumers, Mr. Speaker, I expect these same citizens 

to soon exercise their rights as voters and exchange a faulty 

government for an improved model. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 



6694 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2011 

Opposition Critic’s Statement 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week the 

member from Prince Albert Northcote spent considerable time 

failing to make the case for the NDP’s job-killing resource tax. 

 

He began his diatribe with the blunt statement, “Here are the 

facts, Mr. Speaker.” He then went on to declare, and I quote, 

that “We do not use potash in our agricultural sector in any 

way, shape, or form.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that critic for Energy, Resources, and 

Forestry ought to know better. In fact before he makes such a 

blanket statement about something that he knows so very little 

about, he should do some research. Had he been better prepared 

for last week’s 75-minute debate, he might’ve avoided such a 

foolish statement. He might have known that Saskatchewan 

uses 64 000 tonnes of its own potash every year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am certain the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote did not misspeak here. Stating that Saskatchewan 

farmers do not use potash must win the award for the most 

erroneous statement ever uttered in this House, or at least, or at 

least it’s up there with their leader stating that “We’d mine 

potash in Kamsack.” Not only is it reflective of an NDP critic 

who does not have the skills to understand the resource sector in 

this province, it demonstrates a leader who cannot manage a 

team. Mr. Speaker, the only thing in need of review here are 

those members. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Canadian Agricultural Safety Week 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, occupational health and safety 

is important to all Saskatchewan residents. Mr. Speaker, March 

13 to 19 is Agricultural Safety Week in Saskatchewan. This 

week is a time to make note of the hazards that exist on farms 

across this great province and to find ways to make farming 

safer. This year’s theme is: Manage the risk. Control the hazard. 

 

Across Canada an average of 115 people are killed and at least 

1,500 are hospitalized for farm-related incidents, according to 

the Canadian agricultural injury reporting program, CAIR. 

 

According to CAIR, the two leading causes of death on 

Canadian farms are machinery and livestock. Looking at 

machinery-related deaths, tractors are by far the most 

dangerous, while handling bulls, horses, and cows with calves 

causes the most deaths in non-machinery incidents. 

 

Farming is the fourth most hazardous industry in Canada. As a 

crucial part of our growing economy and a vital human 

resource, we need to be aware of the dangers facing our farmers 

and support safety initiatives for them. Prevention and problem 

solving bring benefits not only of better knowledge, skills, and 

attitudes, but also better quality productivity and cost control 

without losses due to injury or illness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, agriculture has been an important part of my life, 

as it has many of my colleagues who have family involved in 

agriculture. I urge all members to take this week’s message of 

farm safety back to the constituencies. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Rent Control 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that today we 

had a number of families come to the Legislative Building to 

ask the government to give the protection that they need to 

avoid the rapidly increasing rate of rental rates in the province 

of Saskatchewan. We know that in the past four years rents 

have increased by about 40 per cent, and many families are 

struggling indeed to make ends meet and having to make very 

tough choices. These families are asking the government, the 

Sask Party government to move quickly to implement rent 

control. We have thousands of names on petitions, people from 

across the province asking for the same thing. 

 

My question to the minister is, having heard from the people of 

Saskatchewan in many forms about the need of protection for 

renters in this province, are we now in a position to hear from 

the government an announcement that next-generation rent 

control will be put in place by this government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the 

members opposite and everybody in the province that we are 

very concerned about the vulnerability of people that don’t have 

a home, that don’t have shelter. The members opposite are 

asking us to bring forward or gamble on a policy that really 

doesn’t have a lot of credit at all. 

 

We know that the article in The StarPhoenix actually had 93 per 

cent of professional economists agree on one thing: they agreed 

that a ceiling on rents reduces the quantity and the quality of 

housing that’s available. So there are two issues that we know 

do work, Mr. Speaker, that can’t be criticized. One of them is 

putting more money in the pockets of people and the other one 

is more housing. 

 

So we have, Mr. Speaker, we’ve done exactly that. We’ve taken 

92,000 people off the tax rolls. We’ve indexed rent supplements 

and shelter rates, and we’ve doubled low-income tax credits. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve also built more affordable housing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to hear that the 

government is ready to do something about the people who live 

in poverty, or the working poor, because this government has 

frozen the salary of the poorest of the poor, the minimum wage 

earners. And I’m glad to hear her say they’re going to do 

something about that. 

 

But my question to the minister follows the lines that in Canada 

about 80 per cent of the families have protection of rent control 

from the governments of their province or their jurisdiction. In 



March 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6695 

fact in Winnipeg Free Press in January 12th, the headline is 

“Good news for renters. More units built last year than any 

other [year] since the . . . ’80s.” It goes on to say, “Local renters 

finally get a dose of good news Tuesday . . .” because they are 

seeing more rental units built than any year in the past 30 years. 

 

My question to the minister is this: at a time when rent control 

is in place in Manitoba and the rent cap was 1 per cent in 2010, 

and they got a record number of units built in Winnipeg alone, 

807 units under construction, how can you say that rent controls 

don’t work to build out and have more rental units and at the 

same time protect Saskatchewan families? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I think there are some 

numbers that the members opposite probably do know but 

prefer not to think about. We actually had the number of rental 

starts tripled in 2009 to 2010. We had 525 rental starts in our 

province last year. I think the member opposite should know 

that housing starts were up 115 per cent in February over 

February and that multiple units increased by 231 per cent year 

over year. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, with this . . . [inaudible] . . . with the stat that 

the member opposite talked about when it comes to Manitoba, 

Manitoba’s vacancy rates are headed in the wrong direction. 

You know what’s happened in Manitoba last year? Provincially 

their vacancy rate went from 1.1 per cent to point nine per cent, 

and in Winnipeg it went from 1.1 to point eight per cent. 

 

Any progress that was made in Manitoba exists where there is 

loopholes in the rental laws. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the renters in this province, 

the thousands of renters in many constituencies in our province, 

50 per cent of the families rent. In Douglas Park, I think it’s 

around 50 per cent. In Moose Jaw south, it’s about 40. But these 

thousands of families who are facing a 10 per cent increase per 

year or 40 per cent over the last four years will be pleased to 

know that there’s no problem, thanks to the minister. 

 

The fact is there is a huge problem. And as I travel the province, 

whether it’s in Estevan or La Ronge or Kindersley or Yorkton, 

families are telling me they want protection from their 

government by way of rent control. 

 

My question to the minister is this: I know you’ve got a housing 

conference planned, but in year four of the mandate of a 

government, if all we can have is no protection but another 

conference, isn’t this a bit weak? And won’t people have to 

choose a different government in order to get rent control that 

they want and need? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, before the last election the 

members opposite, I know, were considering rent control. They 

actually talked about it in the paper, and they did not do it, Mr. 

Speaker. They cancelled rent control in 1992. They had 16 

years to reinstate rent control; they didn’t do it. All you have to 

do is read the paper from 2007 and you’ll know that the NDP 

did not take the opportunity because they know it didn’t work. 

But you know what does work, Mr. Speaker, is to make . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, we know what does work is 

to make sure that there’s more money in people’s pockets and 

that we build more units. Right now our vacancy rate went from 

1.9 per cent to 2.5 per cent. We know that that’s an increase. 

Mr. Speaker. There’s more work to be done, and that’s why 

we’re having the housing conference. We can’t just do it with 

government alone; we must work with partners. And I’m very 

pleased that we have an opportunity to have the summit and a 

housing strategy that we’ll be announcing in June. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the families in 

Saskatchewan who earn minimum wage know that their wage 

has been frozen for over two years — no increase at all. Health 

care workers, increase of 1 per cent. People who are renting in 

this province, that’s not the only massive increase that we have. 

Whether it comes to gasoline or food or the rising cost of power 

rates in this province, families, working people in this province 

are having a difficult time making ends meet. 

 

My question to the minister is this: at a time when people are 

demanding protection by way of rent control, can we now have 

this government at least consider and look at the option of 

having next-generation rent control in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

know that we have a stand on rent control, that what we’re 

doing is making sure that people have more money in their 

pocket and that we’re building more units. 

 

Well I would like to correct the statement that the member 

opposite made when he talked about minimum wage. We have 

increased the minimum wage three times since January 2008. 

This now is 9.25 an hour. 

 

Mr. Speaker we have also addressed things like lower utility 

costs. Seven per cent decrease in the average residential 

customer’s energy bill, that’s the third decrease in two years. 

We’ve doubled the low income tax credit. We’ve nearly 

doubled the number of seniors eligible for benefits under the 

seniors’ income plan, and we’ve nearly doubled the amount of 

money that they get from $90 to $190 for single seniors. Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve indexed the rental supplements and the shelter 

rates five times and indexed them to the cost of living. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know there’s more work to be done, and that’s 

why we’re working as a government to make sure that there’s 

not only jobs but that there’s opportunities for people in this 

province. And we look forward to it, Mr. Speaker. 



6696 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2011 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Support for Sexual Abuse Victims 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister 

of Justice. Last year the Saskatchewan Party government cut the 

domestic abuse outreach program. Now we learn that Tamara’s 

House, a community-based organization that dedicated itself to 

helping women who are victims of childhood sexual abuse, will 

be closing its doors at the end of April. 

 

The StarPhoenix on March 12, 2011 quoted Tamara’s House 

board member Cheryl Carver saying, “We have lost significant 

funding over the last year and a half,” citing government 

programs having dried up. 

 

To the minister: what is the government’s plan to support the 

victims of sexual abuse who will no longer be receiving the 

support of Tamara’s House? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well firstly, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

thank the employees and volunteers of Tamara’s House for their 

commitment and work over the years. 

 

We, as a province, had continued with $350,000 in funding this 

year, which has been an increase over the last two years. We 

understand that there had been some federal funding that had 

been lost and because of that the board made the decision to 

discontinue operations of Tamara’s House. 

 

As a government, we’re going to work with other organizations 

to ensure that the services provided by Tamara’s House 

continue through other organizations. And again we just want to 

thank the Tamara’s House for the good work that they’ve done 

over the years. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a disturbing pattern that 

has developed with the Saskatchewan Party government and the 

lack of caring for vulnerable people. They cut the funding to 

Station 20, the Quint Development program, the welfare rights 

office, the South Saskatchewan Independent Living Centre, the 

domestic abuse outreach. And now Tamara’s House is closing 

its doors. 

 

In a CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.] Saskatoon 

interview, United Way executive director Sheri Benson said 

that the Tamara House closure is a major loss to the 

community, and I quote, “They’re part and have been a part of a 

social safety net people have counted on.” 

 

To the minister: what’s the government’s plan to restore this 

much-needed safety net? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well as I indicated in my first 

response, Mr. Speaker, the provincial government continued 

with the level of funding from past years, actually increasing 

the level of funding from past years. We understand that the 

funding lost referenced in the article the member refers to was 

federal funding, Mr. Speaker. Because of that, we understand 

the board made the decision to discontinue operation of 

Tamara’s House. 

 

We wish to thank the staff and the volunteers that worked at 

Tamara’s House for their good work, Mr. Speaker. And we’re 

going to work with organizations in Saskatoon to ensure that 

the services provided are continued. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, with respect, the question 

wasn’t what has the government done that is evidently failing. It 

is what the government might do, and when, that might possibly 

succeed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Tamara’s House has been operating for 20 years, 

helping women cope with the sexual abuse they went through 

as children. The trauma of the abuse stays with them and affects 

every aspect of their lives. When Tamara’s House closes April 

30th — and there’s no comfort from this government that it will 

not — women suffering from the effects of childhood sexual 

abuse lose an important resource whose sole focus was to help 

them heal. 

 

To the minister: it is the government’s responsibility to help and 

protect these women. When Tamara’s House closes, where are 

they supposed to go for healing and help? What is the 

government’s plan to help these vulnerable women and when 

does this help come, if indeed it is on its way? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

This government’s going to continue to work with other 

organizations in Saskatoon to ensure that there’s a seamless 

service transition to make sure that the services provided by 

Tamara’s House are continued. 

 

As I indicated, the province made no reduction in funding to 

Tamara’s House. In fact the funding has been increased from 

the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Tamara’s House, I 

would point out as well, never requested additional funding 

from the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We understand that the funding lost that was referenced was 

federal funding. We thank the employees and volunteers of 

Tamara’s House for their very good work over the years, and 

we’re going to continue to make sure that services provided 

continue to be provided. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

[14:15] 

 



March 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6697 

Environmental Monitoring 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, a report was tabled last week in 

Alberta that looked into water quality monitoring in the oil 

sands area. The report, which evaluated previous studies, 

determined there are deficiencies in current monitoring 

programs. It’s clear that there’s not enough monitoring of 

dangerous chemicals getting into water systems, many of which 

would flow into Saskatchewan. At the same time, the Sask 

Party government has cut monitoring programs. 

 

With these latest findings in mind, what is this minister going to 

do to ensure there’s proper monitoring of the water from the oil 

sands area that is flowing into this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Highways and Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

when the NDP were in government, they did very little for 

monitoring for acid rain in northern Saskatchewan. Our 

government has been aggressively monitoring for acid rain. 

We’ve also been working with the Alberta government to 

determine how the Alberta oil sands are impacting 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Any development there in the North, Mr. Speaker, any permits 

given out on this side, were done by the members opposite but 

they had no plan on how it should be developed. Mr. Speaker, 

our government has spent $2 million on a northwest sustainable 

development plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite also have an oil executive 

as their leader. And so, Mr. Speaker, I’d be interested to hear 

the next question because I would like to hear what the 

members opposite would do in this situation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Apparently, Mr. Speaker, the minister is not 

familiar with the report that came down just as recently as last 

week, and we’ll be glad to share it with him if he has not yet 

seen it. The latest study makes it clear contaminants have gotten 

into the water systems in the oil sands area and are flowing into 

Saskatchewan’s waterways. Because of that, many of these 

contaminants are now in Saskatchewan’s ecosystem. Since 

Saskatchewan has been left with the effects of water 

contamination from another province, why isn’t this minister 

trying to determine compensation for the impact of this 

contamination and protecting Saskatchewan people from further 

damage to our environment? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Highways and Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I mentioned, 

our government . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I’d ask the 

individual standing in the gallery to please be seated. I 

recognize the Minister Responsible for Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 

I mentioned, our government’s been aggressively monitoring 

for acid rain in northern Saskatchewan. We’ve been working 

with Alberta to determine how their oil sands have been 

impacting our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I mention that they’re led by a member who used 

to be an oil executive. And I’m curious to . . . I find it curious, 

Mr. Speaker. I have a couple quotes from him. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m quoting this. The Leader of the Opposition said in 2009: 

 

Brad Wall fails to understand that consumers in the United 

States and elsewhere will not want to buy oil that’s 

produced in a way which harms the environment. 

Saskatchewan should prohibit the mining of its oil sands. 

 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, in 2008 he said, and I quote, “If you 

don’t like oil sands oil, what companies will do is build a bigger 

pipeline to the West Coast and export it to China and India.” 

Mr. Speaker, it would be interesting to know where the 

members opposite actually stand on the oil sands front. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, it’s clear the member has 

absolutely no idea of the questions that are being asked. We’re 

asking about monitoring of the water that’s leeching into 

Saskatchewan waterways, and all he can do is try and divert the 

question elsewhere. 

 

Even before last week’s report, the federal government 

promised to improve the monitoring of water quality in the oil 

sands area with a new plan which it’s going to unveil next 

week. Despite the fact the federal government noted the impacts 

of the oil sands area has on Saskatchewan, we have heard 

nothing from this government on the concerns that 

Saskatchewan people have and what they would like to see in 

this new monitoring program. 

 

What discussions has this minister had with his federal 

counterparts and Alberta counterparts on this new plan, or has 

he done nothing and left Saskatchewan vulnerable to future 

environmental problems? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Highways and Infrastructures. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Okay. Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, the 

minister’s been doing good work on this file. Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve been aggressively monitoring in the North on acid rain to 

see the impact, we’ve been working closely with the Alberta 

government to see what type of impact it’s having in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s good to take some environment questions 

because the member opposite appears to not only be concerned 

about acid rain, but also recycling because she keeps recycling 

the same questions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 



6698 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2011 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to stand in this 

House and recycle the same questions until Saskatchewan 

people get answers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan . . . The Sask Party government has 

reduced the funding and monitoring Saskatchewan lakes, 

waterways, and groundwater. At the same time, Alberta has 

also reduced its monitoring programs. These reductions have 

happened even though a report that was commissioned by the 

federal government clearly states that more monitoring of the 

oil sands areas is necessary. And now this latest report shows 

that more monitoring of oil sands area is a must, according to 

the report “. . . is in the best interest of the public and the oil 

sands industry to make sure that all monitoring programs are 

conducted with scientific rigour and oversight.” 

 

With all of this mounting evidence, why is this government 

more interested in protecting the rights of large corporations 

over the safety and security of Saskatchewan people and the 

environment? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Highways and Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

that’s just wrong. This government will defend the interests of 

Saskatchewan people all the time. Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned 

several times previously, we are aggressively monitoring for 

acid rain in the North. We will continue to do so. We will also 

work with Alberta to see what type of impact that will have. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Chiropractic Services 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One year ago, the Sask 

Party cut funding to chiropractic services after they had 

negotiated a deal with the Chiropractors’ Association. And the 

ministry even said, I quote, “I am pleased that we’ve reached a 

deal with the Chiropractors’ Association of Saskatchewan.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party then tore that deal up, saying that 

they had to save $10 million. Mr. Speaker, the third-quarter 

financial numbers are now in, and they show that the 

government will have $1 billion more than it thought it would 

have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: is he going to use some of that 

found money to reinsure chiropractic care in Saskatchewan so 

that people can afford to get the care they need, where and 

when they need it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, a year ago we, this 

government, came to the difficult decision. It was a very 

difficult decision to no longer subsidize chiropractic services in 

the province. What we ended up doing is falling in line with 

every other province in Canada, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, but 

what we did do is continue to subsidize for low income up to 12 

visits per year, better coverage than what many provinces have 

followed through on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I find it very interesting when the party 

opposite, when the NDP went through their policy review, what 

we have seen on health care so far is reinsuring chiropractic 

services and vitamin D. And vitamin D, that’s their cure to fix 

the ails of the health care system, continue to subsidize 

chiropractic services and vitamin D. A long ways from what, I 

think, most people in this province would expect from an 

opposition. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last year when the 

funding was cut, the Chiropractors’ Association president, Dr. 

Shane Taylor, predicted that it would have a direct impact on 

emergency rooms. Last week we heard about ER [emergency 

room] overcrowding at the Regina General and the Pasqua 

hospitals, and people lying in pain on gurneys in hallways 

waiting for treatment. 

 

The minister told reporters, “There’s a number of things that 

bring more people to our facilities right now.” Well, Mr. 

Speaker, one of those things is the Sask Party’s short-sighted 

decision to cut chiropractic funding. Now seniors on fixed 

incomes and the working poor can’t afford to go to the 

chiropractor and instead go to emergency rooms. 

 

To the minister: is he prepared to admit that he made a mistake 

last year and reinstate the chiropractic insurance and take some 

of the stress off our emergency rooms? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, 

the services that we cover are similar to what other provinces do 

for low income — up to 12 visits per year, Mr. Speaker.  

 

For her to make the assertion that emergency rooms are 

overflowing because chiropractic services are de-insured, Mr. 

Speaker, is absolutely false. It’s absolutely wrong. There are a 

number of reasons, Mr. Speaker, including the flu season. 

We’ve seen emergency rooms across Canada experience surges, 

Mr. Speaker, as in British Columbia where they’ve had to put 

them into a Tim Hortons, Mr. Speaker. We have not gone to 

anywhere close to that levels, Mr. Speaker. We are experiencing 

pressures, but it certainly isn’t for the fact that we’re no longer 

insuring chiropractic services. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Don’t bother looking at any of the real causes, 

just make up something on the fly. And if you like what other 

provinces are doing, you should put in rent control then. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the working poor and seniors on fixed incomes 

can’t afford to pay for private coverage. And for these people 

it’s an affordability issue. People are forced to live with chronic 

pain or go to overcrowded emergency rooms and wait hours to 

get help. Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s choice to cut 

chiropractic funding is costing the health care system and the 



March 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6699 

people of Saskatchewan that need it the most. It’s costing them 

more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how can he stand in his spot and 

say that he’s doing his job when he can see that the direct, 

negative results of his short-sighted decisions are costing 

Saskatchewan people more? Now will the minister admit he 

made a mistake, put the money back in? Yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if anybody 

else in this Assembly finds the questioning a little bit strange. 

Yesterday she stood in the House and complained about private 

delivery within the health care system. Today she’s standing in 

the House asking for private delivery within the health care 

system. 

 

I don’t quite understand it, Mr. Speaker. But I do understand in 

opposition, they’ve got the longest serving member over there 

who is a critic now of privatization, hasn’t got up and asked a 

question. I find it amazing: after 26 years she’s relegated to 

sweet tweet. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Rick Hansen Institute Initiative 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

announce today that our government has committed more than 

$4.3 million for a comprehensive five-year Saskatchewan-based 

initiative in partnership with the Rick Hansen Institute. Our 

government is extremely proud to be the second in Canada to 

commit to a Rick Hansen Institute initiative, joining Mr. 

Hansen’s home province of British Columbia to help 

commemorate the 25th anniversary of Rick Hansen’s Man in 

Motion World Tour. 

 

Saskatchewan’s Rick Hansen Institute initiative is supported by 

several provincial ministries and agencies and consists of the 

following five-year commitments: $1 million from the Ministry 

of Health for spinal cord injury related research, $500,000 from 

the Ministry of Social Services, and new funding for the 

Canadian Paraplegic Association of Saskatchewan, and 

$500,000 from the Office of the Provincial Secretary to fund the 

Clayton Gerein Legacy Fund, and more than $2.3 million first 

announced in December from Saskatchewan Sport and 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport to help fund disability sports 

organizations, high-performance athletes with disabilities, and 

accessible playgrounds. 

 

Saskatchewan’s five-year, $4.3 million commitment to the Rick 

Hansen Institute initiative comes at a time when people across 

Canada are celebrating the 25th anniversary of Rick Hansen’s 

Man in Motion World Tour. The Man in Motion World Tour 

caused a profound shift in the collective consciousness towards 

the belief in the potential of people with disabilities and initially 

raised $26 million for spinal cord research, for rehabilitation, 

and for sport. The positive effects of the Man in Motion tour are 

still having an impact today, and it can be seen in all the good 

work being done nationally and around the world by the Rick 

Hansen Foundation and the Rick Hansen Institute. 

 

Thanks to the new partnership, we are thrilled to be announcing 

today the impact of the Rick Hansen Foundation, and Institute, 

within Saskatchewan will be that much greater. By building a 

strong provincial foundation of spinal cord injury research, 

clinical care, and rehabilitation best practices, we hope to 

achieve the best possible outcomes for Saskatchewan people 

with spinal cord injuries. The collaboration and research that 

will take place over the next five years in our province will 

enable innovations in spinal cord injury care and research right 

across Canada. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Clayton Gerein, who passed away in January of 2010, 

represented Saskatchewan for nearly 30 years on the provincial, 

the national, and the international stage. He represented Canada 

in seven Paralympic Games, from 1984 to 2008, and was 

Saskatchewan’s greatest athlete ever. Clayton was named 

Saskatchewan’s male athlete of the year three times in three 

separate decades. The Clayton Gerein Legacy Fund, developed 

in partnership with the Saskatchewan Wheelchair Sports 

Association and the Provincial Secretary, will introduce and 

support the involvement of people with physical disabilities in 

wheelchair sports and other recreational opportunities, 

providing and improving their quality of life. 

 

In addition today’s announcement includes enhanced support 

for high-level athletes and improved access for disability sports 

programs for Saskatchewan athletes with a disability. 

 

Meanwhile enhanced funding to the Canadian Paraplegic 

Association of Saskatchewan, provided through the Ministry of 

Social Services, will go towards peer support, rehabilitation 

counselling, and outreach services to address the gap in 

supporting Aboriginal people with spinal cord injuries and other 

physical disabilities. 

 

The CPA’s [Canadian Paraplegic Association] peer support 

program provides opportunities for newly injured individuals to 

learn, and meet, from other people who are currently active in 

their community and have successfully confronted issues 

related to living with a physical disability. 

 

Special thank you to Rick Hansen and the representatives of the 

Rick Hansen Institute for joining us here in Regina for today’s 

announcement. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and thank 

you to the minister for sending over an advance copy of her 

statement. And we think it is a very good announcement. We 

look forward to seeing the progress over the next five years. 

And we think this is, of course, a very timely announcement 

because when people have a spinal cord injury, it’s one that we 

hope that we cannot see into the future. But while people are 



6700 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2011 

paraplegics, that they can participate fully in our society in an 

inclusive way right from performing to an excellence standard 

in the Paralympics as Clayton Gerein did, right to being able to 

play on the playground and children who have disabilities can 

play and participate along with children who do not. And we 

think this is very important. 

 

It’s also timely as we think about what has happened in the 

NHL [National Hockey League] just a couple of weeks ago 

with that injury, and what can we do to prevent that and how 

can we help people recover from injuries like that? And maybe 

we need to discuss more about our sports in the world and some 

that . . . high-impact sports. What can we do to make sure that 

kind of thing doesn’t happen into the future? So I think this is 

very timely because we keep thinking about this. And we look 

forward to seeing the results over the five years and hopefully 

that can continue into the future. 

 

Rick Hansen led quite a legacy, I think it was in the ’80s, the 

Man in Motion Tour. We all looked and admired his leadership 

then, and here he is still doing this, and it’s a wonderful thing. 

And so we look forward to the outcomes and we are very happy 

to see . . . Well we were saddened to see Clayton Gerein pass 

away in January 2010. Many of us knew Clayton, had seen him 

receive his awards, watched him participate in his high level of 

sports, and wished him the very best. We were all saddened 

when he passed away. And so his legacy here lives on and we 

think that’s a very, very important thing. 

 

So with that, we look forward as I said to the next five years 

and hopefully many, many more years as we support all people 

in Saskatchewan. Thank you very much. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I’m prepared to 

make a statement on a point of order raised by the Government 

House Leader. The point of order relates to the comments made 

by the member from Athabasca during debate on Bill No. 144 

on Wednesday, March 9th, 2011. The Government House 

Leader asserts that the member for Athabasca made profane 

remarks across the floor to another member. In response, the 

Opposition House Leader argued that the matter should have 

been raised at the time and not two sitting days later. 

 

I’d like to remind members it is the practice of this Assembly in 

raising a point of order that it must be brought at the earliest 

possible time. Beauchesne’s, 6th Edition, at paragraph 321 

states, and I quote, “A point of order against procedure must be 

raised promptly.” 

 

The remarks in question are not published in Hansard but are 

clearly audible on the video record. The Government House 

Leader contends that it was not possible to review the video 

proceedings until after the House adjourned on Thursday 

afternoon. I have confirmed that there was a network 

connectivity problem that delayed the posting of the video 

record until after 1 p.m. on March 10th. 

 

I agree with the Opposition House Leader that points of order 

should be raised promptly and at the first opportunity. Most 

often, points of order are raised in the course of debate, but it is 

not uncommon for matters to be raised the next sitting day after 

a review of the record. In this case, I have confirmed that the 

opportunity to raise the issue in the Assembly after a review of 

the video record was yesterday’s sitting. 

 

I remind members that they are able to ask the Chair to review 

the record for comments that they believe to be out of order. 

Members do not need to wait for the publication of proceedings 

before raising a point of order. 

 

Aside from the timing of the point of order, I do find that the 

remarks made across the floor were unparliamentary. I have 

reviewed Hansard and found the Deputy Speaker did intervene 

when the remarks were made. I would like to direct members to 

page 6604 of Hansard where the Deputy Speaker asked the 

member to watch his language and not to talk across the floor. I 

also noted that last evening, at the beginning of proceedings, the 

member for Athabasca withdrew the offensive remarks. 

 

Given that the Deputy Speaker dealt with the matter at the time 

of the incident and the subsequent withdrawal of the remark, I 

do not believe the Speaker needs to make further comment. 

 

I want to close by reinforcing what the Deputy Speaker said at 

the time of the incident and encourage members to be mindful 

of rule 46(2) that prohibits loud, private conversations and 

offensive language in this Assembly. This behaviour makes it 

difficult to maintain order and decorum. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 668 through 704. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 668 through 704 are tabled. I 

recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answer to question 705. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 705 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Table the answer to 706. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 706 answer is tabled. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answer to question 707. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 707 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Table the answers to questions 708 and 709. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 708 and 709 are tabled. I recognize 

the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answer to question 710. 



March 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6701 

The Speaker: — Question 710 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Table the answers to questions 711 and 712. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 711 and 712 are tabled. I recognize 

the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answer to question 713. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 713 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Table the answer to question 714. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 714 is tabled. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answers to questions 715 and 716. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 715 and 716 are ordered. I 

recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Table the answer to question 717. 

 

The Speaker: — 717 is tabled. I recognize the Government 

Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answer to question 718. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 718 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Table the answers to questions 719 and 720. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 719 and 720 are tabled. I recognize 

the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answer to question 721. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 721 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Table the answers to questions 722 through 

724. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 722 through 724 are tabled. I 

recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answer to question 725. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 725 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Table the answers to questions 726 and 727. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 726 and 727 are tabled. I recognize 

the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answer to question 728. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 728 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

Mr. Weekes: — Table the answers to questions 729 and 730. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 729 and 730 are tabled. I recognize 

the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answer to question 731. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 731 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Table the answer to question 732. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 732 is tabled. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answer to question 733. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 733 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Table the answers to questions 734 and 735. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 734 and 735 are tabled. I recognize 

the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answer to question 736. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 736 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Table the answer to question 737. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 737 is tabled. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answer to question 738. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 738 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Table the answers to questions 739 and 740. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 739 and 740 are tabled. I recognize 

the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answer to question 741. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 741 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Table the answer to question 742. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 742 is tabled. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answer to question 743. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 743 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Table the answers to questions 744 and 745. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 744 and 745 are tabled. I recognize 



6702 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2011 

the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answer to question 746. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 746 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Table the answer to question 747. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 747 is tabled. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answer to question 748. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 748 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Table the answers to questions 749 and 750. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 749 and 750 are tabled. I recognize 

the Government Whip. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answer to question 751. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 751 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Table the answer to question 752. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 752 is tabled. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answer to question 753. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 753 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Table the answers to questions 754 and 755. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 754 and 755 are tabled. I recognize 

the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answer to question 756. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 756 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Table the answer to question 757. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 757 is tabled. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answer to question 758. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 758 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Table the answers to questions 759 and 760. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 759 and 760 are tabled. I recognize 

the Government Whip. 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answer to question 761. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 761 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Table the answer to question 762. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 762 is tabled. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answers to question 763. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 763 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Table the answers to questions 764 and 765. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 764 and 765 are tabled. I recognize 

the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answer to question 766. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 766 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Table the answer to question 767. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 767 is tabled. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answer to question 768. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 768 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Table the answers to questions 769 and 770. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 769 and 770 are tabled. I recognize 

the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answer to question 771. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 771 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Table the answer to question 772. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 772 is tabled. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answer to question 773. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 773 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Table the answers to questions 774 and 775. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 774 and 775 are tabled. I recognize 

the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Order the answer to question 776. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 776 is ordered. I recognize the 



March 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6703 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 777 through 804. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 777 through 804 are tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 161 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 161 — The 

Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 

rise to speak to Bill No. 161, The Election Amendment Act. I 

had risen recently in the legislature to speak to Bill 160, in 

which I spoke at length about how this government is taking the 

province in the wrong direction with respect to people’s 

fundamental human rights. And, Mr. Speaker, this Bill, Bill 

161, an election amendment Act, takes again away from 

people’s right. 

 

Now this takes away from the most fundamental right of 

democracy, and that is your right to vote. Now you have to ask 

yourself, Mr. Speaker, if they’re determined to take away the 

fundamental human rights of Saskatchewan residents with Bills 

5 and 6, with Bill 43 in which they are seeking to limit your 

ability to protest and limit your freedom of speech as a 

Saskatchewan resident, and then they introduce Bill 160, which 

again limits your fundamental rights within our society, there 

begins to be a pattern that emerges with this government of 

taking away the fundamental rights of its citizens. 

 

Now as I’d said, the right to vote is the most fundamental right 

that you can have in a democracy, and they’re systemically 

taking away that right from certain individuals within our 

society. And it’s the very people that this government continues 

to fail on a daily basis. 

 

We had visitors to the legislature today demanding rent controls 

and increased housing opportunities in the province of 

Saskatchewan that again have gone unheard by this 

government. They’re not interested in housing, in affordability 

of housing, or in any way introducing rent controls. Now this is 

a group in Saskatchewan who has been frustrated by this 

government. 

 

Now who would it be that Bill 161 would seek to limit the 

rights of? Certainly homeless people, people without housing, 

which is a fundamental human need. People without that need 

are having another right taken away. They’re having the 

fundamental democratic right to vote. So here’s the pattern, Mr. 

Speaker. And it’s unfortunate and it’s sad, that with $1 billion 

more in government coffers, that they seek to limit people’s 

fundamental rights, whether it’s the right to their own 

democracy and to make decisions based on who they want to 

see elected, whether it’s their fundamental right to protest 

against this government, whether it’s their fundamental right to 

free speech, whether it’s their human dignity and the way that 

that’s negatively affected when you have no housing or a poor 

housing situation. These are the people that this government 

targets, chooses to target, when Saskatchewan has more 

prosperity than ever in its history. Now that is a sad 

commentary, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d like to, if I could, quote from a December 1st article in the 

Leader-Post written by Angela Hall. This is December 1st, 

2010, where the minister responsible makes a few statements. 

And he says this, Mr. Speaker: “We’re going to make sure we 

continue consulting with stakeholder groups to ensure that we 

have all the avenues covered off to be more inclusive versus 

exclusive.” Now a stranger thing you could never say. They 

know full well, or they should — he’s the minister responsible 

— that Bill 161 takes away the rights. It’s by its very nature 

exclusive. So how could you say in the newspaper that you’re 

seeking to make it more inclusive when the nature of the Bill is 

to make it more exclusive? It’s an absolutely ridiculous 

statement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so who else believes that that statement is off base, Mr. 

Speaker? In the same article, SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association] chief executive officer, Laurent 

Mougeot, says that his organization will want to be part of the 

discussion around what ID [identification] is acceptable. He 

says, “If the preparation to go to the polling station is such that 

you have to go to an extensive process, I think it might be 

discouraging to some people.” So there you have it, Mr. 

Speaker. There you have it. The CEO [chief executive officer] 

of SUMA, the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, 

says very clearly that if there’s an extensive process, I think it 

might be discouraging to some people. So he believes that this 

government is trying to discourage certain people from voting. 

 

Now who is it in Saskatchewan that may have difficulty either 

with photo ID or attaining photo ID? Certainly seniors in 

Saskatchewan, many of whom either have never had a licence 

or don’t currently have a licence, those people who have been 

treated terribly by this government. Anybody on a fixed income 

in Saskatchewan these days has great difficulty, great difficulty, 

paying for the services that they receive in Saskatchewan. 

 

Housing, again a huge issue for people on fixed incomes — the 

cost to purchase power, the cost to purchase natural gas through 

SaskEnergy. These costs have risen dramatically under the 

Saskatchewan Party government, and with housing they could 

institute rent controls. They could increase the housing supply 

in order to change the market dynamic. In terms of SaskPower, 

certainly they have control over what happens with the rates 

there; SaskEnergy, the same thing, Mr. Speaker. So these things 

are all directly under the control of the government. 

 

And it is seniors on fixed incomes and other people on fixed 

incomes who are hit the hardest by this government. And so 

with this Bill, Bill 161, they seek to exclude this group from 

voting. That’s the main goal. 

 

Who else, Mr. Speaker, has been negatively affected by this 



6704 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2011 

government and who might seek not to support them in the next 

election, Mr. Speaker? And who has this government targeted 

to keep from voting in the next election with the introduction of 

this Bill? Well certainly they’ve disenfranchised many 

Aboriginal people in Saskatchewan, First Nation and Métis 

peoples, because they failed on their duty to consult. They have 

absolutely failed to consult when it comes to tobacco, when it 

comes to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. And so, Mr. 

Speaker, it is clear, it is clear by the actions of the government 

that they are not earning the support of Aboriginal people in 

Saskatchewan. And so again, another group who may find it 

difficult in many instances to get photo ID, targeted to ensure 

that they are unable to vote in the next election. 

 

Again, the most fundamental principle of a democracy is the 

ability to vote freely in an election — eroded by this 

government. 

 

Now again to quote from the December 10th article, Justice 

minister, to quote, “Justice Minister Don Morgan said federal 

elections and provincial elections in BC, Ontario and Quebec 

already require voters to show approved ID.” Didn’t mention, 

failed to mention at that time that there’s a challenge currently 

in British Columbia about the legislation and how it takes away 

the fundamental democratic rights of its citizens. 

 

And he says this, Mr. Speaker: “Saskatchewan is not taking the 

step in response to any specific incident.” So he’s admitting in 

the newspaper on December 1st of 2010 that there’s nothing 

wrong with the system. He couldn’t name, in the history of our 

province, one incident that led to the implementation . . . or the 

introduction, sorry, of this legislation. With all the researchers 

that they’ve got in their offices, with the entire staff of the 

ministry, he couldn’t find one instance that led to the 

introduction of this legislation, couldn’t find one. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And so you have to ask yourself, Mr. Speaker, what is the 

motive? What is the motive of the government to introduce 

legislation that limits the ability of people to vote in their own 

democracy? Well I think it’s clear, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s 

clear that there are a number of groups who have been 

mistreated by the government, who they are targeting, targeting 

to keep from voting in the next election. Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

a shameful act of the government that this would take place. 

 

But what else have they done to attempt to erode the democracy 

of the province? What else have they done, Mr. Speaker? They 

have, in their own caucus, struck down the decision of a 

bipartisan committee of the legislature to hire a Chief Electoral 

Officer. So what happened? You’ve got Bill 161 where they’re 

amending The Election Act to ensure, to ensure that 

disenfranchised people in Saskatchewan don’t vote. 

 

So while they do that, they on another front, after a bipartisan 

committee selects a Chief Electoral Officer, their caucus votes it 

down because they’re not happy that he’s going to be 

independent. They’re not happy that the goal of a Chief 

Electoral Officer is to increase the number of people who are 

going to vote in a jurisdiction. That is the job of the Chief 

Electoral Officer, one of the jobs, overseeing elections certainly 

another. And so they choose to deny the ability of an individual 

to increase the electoral voter numbers, to increase the number 

of people who are going to vote in an election. 

 

Now again, Mr. Speaker, Bill 161 takes away the fundamental 

right, democratic right of people to vote. And it harms the 

electoral process. And again it’s not the only case in 

Saskatchewan where they’re taking away the rights of 

individuals. 

 

Now they’ve taken away the rights of individuals in certain 

cases, but they’ve also taken away the ability of another 

political party in Saskatchewan to run in this election. They are 

named — the Premier, the Deputy Premier — are personally 

named in a lawsuit brought forward and allowed by a judge 

with respect to a $3 million PC [Progressive Conservative] trust 

fund. 

 

So they’re attempting again to subvert the electoral process with 

a Chief Electoral Officer, with Bill 161, because they choose to 

eliminate the ability of certain people to vote. And they’re 

holding the key to $3 million of another political party in 

Saskatchewan, something that I think the people of 

Saskatchewan do not look fondly upon. 

 

Now who else has been harmed by this government? Who else 

is targeted in terms of voting in the next election? Who else do 

they seek to limit the ability to vote, Mr. Speaker? Homeless 

people and students. Again students, on an economic scale, are 

some of the lowest income people in Saskatchewan because 

they spend a full-time, the equivalent of a full-time job 

attending to their studies and then also will attempt in some way 

to be able to afford to go to school. Many of those students at 

our institutions of higher learning are not from the communities 

in which those institutions exist. Many travel from the city of 

Prince Albert to Saskatoon, to Regina in order to attain their 

educational goals. 

 

Now those students are forced to pay for all of the things that 

I’d mentioned earlier. Housing is a huge cost for out-of-town 

students. They’re again paying for power and natural gas, all of 

the things that are controlled by this government again. And 

many of whom are disenfranchised, many of whom are 

frustrated with this government and are an easy target for Bill 

161. Some of whom don’t have a licence, don’t have the ability 

or the finances, the resources to pay for photo ID, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so I would ask the government at this time if they have put 

forward anything with respect to who will pay for the 

identification? Is it the ability of anybody in Saskatchewan now 

to go to a motor licence issuer and get their identification for 

free? Does it come at no cost, Mr. Speaker? Because if there’s 

any cost at all, whether it’s paying for gas for your car to get 

there, whether you have to take the bus from your house to a 

motor licence issuer, if there’s any cost related at all, that cost is 

equal to a penalty to vote. That cost is a cost that is directly 

related to exercising your democratic right to vote. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would argue that we should be enhancing 

people’s ability, desire to be able to vote in our democracy. And 

what these Saskatchewan Party members are choosing to do at 

this time is to limit their ability to vote. And if there’s a cost 

related, then there’s a cost to vote which is absolutely 

unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. 



March 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6705 

Now for many of the people that I’ve mentioned, whether it’s 

seniors or students, whether it’s the homeless — many of whom 

have been demonstrating on the steps of the legislature today — 

whether it’s Aboriginal people, these are again groups that the 

government has harmed. And this is the same group, these are 

the same groups of people who the government is seeking 

through this legislation to keep from voting in some way in the 

next election, Mr. Speaker. And so I certainly will not in any 

way support this Bill because it’s fundamentally undemocratic. 

It takes away the fundamental democratic rights of 

Saskatchewan citizens, Mr. Speaker. And I know that many 

more of my colleagues will want to speak to this Bill. So at this 

time, I move to adjourn the debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill 161, The Election 

Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 162 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hickie that Bill No. 162 — The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

honour to talk about a different election Act, this one being The 

Local Government Election Act, Bill No. 162, that following on 

the heels of an eloquent speech regarding the provincial 

electoral Act. 

 

The issues are, in many ways, the same or similar with some 

nuances and some twists, Mr. Speaker. And why I say that is 

this issue is of course related to local government election Act, 

and indeed there are some amendments actually that . . . One 

that comes to mind that I understand was asked for by both 

SUMA and SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities] and that being to extend the length of service — 

the term of office is a better way of putting it, not the length of 

service — the term of office from three years to four years to 

bring it in line with the provincial Act. And because it was 

asked for by SUMA and SARM and passed at their respective 

annual meetings, Mr. Speaker, the opposition is in support of 

that part of The Local Government Election Act. 

 

But I want to tell you that there are some huge concerns with 

other parts of The Election Act. And, Mr. Speaker, just to put it 

into context, it started around about 2000 and late 2006 and into 

2007 when the federal Conservative government changed the 

Elections Act and were making moves to bring in photo ID 

before people could vote. And you know, Mr. Speaker, New 

Democrats in Ottawa and across the province . . . or across the 

country, rather, were speaking out against that move. And 

there’s a reason that in opposition . . . It wasn’t simply to try 

and be belligerent. It was to try and stand up for the very people 

that many of us represent. And that’s true whether we’re in 

opposition or in government. I’m trying to be a bit non-partisan 

here. 

 

But in this case I want to quote from what some opposition 

members said in Ottawa in February 13th, 2007: 

 

“We have to protect the integrity of the voting system,” 

said Davies. “New requirements for voter I.D. will add 

further barriers to voting for marginalized, low-income 

people, and seriously undermine the right to vote,” added 

Davies, whose riding includes the Downtown East Side, 

where hundreds of people live in homeless shelters and 

rooming . . . [houses]. 

 

Now that’s one segment of the population, Mr. Speaker, that 

photo ID is very difficult for. And photo ID is only one of the 

problems that people who might be living either homeless . . . 

And homeless also means couch surfing, where you don’t know 

from night to night or day to day or week to week whose couch 

you might be surfing on because your circumstances are such 

you may be actively looking for someplace else to live, to rent. 

 

But as is the case in Regina, and has been for three years now, 

the vacancy rate is 1 per cent or less. Most of the three years has 

been less than 1 per cent, which is full occupancy. Less than 1 

per cent vacancy simply includes rental suites and houses where 

the landlords are just desperate. They have to fix a place up 

before they can rent it again for whatever reason. You know, 

maybe it’s been a period of time — 10, 15, 20, 25 years — 

since it last had any significant renovations or maybe the place 

got trashed or maybe there was a fire or maybe there was a 

flood or who knows. It could be any number of things. But less 

than 1 per cent vacancy is considered fully rented out and even 

beyond. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, there’s credible studies that show that the 

couch surfing in Regina numbers are about 3,000 people as I 

stand here and speak. So we have an election Act that is saying 

to 3,000 people that are having difficulty finding a stable place 

to live, 3,000 people who are either living in a shelter — and 

there’s very limited spaces there — or are homeless, living, 

couch surfing . . . So for 3,000 people in Regina, voting is very, 

very difficult, be it in this case in a municipal election which 

will be coming up fairly quickly. 

 

So there are provisions of this Act, Mr. Speaker, that we would 

dearly love the Sask Party government to take out of The 

Election Act. It doesn’t enable voting. In fact it disenfranchises 

a significant sector of the Saskatchewan population. It 

disenfranchises. 

 

And it seems to me that with the exception of people that 

provide services that enable elected MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] to do our jobs — and you know, there’s 

the Clerk and the security people and, you know, people, the 

Pages who are not elected — but for the 58 of us in this 

Assembly that are elected, we should be unanimously trying to 

find ways to get more people voting, to enable people to vote, 

to enable people to speak out, to enable them to say what’s on 

their minds, to enable them to participate in a democracy, to 

enable the very best of Saskatchewan people to come forward. 

 



6706 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2011 

[15:15] 

 

Whether it’s a provincial election or, in the case of Bill 162, a 

local government election, a municipal election, we need to get 

the very best of people. We need to encourage them. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re not doing so when we are demanding photo ID. 

Because a photo ID . . . Also we are requiring a residence, two 

pieces of information that state what your residence is. 

 

Well for the 3,000 people couch surfing, what is their 

residence? You know, today it might be a given. They might be 

able to tell you what their residence is today, but not likely by 

the time an election rolls around. Recognize they have to have a 

power bill, and people who are couch surfing tend not to have 

power bills. I’d be astounded if any of them have a power bill 

that shows for the place they’re couch surfing. If they’re paying 

the power bill, it seems to me then they’re into a rental situation 

and probably have a better situation than simply foisting 

themselves on friends or relatives or whatever the situation is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have an election Act being proposed that 

disenfranchises people, that takes a segment of our population 

and says to them, we do not want you to vote; we do not want 

you to participate in a democracy. And what a shame that is 

from a Sask Party government that got elected on a platform of 

being open and accountable. 

 

We all remember three short years ago all the promises of being 

open and accountable. And yet we now are faced with a piece 

of legislation, a part of this legislation that says, not only do we 

not want to be accountable, we don’t want you to be able to 

participate in the electoral process. In other words, only if you 

are very wealthy, only if you’re rich can you vote in the new 

Saskatchewan. And that is just not right. That’s fundamentally 

not the right way to proceed. It’s fundamentally just wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have this being proposed. The federal 

government made its proposal respecting photo ID in 2007. The 

provincial government made similar proposal in 2010. And now 

early in 2011 we’re still dealing with this legislation. The 

opposition are still opposed to that part of the local government 

election. We’re opposed for a whole number of reasons. 

 

I’ve already said that the Sask Party government got elected on 

a platform of trying to be more open and accountable. 

Yesterday in a different speech, I talked about the New West 

Partnership and how that had never come before the legislature 

for a vote. And yet we were asked to pass a piece of legislation 

so it would bring it into line with the New West Partnership. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are things that are undemocratic. These are 

things much like the federal in-and-out scheme, where just I 

think it was last week, we see that there’s four federal MPs 

[Member of Parliament] were charged under the election Act 

with an in-and-out scheme where the federal Conservative Party 

asked them for some unspent money to spend in an election. 

They sent the cheques to the federal Conservative Party that 

spent it on the election. It showed as being done at the riding 

level. It enabled them to keep their election expenses, on paper, 

under the maximum, but it clearly went against the heart of 

what the election Act was, Mr. Speaker. It clearly, shamefully 

went against what that election Act was about. As a result, 

there’s four MPs currently been charged under the federal 

election Act. 

 

And here we are today with the provincial election Act that the 

member for P.A. [Prince Albert] was speaking of, on our side, 

and flowing from that, An Act to amend The Local Government 

Election Act that I’m speaking to now — all flowing from that 

federal Act to this one. And while there is parts of the Act that 

clearly should be updated and clearly should be brought in line 

with what the municipalities wanted, there are parts of this Act 

that are offensive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how could you have a photo ID with an address 

when you don’t have an address? And we saw earlier today a 

delegation that came to this very legislature, held a rally out 

front dealing with rental in Regina, dealing with a situation 

where for three years now the rental rate has been, the vacancy 

rate has been less than 1 per cent. So what we have is a situation 

where by, again I say, a credible study, nearly 3,000 Reginans 

find themselves couch surfing. We find 267 people stayed in 

homeless shelters or transitional housing each night in Regina. 

We find that homelessness is somewhat invisible because of 

couch surfing, because families and friends will not let their 

loved ones or their friends be out in the cold at night if there’s 

any alternative. 

 

We will all put up our friends in the short term. No matter what 

is going on, we will all stand by our friends in the short term 

and encourage them to find some more suitable place perhaps. 

But certainly if a friend came after supper and said, I’m 

homeless, I need a couch to surf on or I need a scrap of floor to 

sleep on, you bet I’d put that friend up. And I think everyone 

would, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that from October 2006 to October 2010, the average 

rent in Regina — I want to get this exactly right — for a 

one-bedroom apartment in Regina, a one-bedroom apartment 

increased by 43 per cent, Mr. Speaker, in that four-year period, 

from $559 to $802 a month. That’s a huge increase. We also 

know, Mr. Speaker, that a social services recipient in that time 

now would need to spend 97 per cent of their monthly income 

on shelter and food, 97 per cent on shelter and food here in 

Regina if you’re a single person receiving social assistance, 

renting a one-bedroom apartment at the average price — 97 per 

cent of your total income spent on shelter and food. Mr. 

Speaker, it just goes on and on. 

 

And there are problems there that are growing by the month, 

problems with homelessness, problems with rent growing by 

the month. And then we have a government determined to 

disenfranchise those very people from being able to vote in 

their municipal election under Bill 162, an Act to amend the 

local government Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I diversed a little bit again inadvertently to the 

homeless issue. And what I wanted really to highlight was the 

photo ID and the impossibility of getting photo ID that’s 

required to vote under The Election Act. It’s impossible to get a 

photo ID that gives you an accurate address when you’re 

homeless, when you’re couch surfing, when you’re living in a 

homeless shelter because, by the very nature of a homeless 

shelter, it is short-term. It is a transition from here to a more 

stable housing situation. And when you get close to an election, 

that just doesn’t quite work. 



March 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6707 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a situation under Bill 162 where a 

government . . . I talked about being open and accountable and 

how this government is not being open and accountable. I want 

to remind people of the Saskatchewan-Montana carbon capture 

matter that was announced 100 feet from here in the rotunda. 

Great fanfare. The Governor of Montana and the Premier of 

Saskatchewan and the MLA for Silver Springs was the minister 

responsible at the time, and they announced with huge fanfare a 

carbon capture, carbon sequestration project. 

Montana-Saskatchewan announced it, couldn’t have been 

prouder, and yet that died in the dark of night. There’s never, to 

my knowledge, there still hasn’t been an official 

pronouncement from the government that that is a dead duck. 

It’s gone. 

 

There was supposed to be federal funding from the Harper 

government in Ottawa and from the federal government in 

Washington for the United States, but the Sask Party’s cousin, 

Stephen Harper, doesn’t seem to have come through. I assume 

that the federal US [United States] funding didn’t come 

through. 

 

But in any rate, the issue that we deal with here in 

Saskatchewan is the provincial government that announced like 

they’d . . . Well they announced it like they’d built a domed 

stadium, you know. With that kind of fanfare. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The doomed dome? 

 

Mr. Trew: — No, not the doomed stadium, the domed stadium. 

Now it’s the doomed dome. But that was how it was 

announced, just with the same fanfare as the doomed dome. 

Interestingly the same MLA for Saskatoon Silver Springs was 

the MLA for the carbon sequestration fund, the 

Montana-Saskatchewan defunct. That one has gone the way of 

the dodo bird. That’s done, done, done and so is the doomed 

dome done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish, I wish that the member for Saskatoon 

Silver Springs was in charge of the portion of The Local 

Government Election Act that dealt with photo ID because then 

we’d know that the photo ID thing was doomed and was gone, 

and it would enable and ensure that in Regina alone 3,000 

homeless people or couch surfing people would be more likely 

able to vote in the municipal elections. 

 

I have not seen the numbers for Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. I have 

not seen them, so I want to be crystal clear: I’m not presenting 

myself as, in any way, an expert on Saskatoon. It’s a beautiful 

city, but I believe it has very similar problems to Regina. And I 

have no reason to believe that the number of people couch 

surfing would be hugely different in Saskatoon. In fact as I’ve 

heard my Saskatoon colleagues raise the issue, there is 

significant problems with rents rising, with housing prices 

rising, with apartment rentals rising in Saskatoon — very 

similar to the problems that there are in Regina. 

 

So I stand potentially to be corrected, but I am firmly of the 

belief that . . . Let me state it a little more solidly. I am firmly of 

the opinion, the knowledge that there’s roughly 3,000 people in 

Regina that are couch surfing. And it would be my belief that 

Saskatoon would have something within 50 per cent, one way 

or the other, of that. So it could be as low as, you know, 2,000 

people, and it could be as high as 4,500 people in Saskatoon 

that are couch surfing and that the Bill 162, The Local 

Government Election Act is trying to disenfranchise. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are significant of us in this Chamber 

that get elected with fewer votes than what is being proposed 

under this Act to disenfranchise in either of our two major 

cities. And that’s not talking about the 10 or 11 other cities in 

Saskatchewan that also will also have some proportional issue 

with homelessness. 

 

I know that our number one son and daughter-in-law that have 

just moved from Estevan to Regina spoke to me often about 

how tight the market was in Estevan, and how . . . A beautiful 

city, please don’t try and think I’m trying to represent Estevan 

as anything other than a beautiful city. But it’s a beautiful city 

that has some problems, as do all of the other cities, as do all of 

the municipalities, of our province. 

 

There are problems everywhere, Mr. Speaker. There are 

problems everywhere. And the problems, Mr. Speaker, need 

solutions, and this Bill 162 is not part of the solution, Mr. 

Speaker. It is not part of the solution. Okay. Mr. Speaker, I want 

to say that the government that got elected on a position, a 

platform of being open and accountable has been anything but 

in far too many areas. It’s been anything but open and 

accountable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that the Minister of Agriculture is very 

proud of the Agriculture budget and what they’re spending on 

farm families here in Saskatchewan. I want to tell you to put it 

into perspective. In 1991-92, our very first budget when we 

hacked and slashed and cut and we cut things, even including, 

Mr. Speaker, we cut the prescription drug plan that had already 

been cut by the Devine government before we got elected, but 

we further cut it. Why? Because we couldn’t meet payroll. We 

had discussions around what it would mean to declare 

bankruptcy in Saskatchewan. And members opposite just have 

no idea what that’s like, and thankfully you don’t. The sad news 

is, you’ll be gone when we get in any difficulty like that again, 

Mr. Speaker. I just hope it doesn’t take so long. 

 

In 1991-92, after we had done huge cutting, the Agriculture 

budget was 6.2 per cent of program spending. This year, 

Minister of Agriculture, your Ag budget is 3.9 per cent of total 

program spending. So put it into perspective, absolutely. Ask 

the farmers how they feel, and the farmers are feeling like 

whatever they want to. 

 

But the truth of the matter is from 6.2 per cent of programs 

funding under the NDP at our lowest, to 3.9 per cent today . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order. Point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Deputy House Leader 

and ask him to state his point of order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

debating Bill No. 162, The Local Government Election 

Amendment Act. The member rose to speak to that Bill. And 

from what I’ve heard, he has not been speaking to that Bill, so I 



6708 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2011 

would encourage him to do so. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I just want to remind members 

that a long-standing tradition in the Assembly, while we ask 

members to stick to the Bill, we’ve also allowed some latitude 

in the Bill. And we do have now the new rules that allow for 20 

hours of debate on Bills including the committee, and so I 

would ask the member to certainly earmark and gear his 

remarks to the Bill. But also recognizing the fact that members 

can draw, well sometimes they draw long strings. We ask the 

member to refrain from the long string and address the Bill 

before us. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Bill 162, the 

election amendment Act, I know that the government is 

sensitive of being reminded of their shortcomings. But that’s 

really what an election is all about, is holding governments 

accountable for their errors and giving governments, in this 

case, the opportunity to make some corrections. 

 

I have offered up, as have speaker after speaker after speaker, 

on the government . . . on the opposition side — the 

soon-to-be-government side — but on the opposition New 

Democrat side we have offered up opportunities for the 

government to stand up and say, we’re wrong with respect to 

photo ID. We’re wrong to disenfranchise. 

 

I’ve been talking about homeless people and people in shelters. 

Mr. Speaker, I haven’t even talked about seniors, seniors who 

many are increasingly giving up their driver’s licence, which is 

the key point of entry to get a photo ID that is being required 

under Bill 162. Seniors who, as they age, tend to want to drive 

less and less, Mr. Speaker. My father still has a driver’s licence, 

still drives. Thankfully, he’s able to. But I know he’s getting 

less and less comfortable as the years go by. The time is going 

to come when like his father, my late grandfather, he may give 

up, may choose to give up his driver’s licence. When he does, 

he will soon thereafter lose that element of photo ID. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is what this government is just deaf to. 

They don’t seem to understand that photo ID is a significant 

hardship for a significant number of people. When you lose 

your driver’s licence, either it’s yanked away from you by SGI 

or some medical problem or you voluntarily give it up, either 

way, going someplace to get a photo ID becomes increasingly 

difficult. 

 

Why would we want to say to people that have spent their 

lifetime, most of them, building this province, making it what 

we inherited, making it the most vibrant and wonderful 

province in Canada, why would we want to say to those people, 

oh you’re old. You don’t count any more. You’re too old. You 

can’t vote. You have no photo ID. Besides that, you’re old and 

wrinkly. Why would you want to have photo ID? Mr. Speaker, 

what a shame that the Sask Party government feels that way 

about our seniors. I say it’s a shame. And if they cared about the 

people that built this province, they would withdraw that 

requirement for photo ID under The Local Government Election 

Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, clearly I’ve stated the biggest area of concern. I 

know that other people on our side of government want to speak 

of other problems with this legislation. I know that our biggest 

problem is the photo ID. And I know that if that issue went 

away, there are parts of this local election Act, Bill 162, that we 

would be honoured to support. 

 

The part that extends the term of office from three to four years, 

I understand it’s a welcome thing. And we would have 

absolutely no problem supporting that. There are some other 

minor things that help make the process for the clerks and the 

electoral office, make it easier and more consistent for them to 

do their jobs and enhance democracy. We’d be proud to support 

all of the measures that enhance and grow a democracy, but 

we’re not very pleased about the photo ID. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know other members on the New Democrat 

opposition side have things they want to speak to on Bill 162. 

So at this time I move that debate be adjourned on Bill 162. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Coronation Park 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 162, The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 159 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 159 — The 

University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — I wish to rise and make a few comments on 

the Bill No. 159, The University of Regina Amendment Act, 

2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know it’s important to review legislation 

from time to time, make adjustments that would make this 

legislation more effective, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And in looking 

at this Bill and the government’s release, there is an intention 

here to update the university Act and allow for improvements to 

governance processes and to make it more efficient. 

 

Some of the amendments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are in repealing 

the visitor section in the Act. We have enabling the university 

to adopt new processes for election of a chancellor and senate 

representatives. Again the minister indicates that these were 

requested by the university, which is a slight change 

particularly in this, with this minister in terms of contacting 

consulting groups. Not really known for that. But in this case, 

with the university, apparently the university has indicated that 

they are somewhat satisfied with what the minister has done. 

But again for us, when this becomes almost a first, then we . . . 

You can understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we would have 

. . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce 



March 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6709 

guests. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has asked leave to 

introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from 

Saltcoats. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through to the members of the Assembly, 

I’d like to introduce Murray McGillivray who is a rancher from 

the Big Muddy area and a good friend of mine. And with 

Murray today is Henry McCarty who is a veterinarian from 

Wawota. I’ll have the opportunity to meet with them very 

shortly, but I just want everyone to welcome them to their 

legislature. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 159 — The University of Regina 

Amendment Act, 2010 

(continued) 
 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Regina and our 

universities in Saskatchewan are world-class institutions, and as 

they change, we need to update our legislation. If it comes to 

terms of making them more efficient, then we should be looking 

at that. And in that way my understanding is, is that they have 

come up with the Bill 59, an Act to amend the university Act. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the important things was that the 

University of Regina went into making up a review, a strategic 

plan which they looked at. And this was, University of Regina 

President Vianne Timmons announced this strategic plan in 

order to build a better university here in Saskatchewan. And the 

plan details are for the years 2009 through to 2014, a strategic 

planning process. I would just like to at this time sort of briefly 

look at the executive summary of that. 

 

There were consultations were launched in January of 2009. 

And again here, when I speak of this, this is probably a bit of a 

lesson for the minister who perhaps would have been well . . . 

Had something like this come before him, is sort of a class in 

terms of how one consults before bringing in legislation, how to 

consult stakeholders, as that party over there has been 

somewhat, if I could say, played fast and loose with that 

particular aspect of the legislative process. Oftentimes we have 

many examples of them saying they’ve consulted with groups 

when in fact they hadn’t. 
 

So it was a bit positive, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to see that in fact 

that this was coming, that the university had done all this work, 

gathered information from consultations, submissions in terms 

of putting together their goals and objectives that would form 

what they would say is mâmawohkamâtowin: Our Work, Our 

People, Our Communities, and organize their future under these 

three headings — our work, our people, and our communities 

— again for a new Saskatchewan that they were looking 

forward to, new in cultural, economic, and demographic sense, 

and coming into being. 

 

So with that sort of as a backgrounder, some requests were 

made for changes. I mentioned just some of them previously. 

Again we on this side are fully committed to having a 

world-class facility committed to the students within that 

facility, and at that we are very interested in looking at those 

requests from the university in this. Again that was, as I say, a 

relatively new experience from that minister, having in fact 

consulted or . . . how many times we’ve asked questions of who 

was requesting the changes and that minister was unable to 

provide those answers. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Now again I just, perhaps . . . One part out of that study that 

was important that I would like to just read into the record, a 

submission, “Increase our administrative efficiency and 

enhance productivity.” And in there, in the study directly, it 

says: 

 

Even a middle-sized university like ours is a complex 

organization. Federal and provincial reporting audit 

requirements, workplace safety regulations, and a host of 

other obligations to external funding agencies create 

considerable administrative demands. Internal processes 

such as the review of proposed new academic programs 

can also require disproportionate time and effort. 

 

[And now] whether they are carried out centrally or within 

academic units, our administrative processes must serve 

and respect our core mission of teaching, research, and 

public service. We will therefore routinely review our 

administrative processes, policies, and practices to ensure 

they are efficient, meet our requirements, and do not 

unnecessarily hinder the productivity of faculty and staff. 

We will invest in appropriate technology to increase 

efficiency and enhance productivity. 

 

With that background, the university obviously came forward 

and requested that some changes be made. We will still be . . . 

Obviously we still have work to do in terms of talking to the 

stakeholders to make sure that all their needs have been met 

here and to see the impact of the legislation on that to actually 

meet the goals. Again, if in fact the amendments as requested 

by the university to understanding them . . . And after looking 

somewhat at the document, if they are in fact being met and if 

in fact the proper consultations were there, we would feel less 

wary of the changes being proposed here. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, again I just want to say that there have 

been, I mean, numerous examples. I think many people on our 

side have gone over the concerns that we have in terms of 

consultations or lack thereof from that side, from the 

government side. In this case, it does appear that they have 

listened to the university in creating the efficiencies and things 

that the university has . . . And it may be a small part. There are 

many more things to do, but all those steps, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, are positive. 



6710 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2011 

We would still be looking and again, as I said, making sure that 

all the consultation, the stakeholders feel well about this. And, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, with that I would be adjourning debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Fairview has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 159, The 

University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 144 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 144 — The Litter 

Control Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre . . . Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A pleasure to have 

the opportunity to speak today in adjourned debates as we look 

at Bill 144, An Act to amend The Litter Control Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to talk about this because of course 

when it comes to issues of the environment and controlling 

litter and issues of recycling, that of course is a very important 

thing and something that all Saskatchewan people — at least, 

most Saskatchewan people, I believe — certainly care about 

and hold as a high priority. 

 

The recycling amenities that we have available to us as 

Saskatchewan citizens, there are many good and positive ones 

that range in the types of services that are provided. That being 

said, Mr. Speaker, we also recognize that there’s a lot more to 

do with respect to having an effective recycling program in the 

province, a more effective recycling program in the province. 

Having lived in some other jurisdictions, I know there are 

places in the world that have a more comprehensive strategy 

with respect to access to blue boxes and a complete recycling 

availability in urban centres and non-urban centres as well. 

 

This piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, while it’s under the 

banner of The Litter Control Act, it is a bit more specific in its 

intent to addressing a problem. It has to do with the deposits 

that are collected on beverage containers here in the province. 

And for a good number of years, Mr. Speaker, there has been a 

process in place where individuals who purchase a beverage 

product, there is a deposit paid on those items. And it’s a 

process that has worked quite well for our province when you 

look at the role of Sarcan in Saskatchewan, as it provides 

employment for many people in the province in urban centres 

and smaller centres as well, and a good geographical 

distribution across the province. 

 

We know that Sarcan has played a very, very positive role in 

many communities. And Sarcan has a very, very high rate of 

recycling the beverage materials, beverage containers that are 

purchased throughout the province, very high compared to other 

jurisdictions. And I know as I travel or as members in the 

Assembly travel or people in the general public, when we go to 

other provinces or states or parts of the world, we see recycling 

rates that are not as high as the rates that have been achieved by 

Sarcan. So I think that is a very positive thing. And as someone 

who’s basically grown up with the Sarcan system, of course the 

benefits of holding on to those empty beverage containers and 

taking them into Sarcan, I know that’s something that most 

Saskatchewan families do. And it’s very much part of our 

culture in terms of instilling a need and a respect for recycling. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the debate about how much further the 

recycling program ought to go and what it may look like in the 

years to come, that’s a debate for another day because when 

we’re looking at Bill No. 144, the reason for bringing Bill 144 

is quite specific, as the minister identified in his second reading 

remarks. And the reason, Mr. Speaker, is basically to deal with 

a lawsuit that has been put through the court process that would 

have some major financial implications for the recycling system 

here in the province. And just for individuals who may be 

reading at home and this debate is new to them, I will read from 

the minister’s second reading speech where he stated on page 

6022 of Hansard on November 15th: 

 

On December 31st, 2009, a law firm issued a statement of 

claim against the province. The statement of claim is 

seeking to recover the environmental handling charges 

imposed and collected under authority contained in The 

Litter Control Act. The claim is brought on behalf of a 

restaurant company that purchased liquor for resale on its 

premises. The statement of claim contends that the vendor 

should not be subject to the environmental handling 

charges because they do not meet the definition of a 

purchaser as stated in the Act. 

 

So the problem, Mr. Speaker, that the province is facing here is 

that a lawsuit has been initiated by a restaurant because they do 

not feel like they meet the terms of a purchaser as defined by 

the Act. And the lawsuit is under way. And while the amount in 

question in this particular lawsuit is not immense — I think it 

says here a single claim of $2,200 — when that amount is 

considered with respect to how it would have implications for 

many other businesses and situations here in the province, it 

becomes more significant. 

 

So the minister went on to state in his second reading remarks 

that it was the ministry’s opinion that they, in a sense, do not 

have a leg to stand on in opposing this lawsuit and that the 

ministry would lose and be responsible. 

 

So what this piece of legislation does is it amends the existing 

legislation to retroactively change the law so that the lawsuit 

does not have a basis and the lawsuit would not be successful in 

seeking the $2,200 amount, and thereby the implications for the 

rest of Saskatchewan’s business community would not have a 

bearing on them. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s basically, it’s a piece of legislation that’s 

brought in to address a specific concern, which is a lawsuit that 

has been brought forward by a restaurant. And the legislation 

that’s being brought in in this amendment is to retroactively 

change the law so that the lawsuit does not have a basis and will 

not be successful. So that is the reason for this amendment and 

that is what it is seeking to solve or address. 

 



March 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6711 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when we look at this type of action, I want 

to be very clear that in my opinion, this type of behaviour by a 

legislature should be a very, very rare thing. And this type of 

behaviour, going back and retroactively changing the law, 

should only be done so, Mr. Speaker, in rare circumstances 

where it is warranted. And it’s my hope, Mr. Speaker, that the 

assessment by ministry officials in stating that there is not a 

sound basis of defence against the lawsuit, it’s my hope that 

that is a correct assessment and it’s my hope, Mr. Speaker, that 

members opposite have certainly done their homework on this 

issue to ensure that it is a responsible thing to be doing, 

retroactively changing the law. 

 

Yes, there’s the supremacy of this body here with respect to the 

laws in the land, but going back and retroactively changing the 

law in order to cancel out a lawsuit that the province is facing is 

a very significant step and it’s one that should not be taken 

lightly. It must occur with the proper debate, which is occurring 

in the House, and it must occur with the proper investigation by 

the ministry that this is in fact the proper course of action. 

 

So I sincerely hope that that work has occurred and that the 

decision to retroactively go back and change the law has been 

done so with thorough and very thoughtful consideration and 

examination of the facts. Because we could think of . . . It 

doesn’t take long for one’s mind to think of other situations 

where it could be convenient for the government to 

retroactively go back and change the law. It could be a 

convenient way to get out of other troubling circumstances. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it’s a very serious thing when you’re 

introducing legislation to retroactively solve a problem where 

individuals have been operating under a certain understanding 

for quite some time. So it could have very significant 

implications for other sectors of the economy and society, and 

serious implications for the role of this legislative body in 

introducing a law and treating everyone in society in a fair and 

equitable manner. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with Bill 144 as I wrap up my remarks, it’s 

tied into legislation to do with the recycling process, the 

structure of the recycling process here in Saskatchewan with 

respect to the collection of deposits on beverage containers. 

And the legislation, the amendments that we’re looking at have 

been brought in order to address a lawsuit that the government 

is facing with respect to the collection of deposits for beverage 

containers. And the legislation has been brought in because it 

was the ministry’s belief that it would lose the lawsuit and be 

responsible for paying damages to this one individual — there 

was one group as well — which would thereby have 

implications for the broader sector. 

 

And so this piece of legislation is being brought in to address 

that issue so that the lawsuit would not be successful. It’s my 

opinion that this type of action by a legislature or parliament 

must be done so only in very rare circumstances and must be 

done so only with very, very thoughtful consideration about the 

implications and the consequences of this action, and a 

thorough examination to determine that such extraordinary 

measures are in fact in order and appropriate and the best way 

to solve the problem. Because it’s a very serious matter when 

the law is retroactively being changed to cancel out a lawsuit. 

 

So I hope that work has been done. And I hope that the 

government, in using its majority to bring this legislation 

through, is making the right decision based on the information it 

has available to them and the research that has been done. And 

with that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks on this Bill 

and move to adjourn debate on this Bill. Thank you so much. 

 

[16:00] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 144, The Litter 

Control Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 155 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 155 — The 

Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 

once again it is truly a privilege and an honour for me to have 

the opportunity to enter into this debate on behalf of the fine 

people of Regina Northeast. Of course, Mr. Speaker, the Bill 

that we’re debating here today is Bill 155, An Act to amend The 

Natural Resources Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, any time, any time a government enters into 

making amendments to legislation, one has to be fairly mindful 

that one wants to scrutinize those amendments to ensure that 

they have the desired effect that I think the government wants to 

achieve, and certainly the desired effect that the people of 

Saskatchewan would like to see. 

 

So in this particular case, Mr. Speaker, I say that this Bill is sort 

of a mixed bag. There’s parts of which is just simply 

housekeeping, with some name changes and some amendments 

to reflect the government’s decision to move from departments 

to ministries, and that was required, I guess. Part of the legal 

process was required to make those changes into the Act. So we 

certainly see that and of course, Mr. Speaker, like I say, it’s 

housekeeping so it’s fairly straightforward. 

 

But at the same time, there are aspects of the Act that causes 

one to be a little concerned, particularly around the financial 

impact or the economic impact these changes may have. As you 

know, Mr. Speaker, in the past The Natural Resources Act 

certainly housed the wildlife . . . The Fish and Wildlife 

Development Fund was housed under this particular Act and 

governed under this particular Act. And now, Mr. Speaker, the 

administration of this fund is now being changed by the 

government’s suggestions, changes at least within this 

legislation, and it would now result in the . . . being established 

a fish and wildlife development advisory council is to be 

established. So, Mr. Speaker, the council consists of not more 



6712 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2011 

than seven members appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council in accordance with the subsections of (3) and (5) in this 

particular Bill. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, one would hope that the government would 

look at providing the opposition and the good folks of 

Saskatchewan a little more information in regards to the 

makeup of this particular advisory council, and to ensure that 

the membership there would certainly reflect the wide range of 

those groups and individuals who have an interest in our 

wildlife and the preserving of wildlife in our great province of 

ours which . . . Mr. Speaker, I think it goes without saying that 

the preservation of wildlife, the habitat for wildlife certainly is a 

very important part of our economy of our province because it 

generates a lot of dollars, tourism dollars, and a lot of sporting 

activity dollars within this great province of ours. 

 

And when we look at Saskatchewan, and for those of us who’ve 

had the opportunity to travel this great province, we know that 

there is a lot of areas of the province which is really suitable to 

wildlife and we must maintain those areas so that we maintain 

the habitat for wildlife so that wildlife flourishes. And we want 

to make sure that that’s the case so that we have . . . well first of 

all that generations to come have the opportunity to enjoy the 

opportunity to see wildlife in its natural habitat, to be able to 

travel into the forests or into our grasslands and see the wildlife 

that’s native to this province of ours and this country, and to see 

it in its natural habitat. Because there’s a rare beauty there that 

you can only appreciate if you take the time to watch and watch 

the activities of various species as they go about their time on 

this great earth. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the same can be applied to our fisheries. 

Certainly we have a landscape of Saskatchewan dotted with 

many lakes, those in the South, and those in the South which 

are really used in a lot of cases by southern sportspeople who 

enjoy fishing . . . And I must say, Mr. Speaker, I am looking 

forward to the increased opportunity of doing that myself. As 

you know, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure the colleagues here, that I 

intend to not seek re-election in the next election and I’m 

looking at having even a little more free time so that I can enjoy 

the great outdoors. And a part of that, of course, would be doing 

some fishing, Mr. Speaker, and I would be looking forward to 

that. And I would be hoping that some of my colleagues on 

either side of the House would find the opportunity to join me. I 

would enjoy the company. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, with that in mind, but more importantly not 

only for us in the present generation but for future generations, 

we must endeavour to ensure that we have strong fisheries and 

our lakes continue to be very active with the fish population, as 

well as ensure that the wildlife of our great province of ours 

continue to flourish and do well. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the activity, the economic 

activity that surrounds wildlife and that activity brings dollars, 

simply dollars to our economy, simply brings dollars to our 

communities and can bring dollars to our businesses throughout 

this province because there is a real commerce around wildlife 

and a real commerce around the sporting activity that surrounds 

that. And it’s not only just in the upfront things like buying 

fishing rods or fishing hooks or perhaps even boats and motors. 

There’s the whole economy around maintaining that equipment. 

It’s always a whole economy around all the sporting good 

equipment including, Mr. Speaker, quadding. I, like many 

others I’m sure are in this Assembly, enjoy the opportunities 

whenever they come at hand to get out and enjoy nature and to 

do so from the back of a quad, so to speak. And I think when 

we’re quadding, we have to ensure that we are mindful of our 

surroundings. We are mindful that we don’t do any untold, 

unwanted damage to our wildlife habitats, and so we have to be 

mindful of that, Mr. Speaker. But it is truly an opportunity to be 

a part of nature and to get out there and to enjoy the wildlife as 

it presents itself in its natural habitat to us, and to enjoy the time 

and to relax. 

 

And sometimes I think, Mr. Speaker, we don’t get enough of 

that and we don’t do enough of that and we don’t spend enough 

time just simply enjoying mother nature and enjoying the joys 

and the beauty that mother nature provides to us. And in fact, 

Mr. Speaker, that opportunity is provided to us usually free of 

costs. You can really enjoy yourself and relax and have a great 

time by just spending a little time and enjoying what mother 

nature’s provided for us — as the saying goes, taking a little 

time to smell the flowers as we go by. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there is a real need to ensure that the 

amendments that the government’s proposing here as far as the 

establishment of the fish and wildlife development advisory 

committee are amendments that are in the best interests of the 

industry, are in the best interests of the individuals of this great 

province who really enjoy the wildlife and the great outdoors, 

and are in the best interests of, quite frankly, the wildlife and 

the fish industry in itself. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that’s why it is important when government 

makes changes, makes amendments to an Act, that they do so 

thoughtfully. And in order to do that, Mr. Speaker, I would 

suggest that the government has to look at getting feedback 

from the front-line people on the issue. And in this particular 

issue I would say it would be the front-line people. It would be 

those who find much of their livelihood is generated from the 

activities of sportsmen, whether it be in the fishing industry or 

whether it be in hunting, or it might be a combination of both, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that would be people who are . . . certainly the Outfitters 

Association would be one of those that I would have hoped that 

the government had serious consultations with before they 

made the recommendations for these amendments. Certainly, 

Mr. Speaker, we look at Ducks Unlimited. They are a very 

renowned body of people who are very interested in wildlife 

and the preservation of wildlife in this great province of ours, 

and I would really wonder if the government took time to sit 

down with the Ducks Unlimited people and talk to them about 

these proposed changes. 

 

Or better yet, Mr. Speaker, rather than talk to wildlife 

organizations and officials about proposed changes, ask them 

what changes they would like to see done. Ask them what they 

think are the changes that would most benefit the people of 

Saskatchewan, the industry as a whole and, of course, mother 

nature and the wildlife that we so desire to protect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one then begins to wonder: what level of 

consultation did this government actually carry out, and who 



March 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6713 

did they consult with? Did they carry out consultations with any 

of the organizations that represent sportsmen and the entire 

sporting industry, such as the Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation? Did the government sit down and discuss these 

proposed changes with the Wildlife Federation? Or yet better, 

Mr. Speaker, did they have the opportunity to sit down with the 

Wildlife Federation and ask their input and ask them what they 

thought would be the changes that would be most beneficial to 

the industry as a whole? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is that approach that I think is in the best 

interests of any industry is for our government . . . And I 

believe that governments of all political stripes certainly want to 

make changes that are in the best interests of the industry and 

would certainly want to make changes that are in the best 

interests of Saskatchewan people. So I would hope, Mr. 

Speaker, that this government did take the initiative to contact 

the various stakeholders, the various organizations that are very 

heavily involved in wildlife and fishing and ask them what they 

thought would be the most appropriate changes to be made that 

would be in the best interests of Saskatchewan people, but also 

in the best interests of the industry and best interests of the 

wildlife. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we ask, like what prompted these changes? 

What prompted the government to bring forward this 

amendment? Was the government approached? Did somebody 

or some organization approach the government and say that 

these changes were necessary? And how was it determined, Mr. 

Speaker, that these changes were needed? Did they simply take 

the word of an individual or individuals, or did they meet with 

groups? Or did they have some scientific evidence to back it up 

that says these changes have to be made? Or is there some other 

hidden agenda here, Mr. Speaker, that would move the thrust, I 

guess you would say, from the fund to the advisory council, and 

that control will then be held in the hands of a maximum of 

seven individuals? So, Mr. Speaker, that is again a question: 

why was that done? 

 

And if there was consultation done, Mr. Speaker, and I will 

have to assume there was. I will simply assume there was. I 

don’t know that there was but, for the argument’s sake, we’ll 

simply assume there was consultation done. Then I would like 

to know, Mr. Speaker, is what method was used to do the 

consulting? 

 

Did the government simply contact one or two or a handful of 

individuals who are involved in the industry and then direct, 

direct the conversation by saying, here are four or five changes 

we want to make and what do you think of it? And therefore 

narrow the debate down to simply the changes that the 

government wanted to make. Or a more open approach 

would’ve been for government to have approached 

representation from the industry and say, what do you think? 

What changes do you think need to be done to enhance the 

industry, to better, make a better situation for the wildlife, that 

we can ensure that our wildlife continues to thrive in this 

province, but also so that the industry that supports that and 

supports the sporting activity around that continues to thrive? 

 

Mr. Speaker, again, you know, who did the government talk to, 

and what method did they use to talk to them? Was there some 

type of a public process? Was there public meetings held? Or 

did the government simply direct its comments to a very narrow 

group of individuals that are identified as representation of the 

industry? 

 

[16:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, what was the reaction to that, to the consulting 

that the government did? The government did go out and 

consult. And the government did talk to individuals and 

individual groups and those who are noted individuals within 

the industry, and then what was their reaction? Did they wholly 

support the amendments that the government’s proposing? Or 

did they have comments and suggestions that these amendments 

should be changed, should be perhaps different than what’s 

being proposed by the government here in this particular Bill? 

So, Mr. Speaker, that certainly raises a lot of questions. 

 

And probably the most straightforward one, Mr. Speaker, that 

the government has missed as far as the opposition is 

concerned, I think as far as the people’s concerned, of this great 

province, and that is a simple question, is how will these 

changes, how will these changes affect the people of 

Saskatchewan? How will these changes affect the people who 

are involved in the sporting industry? How will these . . . Not 

only the sportsmen, Mr. Speaker, not only those who participate 

in hunting activities and those who participate in the fishing 

activities both summer and winter and even those, Mr. Speaker, 

in the northern parts of our province who actually make a living 

from the fishing industry — our, certainly, fishing industry is 

very important to part of their yearly and family income, Mr. 

Speaker — how will these changes affect these folks? And to 

what extent did the government consult on these changes to 

ensure that the changes do not have a negative effect on people 

. . . [inaudible] . . . rather than having a positive effect? And I’m 

sure, Mr. Speaker, that is what the government would wish 

would happen, is that the effects of changes would be positive 

to the people of this great province. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, a question that I would have is, you 

know, how will these changes improve the welfare and the 

livelihood of the people of this great province? And will it have 

a positive effect? Can we point to some mechanism or some 

method as a result of the changes that’s being proposed by the 

government here, in the amendments to these Bills, that will 

improve the life of people in this great province, whether they 

be involved in the industry or not, whether they be a sportsman 

or whether they be somebody who is directly involved in the 

industry, of ensuring the opportunity is there for people to 

participate in either the fishing activities or hunting activities? 

How will this improve their lives? How will this make their 

living perhaps a little better? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are certainly a lot of Bills . . . a lot of 

questions around this Bill, I should say, that haven’t been 

answered and certainly need to be answered. And I think the 

government has certainly not been able to address that certainly 

with the information that they’ve provided both the opposition 

and the general public. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to need more time to do 

further research and to contact many of the stakeholders within 

the industry to get their impression of these proposed 

amendments and to get a sense from them as to whether or not 



6714 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2011 

the government has done a reasonable job of consulting and has 

been able to capture their comments and their thoughts on the 

changes as proposed under this Bill and to ensure that these 

amendments are in the best interest of the industry and the best 

interests of Saskatchewan people. 

 

So with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I will take the opportunity to 

have that time. And my colleagues I’m sure will have 

comments that they wish to make on this particular Bill. So 

with that in mind, I will move adjournment of debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Northeast has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 155, The Natural 

Resources Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 160 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 160 — The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a 

certain sense of gravity that I rise to participate in today’s 

debate on Bill No. 160, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 

Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

Saskatchewan of course, in different fields, has led the way not 

just nationally but internationally in different measures taken 

throughout the years. Saskatchewan is widely regarded as the 

home of medicare. And that of course took place, the big step, 

one of the big steps forward in that fight, Mr. Speaker, took 

place in 1947 with the introduction of hospitalization insurance, 

and of course on through the medicare disputes, and on from 

that and to a place where health care is regarded as one of the 

distinguishing features of which Canadians define themselves 

and of which they are very proud. 

 

One of the other measures that took place in that time frame 

when hospitalization insurance was coming forward, Mr. 

Speaker, was the introduction of the Saskatchewan Bill of 

Rights, the first bill of rights introduced in a Canadian 

jurisdiction, 1947. One of the people that was very much 

involved in the drafting of that piece of legislation was an 

individual named Frank Scott, who was long the dean of the 

McGill law school and one of the people that was a huge 

influence on the thinking and thought of Pierre Trudeau and the 

way that that in turn translated into something like the Charter 

of Rights. 

 

The work in Saskatchewan also, in 1947, presaged the 

introduction of the Diefenbaker government’s introduction of 

the bill of rights, I believe in the late ’50s, and of course led into 

the work that brought about the introduction of the Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms. 

So Saskatchewan has played a leadership role and had influence 

beyond its borders in a myriad of ways when it comes to the 

question of human rights and how that is addressed in Canada. 

And it’s no small feat, or it’s no small thing for a government to 

bring forward amendments to that legislation. And certainly it’s 

a fairly heavy question that we are here to consider with the 

introduction of Bill No. 160. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Speaker, I’ll state off the top, some of the 

language that’s been used in the defence of this legislation 

around the promotion of education and the introduction of 

perhaps human rights curricula in the public school system, 

these are all aims that are laudable, ensuring that people have a 

more streamlined, a better pace of action when they pursue 

something through the Human Rights Code and through the 

human rights system in this province. Again the stated goal is 

the expediting of procedure — again a fairly laudable objective. 

 

But the objectives, and as laudable as they are to my mind, Mr. 

Speaker, do not measure up to what we find in the legislation 

and what we find in certain critiques of the legislation as 

brought forward and then the way that the consultation has 

taken place around that legislation. 

 

I’ll also state that certainly the current Human Rights 

Commissioner is somebody that I think did a tremendous piece 

of work for the province in his tenure as the treaty 

commissioner, you know, widely popularizing the treaty 

education and the notion that we are in fact all treaty people. 

And certainly I have a great deal of respect for the Human 

Rights Commissioner. But I guess the way that this debate has 

unfolded, the Human Rights Commissioner I think has come to 

the fore as the end-all, be-all defender of this legislation. 

 

And certainly the Minister of Justice . . . This is a Bill that’s 

brought forward by the government. And the work that should 

normally be done by the Minister of Justice in explaining and 

persuading or perhaps rethinking some of the measures brought 

forward, it seems to be, that normal process seems to be a bit 

clouded in this. But I think it’s important to remember that, at 

the end of the day, the Minister of Justice speaks for the 

government on these matters. This is a government Bill. And 

the concerns that we have on this legislation, the concerns that I 

have on this legislation, I certainly lay at the feet of that 

minister and of this government. 

 

Now again the goals around greater possibilities for education, 

expediting the process, and having a greater reach of human 

rights in the province, does that measure up? And what is it 

about the current legislation that needs fixing? And that is 

something that has yet to be explained in any sort of satisfactory 

way, Mr. Speaker. And I think it’s helpful to look at the 

legislation that’s under question, not just the amendments. But 

what does the existing legislation have to say about the current 

regime that supposedly cries out for remedy? 

 

I guess first off in the current legislation as it exists under 

section 47 of the legislation . . . pardon me, under section 3 of 

the legislation, right at the top of the legislation it lays out what 

are the objects of the Act, The Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Code. And what are those objects? And I quote from the 

legislation, Mr. Speaker: 

 



March 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6715 

Objects 

3 The objects of this Act are: 

 

(a) to promote recognition of the inherent dignity and 

the equal inalienable rights of all members of the 

human family; and 

 

(b) to . . . [promote] public policy in Saskatchewan 

that every person is free and equal in dignity and 

rights and to discourage and eliminate discrimination. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is a fairly broad and inspiring mandate for the 

legislation. Objectives like that could hardly be construed as 

prescriptive or constraining the ability of, again, the promotion 

of “. . . recognition of the inherent dignity and the equal 

inalienable rights of all members of the human family” or the 

furthering of “. . . public policy in Saskatchewan that every 

person is free and equal in dignity and rights and to discourage 

and eliminate discrimination.” 

 

What is it about those objectives, Mr. Speaker, that cry out for 

amendment? And I would argue that those amendments . . . that 

these objectives, pardon me, Mr. Speaker, these objectives 

should stand. These objectives should . . . They say a lot and 

they say it well, Mr. Speaker. So we don’t see that the 

objectives that are enshrined in the legislation as it currently 

exists pose any sort of undue challenge for the legislation or for 

the Human Rights Commission, and we think they should stand. 

 

It’s also worthwhile, Mr. Speaker, to look at what are the duties 

of the commission, and those are found in section 25 of the 

current Saskatchewan Human Rights Code. And the duties of 

the commission are enumerated as follows: “The commission 

shall . . . ” And that’s an important word to note, Mr. Speaker, 

and I’ll come back to that in a moment: 

 

The commission shall: 

 

(a) forward the principle that every person is free and 

equal in dignity and rights without regard to religion, 

creed, marital status, family status, sex, sexual 

orientation, disability, age, colour, ancestry, nationality, 

place of origin, race or perceived race or receipt of 

public assistance. 

 

That’s section (a), Mr. Speaker. Section (b) to promote, the 

commission shall: 

 

(b) promote an understanding and acceptance of, and 

compliance with, this 

Act; 

 

Section (c), section 25: 

 

(c) develop and conduct educational programs designed 

to eliminate discriminatory practices; 

 

Again if I can add parenthetically, Mr. Speaker, one of the 

guises that the amendments are brought forward under is the 

ability to engender further educational work. And on the other 

hand, we find that enshrined in the legislation as it’s written and 

as it’s enshrined in law right this very day, Mr. Speaker. Section 

25: 

(d) disseminate information and promote understanding 

of the legal rights of residents of the province and 

conduct educational programs in that respect; 

 

Again building on the educational mandate of the Human 

Rights Code and of the commission. Section 25: 

 

(e) further the principle of the equality of opportunities 

for persons, and equality in the exercise of the legal 

rights of persons, regardless of their status; 

 

Section 25: 

 

(f) conduct and encourage research by persons and 

associations actively engaged in the field of promoting 

human rights; 

 

And section 25: 

 

(g) forward the principle that cultural diversity is a basic 

human right and fundamental human value. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, in a province where our very motto is 

“from many peoples, strength” that reflects the spirit that 

presides in this current legislation. It reflects the duties of the 

commission that have been enumerated in section 25. And we 

think that again there’s a fairly substantial set of duties that the 

commission is not only tasked with performing but absolutely 

should be performing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we’ve looked at the objects of the legislation. We’ve looked 

at the duties of the commission. And I think it’s also further 

instructive as to what can be done under the Human Rights 

Code. And for this we turn to section 47(1), under “Programs, 

orders, or approval of by commission.” 47(1) reads: 

 

On the application of any person or on its own initiative, 

the commission may approve or order any program to be 

undertaken by any person if the program is designed to 

prevent disadvantages that are likely to be suffered by, or 

to eliminate or reduce disadvantages that are suffered by, 

any group of individuals when these disadvantages would 

be or are based on or related to the race, creed, religion, 

colour, sex, sexual orientation, family status, marital 

status, disability, age, nationality, ancestry or place of 

origin of members of that group, or the receipt of public 

assistance by members of that group by improving 

opportunities respecting services, facilities, 

accommodation, employment or education in relation to 

that group or the receipt of public assistance by members 

of that group. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, section 47(1) talks about what can be done 

under the section. And there is an awful lot that can be done 

under the current Human Rights Code. So I look at the current 

Human Rights Code. Mr. Speaker, I’m not a lawyer. I’m not a 

human rights lawyer, but I certainly am a legislator and proud 

to be so. And I look at the current legislation and what is 

proposed under the amendments and I don’t see how, in this 

regard, there are changes required. 

 



6716 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2011 

So we get into, who is it that has problems? What was the 

voices that have come forward to date, Mr. Speaker, in critique 

of this legislation? And I talked about Frank Scott, earlier on 

and some of the concerns or some of the legacy of Professor 

Scott when it comes to the constitution and the Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms, and certainly The Saskatchewan Bill of 

Rights of 1947. Certainly another monumental name in recent 

constitutional affairs is that of Dr. John Whyte. And Dr. John 

Whyte is one of those that has enumerated concerns with the 

current piece of legislation as it’s being brought forward and is 

urging reconsideration. 

 

Another voice that is raised in criticism of this legislation and a 

voice that I find to be of particular interest, Mr. Speaker, is that 

of the general secretary of Amnesty International. The general 

secretary of Amnesty International, I should state for the record, 

Mr. Speaker, is an individual named Alex Neve. He’s a member 

of the Order of Canada, and of course he’s the general secretary 

for the Canadian section of a international organization that has 

won the Nobel Peace Prize for their work in the defence and 

promotion of human rights. So when Amnesty International 

does its work and when they come forward with concerns being 

raised, you would think that would give some pause for 

thought. 

 

And I should say on a personal basis, Mr. Speaker, Amnesty 

International, one of the first ways that I gained a broader 

awareness of the world around me and the issues that we face as 

a human family had to do with the Conspiracy of Hope concert 

in the summer of 1986. And one of the bands that was involved 

in that, Mr. Speaker, artists that had come forward to use their 

talents to advance the cause of human rights and to try and get 

some freedom, to get some redress for different prisoners of 

conscience that were held by dictatorships around the world, 

one of the bands that was involved in that was U2. 

 

And of course in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard no 

lesser light than the Premier, the member from Swift Current 

quote the words of the leader of U2, Bono, in reference to 

different legislation. So you know, I don’t think I’m alone in the 

impact that bands like U2 had on my consciousness and the way 

that it helped me to think about the world around me and the 

issues that were going on. 

 

And I guess one of the things that was notable about that 

concert series, Mr. Speaker, was the way that it used popular 

culture to make a political case, to make a human rights case 

against some horrible situations that existed around the world 

and the way that played into fighting apartheid in South Africa 

or fighting the use of torture in different regimes around the 

world. And again of those six prisoners of conscience that had 

been held, there were two that were released not long after that 

concert series, demonstrating the ability of people that have a 

talent, people that have the public eye through popular culture, 

to use those talents for good and to use them in a political way, 

if I can say so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so that is where Amnesty International entered into my 

consciousness. And I think it had something to do with the 

interest that I grew to take in the affairs of the world and of my 

community. And I think Amnesty International has certainly 

played a role like that for many people, Mr. Speaker. But most 

importantly what it’s done is to fight the abuses of human rights 

that are evident in the world around us, to hold out that candle 

of hope in the darkness of different dictatorships and to bring 

forward the case of people that are otherwise being silenced. 

 

And if you think about it, Mr. Speaker, that is at the base of 

what human rights is all about. It’s the right to live like a human 

and to not be oppressed or to be treated poorly for who you are 

on this Earth, for being a human being. 

 

And I think of the work that Amnesty International has done 

generally and the work that they have done certainly on a global 

basis that led to the awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize to this 

organization. But I also think specifically about the way that the 

Stolen Sisters reports on the missing or murdered Aboriginal 

women, the way that Amnesty International was able to focus 

attention and to galvanize action on behalf of the Stolen Sisters 

and to shine a light of hope on some pretty horrendous 

situations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again the work that Amnesty International set in play with 

Stolen Sisters or the way that they were able to focus attention 

and to focus the public debate on how criminal it was that there 

were Aboriginal women that had been murdered or had gone 

missing for really fundamentally no other reason than being an 

Aboriginal woman, and the way that they shone a light on the 

sort of structural dynamics at play, but the way that they shone 

a light on the very human tragedy of these situations, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Again when Amnesty International speaks up on an issue, again 

I take notice, and I know I’m not alone in that. So it was with 

great interest that I came to learn of the concerns of Amnesty 

International as it relates to this legislation. And again Amnesty 

International is not alone in registering some of these concerns, 

but I certainly think that when it comes to the proper promotion 

or the abuse of human rights, Amnesty International has a 

certain authoritative quality when it comes to what they have to 

say about whether or not a piece of legislation is in fact 

promoting human rights, whether in fact it’s progressive or 

whether it’s not. 

 

And again something I’d like to quote from at length or perhaps 

read into the record, Mr. Speaker, is a letter that we’ve obtained 

a copy of that was written from the Canadian Secretary-General 

Alex Neve of the Canadian section Amnesty International, to 

the Minister of Justice of this government. It’s dated December 

10th, and it states: 

 

Dear Minister, 

 

Amnesty International is writing this open letter to urge 

you to reconsider the plans for reform of Saskatchewan’s 

laws and institutions for the protection of human rights in 

the province, as contained in Bill 160, which you recently 

introduced in the provincial legislature. 

 

Amnesty International is, in particular, deeply concerned 

about the proposal in the Bill to abolish the Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Tribunal and leave adjudication of human 

rights complaints in the hands of the provincial Court of 

Queen’s Bench instead. We are concerned that this will 

impede access to human rights remedies for many 

individuals, as court proceedings are inevitably more 



March 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6717 

complex, formal and time-consuming. 

 

We recognize that Bill 160 also proposes changes to the 

role of the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission, 

including an increased focus on dealing with systematic 

patterns of discrimination and on making use of alternative 

dispute resolution methods, such as mediation. Those are 

enhancements to the system that would very likely make 

positive contributions to greater human rights protection. 

But informality and accessibility of the adjudication 

process itself plays a crucial role in maximizing human 

rights protection, given the very nature of the complaints 

and the fact that they’re often brought forward by 

individuals from marginalized groups and sectors in 

society. 

 

It is well recognized, in Canada and globally, that human 

rights institutions other than the courts have an important 

role to play in adjudicating human rights complaints. 

Notably, the Paris Principles relating to the Status of 

National Institutions, adopted by the UN General 

Assembly in 1993, expressly set out that a national human 

rights body “may be authorized to hear and consider 

complaints and petitions concerning individual situations.” 

 

Carrying on in the letter: 

 

Across Canada, that is precisely the model that has been 

adopted in all jurisdictions. Provincially and federally, 

human rights tribunals with informal procedures that aim 

to maximize accessibility are empowered to make the first 

level decision in human rights complaints which proceed 

to the stage of adjudication. The role of the courts is left to 

hearing appeals and supervising tribunals. Amnesty 

International considers that to be best practice. 

 

And I underline that again, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Amnesty International considers that to be the best 

practice. 

 

Such a significant change to the process available to the 

people of Saskatchewan for enforcing the protection of 

their rights should, at a minimum, be subject to extensive 

public consultation. In fact, given what is at stake there 

should be public consultation before any significant 

changes are made to human rights legislation, institutions 

or procedures. It is our understanding that did not take 

place before Bill 160 was introduced. 

 

Minister, systems for the protection of human rights can 

most certainly benefit from ongoing improvement. I’m 

writing to you on International Human Rights Day, which 

marks the 62nd anniversary of the adoption by the United 

Nations of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It 

is an apt occasion to call on you and your government to 

commit to an approach to reform that would strengthen 

and not risk undermining provincial human rights 

protection. In that spirit, we urge that, rather than proceed 

with Bill 160 at this time, your government launch a 

public consultation process to consider possible reforms 

that would strengthen the province’s human rights laws 

and institutions. 

Sincerely, 

Alex Neve 

Secretary General 

 

Amnesty International, Canadian section. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So Amnesty International, the Canadian section, again an 

organization that has won the Nobel Peace Prize for their efforts 

in the defence and promotion of human rights around this globe. 

Amnesty International, an organization which, never in my 

memory, Mr. Speaker, has weighed in on a matter of provincial 

legislation in this province of ours, is saying that this is a Bill 

that should be pulled back and reconsidered. And I guess, you 

know, maybe this government of the day is fine with flouting 

the opinions of what are obviously experts in the field, Mr. 

Speaker. But I guess they can’t have it both ways. They can’t 

call this legislation progressive in the one breath and then go 

ahead despite the concerns raised by people like Alex Neve of 

Amnesty International and still hold themselves forward as 

some kind of example of being progressive. 

 

This legislation . . . Secretary General Neve holds out some of 

the concerns that they as Amnesty International have with what 

this will do to not just the human rights that exist but almost 

equally as important, Mr. Speaker, the enforcement, the ability 

to defend those human rights. They hold that out as a huge 

concern and it’s one that we certainly share as the official 

opposition and that I certainly share as a legislator. 

 

As part of the evolving debate that picked up steam around this 

legislation and as people looked more between the stated intent 

and what are some of the pieces in the legislation as they 

actually impact — it’s the ability to secure human rights here in 

the province — they came to be much more aware of the fact of 

what kind of power is being consolidated in the hands of the 

Chief Commissioner, where words like what is warranted and 

what is reasonable become a judgment call for the Chief 

Commissioner. Power taken out of the hands of the tribunals 

and put solely in the hands of one individual. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, one of the points, as I understand them 

as a layperson when it comes to matters of constitutional law, 

when it comes to things like charters of rights and bills of 

rights, there’s certainly an interpretive role to be played by the 

courts, and certainly we see that as different measures roll 

forwards in the post-implementation era of the Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms. But the law is prescriptive, and 

necessarily so by its very nature. It makes it . . . It very 

narrowly confines the powers of one individual or another to, 

you know, if they’re a good person and you agree with them, 

maybe one set of decisions come out. When you have 

something that’s enshrined in law, it very much solidifies and 

gainsays those rights. 

 

So as we see the Human Rights Code put forward, as I’d 

provided an overview of the objectives and the duties and the 

means that are available to the Human Rights Commission 

earlier, we see those things being enshrined in law as very 

important. But we also see that, with the proposed legislation 

and the way that it’s been defended, the grounds that are being 

defended, I think in many ways, are certainly able to be pursued 



6718 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2011 

under the law as it exists. That educational mandate that’s 

garnered such attention, I don’t see what there is in the current 

Human Rights Code that detracts or dissuades from pursuit of 

those education initiatives. 

 

But what we do see in the legislation being brought forward is 

that consolidation of power, a less than adequate consultation 

process, a bit of confusion in terms of whose Bill this is. And 

again, Mr. Speaker, we’re very clear on this side that this is a 

Bill of this government and it’s a Bill of that Minister of Justice. 

And again the kind of expert voices that are coming forward, 

the authoritative voices that are coming forward saying that this 

is something that should be reconsidered. 

 

And I guess again there’s another piece of work that Mr. Neve 

has done on behalf of the discussion around this debate and a 

debate that took place in Saskatoon at the start of this month, 

Mr. Speaker, and it’s available on the Amnesty International 

Canada Saskatchewan website. But in enumerating what are the 

concerns or expanding upon the concerns that he had identified 

in his letter to the minister of December 10th, he talks about 

two concerns. Having heard that the consultation wasn’t an 

open-ended consultation around this Bill, but rather it was sort 

of, here’s the deal; respond to it as you will, the second concern 

that he had found expressed to him, and I quote: 

 

. . . many have expressed concern to me that the 

consultations focused mainly on the four pillars and gave 

much less attention to the more controversial proposal 

related to the future of the human rights tribunal. 

 

Mr. Neve comes forward with a number of what I think are 

helpful recommendations on how to improve the process, but he 

also comes forward with a concern around the powers that are 

being consolidated in the hands of the commissioner and how 

he sees that as negatively impacting the ability of the Human 

Rights Commission to do their work. 

 

The first is with mediation and what constitutes a fair and 

reasonable offer of settlement and the way that that is placed 

squarely in one person’s hands. He brings forward a second 

grounds of criticism around dismissal of human rights 

complaints where the commissioner can, on grounds that the 

complaint is not warranted, dismiss the complaint out of hand. 

And there’s no explanation as to what are the guidelines for 

that, Mr. Speaker. A third area of concern is that there’s no 

review or appeal of a decision to dismiss a complaint. So again 

does that aid the case of the pursuit of human rights? 

 

I guess there are other things that certainly my colleagues will 

bring to the floor, Mr. Speaker, and certainly there’s some 

things that are reiterated in the copy of the remarks made by 

Mr. Neve at the start of March in Saskatoon. 

 

But for me I think it’s like this: if you have somebody as 

authoritative as Amnesty International coming to your province 

to tell you that a piece of legislation that deals with the Human 

Rights Code is ill-considered, you would think that it would 

behoove the government to sit up and take note because when 

. . . And I know that I’ve not been around this House for a long 

time, but I am a student of the history of this place, Mr. 

Speaker, and I cannot recall a single instance of Amnesty 

International weighing in on any particular legislative measure 

of any stripe of government in the history of this province. 

 

And again this is Saskatchewan, where we have this proud 

history of the first bill of rights in 1947 in Canadian 

jurisdictions, and the way that that has impacted the national 

affairs of this country. So you would think that given that 

history, and given the voice and certainly in the person of Alex 

Neve of Amnesty International coming forward to call on this 

Bill to be reconsidered, you’d think that would warrant some 

attention. And I guess I’ll say this: that certainly caught my 

attention, Mr. Speaker, and has awakened me to the possible 

problems inherent in this amendment. 

 

And again certainly other of my colleagues will have more to 

say on this matter. But as it stands, I think when somebody like 

Alex Neve and Amnesty International comes to the province, 

Mr. Speaker, and speaks out against this legislation, and in 

something that is so unheralded, so unprecedented in the history 

of this province — and given the history of this province — I 

think we owe it to the people that the human rights that we seek 

to defend and promote through this legislation, they deserve a 

better and closer look at this legislation. And we as legislators 

would do well to listen the voices of the Alex Neves. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that other of my colleagues 

will be very interested to participate in this debate, and as such I 

move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 160, The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 157 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 157 — The Oil and 

Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise to speak about Bill 157, An Act to amend The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Act. Mr. Speaker, this Bill is a little thicker than 

some of the ones that we get around this place this year, and so 

practically it may take a little longer to actually review all of the 

issues that are set out in this legislation. But I think practically 

the legislation is set up to develop some compliance, assurance, 

and enforcement processes through setting up some new 

systems of measuring how oil and gas is produced and 

transferred within the province. And it’s interesting to see how 

this is done. And I think perhaps this evening I’ll have a chance 

to look at, in a little more detail, some of the fundamental 

issues, but I think at this point we should probably talk just a 

little bit about what is happening here. 

 

It appears that the government and industry and various groups 



March 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6719 

have sat down and worked through a number of changes that 

will make things somewhat simpler for the industry. And I’m 

often reminded, Mr. Speaker, of some of the work that’s 

happened in the North Sea as it relates to a lot of the oil and gas 

properties in the North Sea. And I think a number of years 

before we in Canada have looked at how one works together 

with industry, they made some very conscious decisions there 

to set up processes and procedures that would allow for the 

sharing of the information between Great Britain and Norway, 

Denmark, Germany, Sweden, any of the groups that were 

around the various oil deposits, and I think now including 

Russia which, and Finland, which have territories around on the 

north, northern part of some of those oil fields. 

 

But one of the interesting points that always intrigued me was 

that they, by legislation in the various countries, ended up 

sharing their information as it related to the various layers, the 

substrata under the North Sea where the oil and gas were 

located, in such a manner that people were able, as the 

geologists and engineers who were working on the projects, it 

would enable them to have the ability to go and look at the 

structures in a virtual reality situation. And it’s always 

interesting to think about virtual reality. Some of us only will 

see it maybe in some art works or places where people have 

used this, but what was enabled was for people to put on the 

headgear and the glasses that will allow them to go down and 

walk around or move around under the surface to see what these 

structures were. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are some aspects of this Bill today 

which include the sharing of information across our borders that 

may allow for some of that kind of work. I think we still have 

some major challenges around who owns the information and 

how that information is stored in our systems. But practically, 

this may end up having some aspects of providing this 

information for the oil companies, for the gas companies, for 

government, for various groups who are concerned about this, 

so that we can end up then having this shared information 

available for everyone who wishes to proceed. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 5 p.m., this Assembly will recess 

until 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6689 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6689 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6689 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6689 

  Bjornerud ...................................................................................................................................................................... 6689, 6709 

  Morin ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6689, 6691 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6690 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6690 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6690 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6690 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6690 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6691 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6691 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6691 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6692 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6692 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Affordable Housing 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6692 

 2011 Les Rendez-vous de la Francophonie 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6692 

 Achievements of Saskatchewan’s Curling Teams 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6693 

 Fundraising for New Curling Rink 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6693 

 Consumer Rights 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6693 

 Opposition Critic’s Statement 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6694 

 Canadian Agricultural Safety Week 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6694 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Rent Control 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6694 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6694 

 Support for Sexual Abuse Victims 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6696 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6696 

 Environmental Monitoring 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6697 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6697 

 Chiropractic Services 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6698 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6698 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Rick Hansen Institute Initiative 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6699 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6699 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Ruling on a Point of Order 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6700 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6700 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 161 — The Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6703 

 



 

 Bill No. 162 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6705 

  Harrison (point of order) ....................................................................................................................................................... 6707 

  The Speaker (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................. 6708 

 Bill No. 159 — The University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6708 

 Bill No. 144 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6710 

 Bill No. 155 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6711 

 Bill No. 160 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6714 

 Bill No. 157 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6718 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


