




















































Hansard: May 10, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 59A  TUESDAY, MAY 10, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7563 

 May 10, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress. 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly I’d 

like to introduce today Catherine Craig, sitting in your gallery. 

Mr. Speaker, Catherine is working in my constituency office as 

a summer student. She’s an English major at the University of 

Regina. 

 

She’s come with great curiosity, a willingness to learn, and 

we’ve been very pleased with her attitude so far. She’s going to 

learn the role of the MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] and a little bit about the political experience in this 

province, and so we have made this a part of her learning 

experience. And we’d ask all members to welcome her to her 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I see seated in your 

gallery two individuals I’d like to introduce to you and through 

you to all members. In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is Kent 

Peterson and Paige Kezima, newly installed president and 

vice-president of the University of Regina Students’ Union, 

who are here to watch the proceedings today. And I would ask 

all members to join me in welcoming them to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

you and through you, I’d like to join the member opposite in 

welcoming these student leaders from the University of Regina 

here to their Assembly. Obviously the University of Regina is a 

vitally important institution, not just within the city but right 

across the province. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask everyone in the 

Chamber to join me in welcoming these student leaders to their 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For what is probably 

the last time, I have the honour of welcoming an individual in 

the east gallery. This is someone I’ve introduced previously, 

and it’s always a pleasure to see my old friend, Gunnar 

Passmore. I say old friend not because of Gunnar’s advanced 

age but because of the length of time that Gunnar and Dee, his 

wife, and myself have been friends and acquaintances. 

 

And I want to say a couple of things about Gunnar. One, he is 

with the Saskatchewan Building Trades Council and is the 

government liaison. So anyone looking for any information in 

this place of all, Gunnar’s the guy to talk to. 

 

The other thing I want to say is, because I haven’t had time to 

connect with Gunnar on this, but I’m very much looking 

forward to the Building Trades Dollars Against Diabetes golf 

tournament coming up where Gunnar and I pair up and finish 

somewhere around dead last in that fundraiser. But it’s a fun 

fundraiser and I very much look forward to golfing in it again 

this year with Gunnar Passmore. 

 

I ask, Mr. Speaker, all colleagues to help me for my last time in 

welcoming Gunnar to . . . I should say for anyone that’s 

watching, my last time because I’m not running again and time 

is running out here. It’s not that Gunnar is in any way 

challenged health-wise. It’s all me. Please help me welcome 

Gunnar for the last time here. Gunnar. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast, the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the 

member opposite in welcoming Mr. Passmore to the legislature. 

I realize it’s the member’s last time introducing him, and 

probably we’ll have occasion to introduce Mr. Passmore again 

in his capacity with organized labour. I’d like to welcome him 

to the legislature and thank him for the respectful way he’s dealt 

with us in the various meetings we had. He has indicated to me 

that he lives in the constituency of Indian Head-Milestone. He’s 

also indicated he does not support the current MLA from that 

area, but indicates that he’s a nice person in any event. So 

please welcome Mr. Passmore. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose, the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to this Assembly, I would like to 

introduce, in the west gallery, 40 grade 8 students from my 

home, Mr. Speaker, from Rosetown Central High. They’re 

accompanied by their teachers, Richard Berezowski, Terry Hall, 

and Ken Boyd, and also chaperone Shona Braun. They have a 

big day planned here today, Mr. Speaker. I look forward to 

talking to them a little bit later this afternoon. And I ask all 

members to please give these great young people a warm 

welcome to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly I’d like to introduce a fine looking group of grade 9 

students from Gravelbourg High School in Gravelbourg, 

Saskatchewan. There are 17 students and they’re accompanied 

by their teacher, Crystal Stark, and Darcey Huyghebaert. And 

yes, there is a relationship there; Darcey’s my son. So I would 

ask all members to welcome these individuals to their Assembly 

and I’ll be meeting with them shortly after question period. So 

please help me welcome them. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 



7564 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2011 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition that speaks to the issue of educational 

assistants and the support that they provide to students with 

intensive needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen the number of educational assistants 

drop over the past number of years and many people point to 

the Ministry of Education’s document, Enhancing 

Opportunities through Full-Service School Divisions, which 

actually called on the reduction of EAs [educational assistants]. 

So, Mr. Speaker, we know the importance of EAs, and many 

parents are feeling the loss of not having an adequate number to 

support students. And the prayer in this petition reads, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the government to 

provide appropriate funding for the required number of 

educational assistants to provide intensive needs students 

with the supports that they require to maintain a positive 

learning environment for all Saskatchewan students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of residents in Indian Head 

and Regina. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty 

here in Saskatchewan. And we know that freedom from poverty 

is an enshrined human right by the United Nations and that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security. And we 

know the gap, the income gap between the rich and the poor 

continues to grow, and now one in five children in 

Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. 

 

And citizens living in poverty have long identified affordable 

solutions. Recent national-provincial initiatives including the 

Saskatoon health disparities report and the Canada Without 

Poverty, Dignity for All campaign all call for a comprehensive 

poverty elimination strategy. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I do so present. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of my constituents who live in the 

neighbourhood of Hampton Village. The petition reads: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes, including education property tax; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to neighbouring 

communities to attend schools that are typically already 

reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

residents of Hampton Village. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

again today in support of potash royalty review, presenting this 

petition because the people of Saskatchewan are owners of a 

1,000-year strategic resource and they deserve to receive the 

maximum benefit from that resource. Additionally, Mr. 

Speaker, a CEO [chief executive officer] of a big potash 

company in Saskatchewan said that there’s a new norm for 

potash, and that’s been proven through their first quarter results 

which saw $732 million in gross profits. Mr. Speaker, the 

prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to begin a 

comprehensive, transparent, and public review of 

Saskatchewan’s potash royalty system with a view to 

maximizing the return from this strategic resource for its 

owners, the people of Saskatchewan, who wish to use 

these additional potash royalty revenues for needed 

investment in health care, child care, education, affordable 

housing, infrastructure, and other social programs as well 

as public initiatives such as debt repayment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition today is signed by good folks from 

Aberdeen, Langham, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, and Pleasantdale. 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

again today to present a petition to restore funding equity to 

Regina Catholic schools. Regina Catholic schools received 

$275 less per pupil than Regina public schools in the school 

year 2009-2010, amounting to a funding inequity of $2.7 

million, and that is growing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This funding inequity places program delivery and staffing and 



May 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7565 

levels at risk, not just at the Regina Catholic schools, but 

Catholic schools throughout the province. The Government of 

Saskatchewan has denied Catholic school boards in the 

province representation on the government-appointed 

committee mandated to develop a long-term funding formula 

for Saskatchewan school boards. And the petition reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to address the funding inequity between 

Regina Catholic schools and Regina public schools that 

provides $275 less per pupil funding for Regina Catholic 

school students, totalling $2.7 million, and make known 

that the continuation for another school year of funding 

inequity places program delivery and staffing levels at risk 

in Regina Catholic schools; and in so doing, immediately 

restore funding equity to ensure that every student in 

Saskatchewan, whether enrolled in a Catholic or a public 

school, receives equitable resources to ensure every 

student in Saskatchewan has access to a quality education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the residents of 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition in support of personal care home funding. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan residents require different levels of care in their 

senior years, and personal care homes play a vital role in 

providing seniors who live in them an appropriate level of care. 

The Saskatchewan Ministry of Health currently does not fund 

personal care homes, although it does fund special care homes 

which provide services to seniors requiring higher levels of 

care. Mr. Speaker, therefore: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan cause 

the government to provide a subsidy to personal care 

homes, permitting seniors who rely on them to live in 

dignity and independence without bearing an undue 

financial hardship. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by people from the 

constituency of Saskatoon Fairview, Saskatoon, and La Ronge. 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again today, as I often 

have during this sitting, to present a petition by citizens of 

Saskatchewan concerned about the detrimental effects that Bill 

160 will have on human rights law if enacted. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

withdraw Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public 

consultations informed by a public policy paper before any 

amendments to the Human Rights Code, the law that 

supersedes all others in our province, are even considered. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Radville, Duck 

Lake, La Ronge, Biggar, Patuanak, Yorkton, Cumberland 

House, Saskatoon, Tisdale, Martensville, Allan, Star City, 

Aberdeen, Naicam, Warman, Creighton, Langham, 

Lloydminster, Perdue, Estevan, Domremy, Birch Hills, Moose 

Jaw, Esterhazy, Ituna, Melville, Kamsack, Weyburn, Regina, 

Watson, Melfort, Lumsden, Craven, Arcola, Nipawin, LeRoy, 

Air Ronge, Stanley Mission, Rouleau, Pilot Butte, 

Churchbridge, Cochin, North Battleford, Cut Knife, Mervin, 

Canora, Liberty, Swift Current, Big River, Battleford, 

Kindersley, Prince Albert, Maple Creek, Cupar, Southey, 

Duval, Belle Plaine, Lang, Fort Qu’Appelle, Balcarres, 

Raymore, Buena Vista, Grenfell, White City, Humboldt . . . 

[inaudible] . . . Lemberg, Montmartre, Bruno, Lanigan, 

Wadena, and Margo. I so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from 

across Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of our 

finances by the Sask Party. They allude to a record that includes 

the running of deficits and increasing of debt at times of record 

highs in revenues in this province, Mr. Speaker, all coming at a 

consequence both to this generation but to future generations, 

Mr. Speaker, a record that includes increasing debt by more 

than $1.3 billion over the last three consecutive years and 

increasing our public debt by $548 million this year alone, Mr. 

Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by good folks and concerned citizens 

of Prince Albert, Redvers, and Regina. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Champions of Mental Health Awards 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to bring to the 

attention of members of the Legislative Assembly today a new 

awards program in support of those who care for people with 

mental illness or those who struggle with mental health issues. 

 

On May the 7th, people from around the province gathered in 

North Battleford for the second annual Champions of Mental 

Health Awards sponsored by the North Battleford branch of the 



7566 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2011 

Registered Psychiatric Nurses Association of Saskatchewan. 

This 2011 program recognized Koopmans Autobody for the 

Supportive Employer Award; Chris Ebach, an extended 

psychiatric rehabilitation facilitator with Saskatchewan 

Hospital, North Battleford, and Lucy Bendall, an RPN 

[registered psychiatric nurse] community mental health nurse 

for the Mental Health Staff Awards; the Shellbrook bingo 

volunteers for the Volunteer Award; and Marilyn McGowan for 

the Community Based Mental Health Organization Award. 

 

Marion Palidwar, president of the North Battleford branch of 

the RPNAS [Registered Psychiatric Nurses Association of 

Saskatchewan], says the Champions of Mental Health Awards 

not only acknowledges those in the community who are making 

a difference in the lives of people living with mental illness, but 

brings an awareness to the public, locally and further afield, of 

the continuing need to improve mental health services. 

 

I ask all members to join me in congratulating the organizers 

and thanking the participants in this effort in support of those 

who are making a difference in the lives of so many of our 

province’s vulnerable citizens. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs. 

 

World Lupus Day 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Today is World Lupus Day. The World Lupus Day 

proclamation was first developed in 2004 when an international 

steering committee representing lupus organizations from 13 

different nations met in Eton, United Kingdom to organize the 

observance of World Lupus Day. The proclamation is a call to 

action to increase support for lupus research, awareness, and 

patient services. 

 

Lupus is a chronic autoimmune disease which often attacks 

young women of child-bearing age, but individuals of any age 

or gender can develop lupus. The ongoing and complex nature 

of lupus causes a wide range of symptoms and effects with 

repercussions on family, friends, work colleagues as well. 

Despite these facts, lupus remains a relatively invisible health 

issue in the public, health professionals, and governments 

worldwide, thus continuing the need for increased lupus 

awareness. 

 

World Lupus Day focuses on the need for heightened public 

awareness, improved patient health care services, increased 

research into the causes, and a cure for lupus. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind everyone that this weekend 

there will be lupus groups from around Saskatchewan 

participating in Lupus Canada’s awareness-building fundraiser 

called a Walk for Lupus. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government I would 

like to commend the Lupus Saskatchewan Society for their 

continuing efforts to raise awareness of lupus throughout the 

province of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, today, May 10th, is World 

Lupus Day. Because of the many different ways in which it 

appears, lupus has been called the disease of 1,000 faces and 

affects more than 5 million people worldwide. An autoimmune 

disease, lupus causes its sufferers pain, swelling, and damage to 

their joints, skin, bones, and internal organs. 

 

May 10th is a day on which the worldwide lupus support 

community makes a special effort to educate the broader 

population about lupus, its symptoms, and its impact on those 

who suffer from it. Such education is one of the most important 

services undertaken by members of the lupus support 

community. Knowledge is crucial since the widely varying 

types of symptoms that can be exhibited by someone with the 

disease mean that lupus can often be misdiagnosed. 

 

With increased education and awareness, people afflicted with 

lupus can sooner recognize their symptoms. Doctors will be 

more likely to diagnose the illness correctly and much suffering 

can be avoided by shortening the time between the disease’s 

appearance and the beginning of a proper treatment regimen. 

 

Lupus has no cure, but as the knowledge of this disease grows, 

so will the opportunity for work towards a final cure. 

 

Lupus Saskatchewan Society joins Lupus Canada and the 

related organizations worldwide in recognizing World Lupus 

Day. On May 28th at 2:30 p.m., the LSS [Lupus Saskatchewan 

Society] will be hosting a Walk for Lupus here in Regina 

beginning on the east side of the Legislative Building by the 

Trafalgar Fountain. I ask all members to offer their support for 

this and other efforts to show support for people with lupus, 

their families, and friends. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Family First Radiothon 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

commend the Moose Jaw Health Foundation, who raised over 

$300,000 in its fifth annual Family First Radiothon held 

Thursday and Friday of last week. 

 

During the 36-hour radiothon, residents of Moose Jaw and area 

phoned or stopped in at the Town ’N’ Country Mall and showed 

their support for the hospital with donations in all 

denominations. The success of the event was amplified by a 

$50,000 anonymous donation and $113,630 bequeathed by 

Hazel Lewry, who had formerly worked as a nurse at the Moose 

Jaw Hospital. The grand total of $309,526 is very much 

appreciated, as the money will provide new chemotherapy 

equipment for the Moose Jaw Union Hospital, including an 

Invacare recliner, PCA [patient controlled analgesia] pulse 

pump, along with transport stretchers, electric hospital beds, 

and vital signs monitors, all to help and care for cancer patients. 

 

The success of the fundraiser is indicative of the support for the 

hospital in Moose Jaw serving the Five Hills Health Region. 

Over the past five years, over $1 million has been raised 

through the radiothon for equipment upgrades. 

 

Thank you to the Moose Jaw Health Foundation for their 



May 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7567 

commitment and dedication, to the volunteers who donated 

their time answering the phones and accepting donations during 

the radiothon, and a special thanks to all the supporters who 

graciously donated for the improvement toward chemotherapy 

equipment at the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

National Mining Week 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, National Mining Week is on, and 

it runs from May 9th to 13th. It provides a great opportunity for 

us to take stock of the wonderful resources we have right here 

in Saskatchewan. National Mining Week is about celebrating 

the hard-working people of the industry and acknowledging 

their huge contributions to our province. 

 

The mining sector in Saskatchewan is an essential component 

for economic and social fabric. Having emerged among the top 

of Canada’s mineral producers, our province’s mining sector 

contributes greatly to our prosperity. The mining industry 

spends more than $3 billion annually on wages, goods, and 

services and provides over $2 billion in revenue to the 

provincial treasury. These revenues support government 

programs and services such as health care, education, and 

infrastructure development. With more than 25 operating mines, 

Saskatchewan is a significant player in the global mining scene 

and is currently among the world’s largest producers and 

exporters of both potash and uranium. Mr. Speaker, from 

Coronach to Points North, Saskatchewan is a mining province. 

 

The NDP [New Democratic Party] celebrates Mining Week and 

recognizes the important contributions of the mining industry 

and the thousands of Saskatchewan families who contribute to 

its sustained prosperity. I ask that all members join with me in 

celebrating National Mining Week to reflect upon the hard 

work and dedication of the people who work in our province’s 

mining industry, and celebrating the rich and diverse mining 

industry that we have in our province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Head Office Relocates to Saskatoon 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today the province 

received good news. One of the world’s largest mining 

companies, BHP Billiton, has decided to relocate its diamond 

and specialty products head office to the city of Saskatoon. In 

addition to the head office senior management team, we will 

also see a relocation of over 30 support positions. According to 

this morning’s news release, this relocation will phase over the 

coming months and reflect the company’s commitment to 

establish a premier potash business managed from 

Saskatchewan near its flagship potash development project. 

 

Tim Cutt has also been announced as the new president of the 

diamonds and specialty products division. Mr. Cutt has said, 

and I quote: 

 

I am delighted to be returning to Canada . . . and to be 

playing my part in developing an industry leading potash 

business in Saskatchewan that creates value for 

shareholders, plays an active role in the community and 

creates new jobs and opportunities for the Province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we are witnessing are positive spin-offs of a 

stable royalty regime, where businesses want to invest and 

create new jobs and opportunities in Saskatchewan. BHP’s 

major investment in Saskatchewan continues to demonstrate the 

Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Bargaining With Teachers 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday 

teachers left the classroom across Saskatchewan and joined 

together to kick-start the stalled contract talks with government. 

 

Saskatchewan teachers have been without a new contract since 

last August. The action last Thursday marked the first ever 

province-wide job action by teachers in the history of 

Saskatchewan — a rare event, Mr. Speaker, and certainly not an 

act taken lightly by Saskatchewan teachers. Mr. Speaker, our 

teachers took this action with a 95 per cent endorsement by 

their members, a very strong mandate. 

 

It should be noted that neither the Premier nor the minister 

could find the time or respect to address the thousands of 

teachers assembled on the steps of the legislature.  

 

Further, it’s disappointing that this Sask Party government is 

trying to sway public opinion by using taxpayers’ money to 

negotiate against the teachers through advertising rather than 

engaging in good faith bargaining. Take for example the 

full-page ad in Saturday’s Leader-Post and the website 

established by this government. Teachers’ tax dollars are being 

used against them. I question why this money is not better spent 

to provide a fair contract and ensure the necessary investments 

required in education . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Okay. Then I would allow the member to . . . 

My apology. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Given the fact 

that we had just a miscalculation on the clock, I would ask the 

members if we’d allow the member to do his full statement. Go 

ahead. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday 

teachers left the classroom across Saskatchewan and joined 

together to kick-start stalled contracts with the government. 

Saskatchewan teachers have been without a new agreement 

since last August. This action last Thursday marked the 

first-ever province-wide job action by teachers in the history of 

Saskatchewan — a rare event, Mr. Speaker, and certainly not an 

act taken lightly by Saskatchewan teachers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our teachers took this action with a 95 per cent 

endorsement by their members — a very strong mandate. It 



7568 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2011 

should be noted that neither the Premier nor the minister could 

find the time or respect to address the thousands of teachers 

assembled on the steps of the legislature. 

 

Further, it’s disappointing that this Sask Party government is 

trying to sway public opinion by using taxpayers’ money to 

negotiate against the teachers through advertising rather than 

engaging in good faith bargaining. Take for example the 

full-page ad in Saturday’s Leader-Post and the website 

established by this government. Teachers’ tax dollars are being 

used against them. I question why this money is not better spent 

to provide a fair contract and ensure the necessary investments 

required in education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I call on this Premier to cut the wasteful 

taxpayer-funded propaganda war on teachers and to invest in 

them today. Quite simply, not only do teachers deserve better, 

Saskatchewan people deserve better. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Negotiations With Teachers 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday 12,000 teachers 

took job action for one day. Three thousand of them came to the 

legislature to try to get the government to listen to them and to 

treat them fairly. Yesterday, after exhausting every other 

avenue, 60 health care professionals held a one-day strike in 

Prince Albert to highlight chronic understaffing and unfair 

contract offers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government has given a 24 per cent wage 

increase to the director of House business, but they have no 

money for a fair contract for teachers or health professionals. 

To the minister: in light of the 24 per cent wage increase to their 

director of House business, how is it fair to offer people who 

educate our children and the front-line people who provide help 

to our families 5.5 per cent over three years, an increase less 

than the cost of living? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s very encouraging that a formal invitation was given to the 

teachers to return to the bargaining table. We are very 

encouraged that the teachers have accepted that invitation, and a 

date will be set up at the earliest possible date where the two 

bargaining teams can get together. I’m being told that that will 

probably be early next week. So I encourage that the 

negotiations resume and the discussions take place where they 

need to take place, Mr. Speaker, which is at the bargaining 

table. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the only way this government 

negotiates is with the help of Bills 5 and 6. Bill 5 has 

completely corrupted the collective bargaining process, and Bill 

6 allows employers to bargain in public and the government to 

publicly threaten employees. 

 

The government is running ads in the paper saying if teachers 

get the wage increase they’re asking for, there’ll be massive 

layoffs. SAHO [Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations] is putting flyers on bathroom and stall doors, 

bulletin boards, and running ads through the media trying to 

intimidate health care workers. To the minister: is this the 

government’s idea of fair negotiating process with teachers, 

health science professionals, and other employees? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, there are indeed ads that 

are being run. The ads are to lay out the facts. Mr. Speaker, 

there is comparisons that both sides, both bargaining teams 

agree to as far as what wages are in other provinces. And I 

would like the other side to say that they don’t think that the 

public is entitled to any of those facts. It would be interesting to 

hear them say that publicly, we should not allow the public to 

be aware of the facts. 

 

There was however wage numbers that was agreed upon on 

both sides of the bargaining, both the teachers and the 

trustee-government bargaining teams, and those wages are 

being published as to what they are, as well as where the wages 

are here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Should we keep the public in the dark? Is that what the NDP 

would like to see happen? I know they did it when they were in 

government. They kept many people in the dark. But, Mr. 

Speaker, we think the facts should be made public. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we hear oftentimes that on the 

floor they will not negotiate collective agreements on the floor 

of this legislature. Yet we heard from the minister right now 

that they are prepared to advertise and use taxpayers’ dollars to 

bring forward the facts — their facts, not according to these 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is doing well not because of 

anything the Sask Party government has done, but because of 

hard-working professionals like teachers and health care 

workers who do the heavy lifting. Mr. Speaker, we have record 

revenues this year and almost 1 billion in the rainy day fund. 

We know the Premier controls the purse strings. 

 

To the Premier: the government has money to give health 

region CEOs up to 60 per cent wage increases. Will the Premier 

return to the bargaining table with an increased mandate to 

provide the people who help build the province with a contract 

that really values their hard work and dedication? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, there is a number of 

professionals within our province. In fact all the workers in our 

province deserve to be valued, Mr. Speaker. And that is why the 



May 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7569 

government put forward what they believe to be fair and 

competitive. When you compare the offer that has been put 

forward, it’d be, if accepted, it would be the second highest of 

the Western Canadian provinces, and it is above the Canadian 

average. If you put forward a fair offer, Mr. Speaker, I believe 

that is showing that you value the work of that profession. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Membership in the Enterprise Club 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Minister of Justice. The annual returns for the 2010 political 

donations are now out. Well most of them, Mr. Speaker. As we 

know, people who purchased $1,000 Sask Party Enterprise Club 

memberships in 2010 are not disclosed necessarily in these 

returns that disclose every other donation over $250 because the 

Sask Party hasn’t done their wining and dining exemption yet, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Does the minister agree that it is in the public interest to know 

everyone who has given $1,000 to a political party in 

Saskatchewan in the previous year, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 

question and appreciate the opportunity to get up and explain 

what exactly has happened with this year’s return. 

 

I’m advised by party officials that for donations that were given 

in the previous year by way of memberships in the Enterprise 

Club, they were issued tax receipts in early 2011 for the 2010 

taxation year. But, Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, there is a 

very small handful of people that had given donations that will 

actually apply for the next taxation year. So in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, there is a supplementary list of people who have given 

donations or bought memberships who have not yet been 

entitled to receive tax receipts. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, either way we are in full compliance with the 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, and if the member wishes to go back 

and re-review the return, he’ll see that the list is complete with 

both those members and individuals that received a tax receipt 

and those that had made a donation for which a tax receipt 

cannot yet be given. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we are hearing from 

individuals who believe that they are members of the Enterprise 

Club, but can’t find disclosure of their donations in the 2010 

returns. 

 

We know that the Sask Party has set up the Enterprise Club, an 

exclusive $1,000 membership club, that allowed individuals, 

businesses, and corporations the ability to buy time to meet with 

the Premier, Sask Party cabinet ministers, and MLAs and other 

government officials. The Sask Party is appointing people to 

boards and positions, public responsibility. These appointees 

are supposed to be unbiased in their political views and working 

for the public good. 

 

To the minister: does he agree that the public has a right to 

know if the people being appointed to public boards and 

positions of responsibility are members of $1,000 Enterprise 

Club and if they have had special access to the Premier and his 

cabinet? And is he saying today that the Sask Party has reversed 

its policy of failing to disclose these donations for an entire 

fiscal year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been through this a 

number of times before. There is a very complex process to 

determine what a person is entitled to by way of a tax receipt. It 

contemplates determining the entire cost of an event and 

dividing it by the number of people that attended the event. It’s 

stipulated in the legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, it will be the 

practice of this party and this government to ensure that that 

takes place, as I expect it will be with the members opposite. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can advise as well that where monies have 

been received, but we are not yet able to determine what tax 

receipt is there, we have disclosed that not because of a reversal 

in policy, but we have done that out of abundant caution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can advise you as well that during the previous 

government, when they were in government, they just chose 

simply not to disclose these donors at all. They did nothing, Mr. 

Speaker. There was a large number of people that they received 

donations from that they did nothing whatever with, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It is the policy and practice of this government and this party 

that we will disclose things fully and completely. We have 

absolutely nothing to hide, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, anybody who’s given the 

New Democratic Party $1,000 once has their name on a little 

brass plaque down at provincial office. So if the minister’s 

concerned about non-disclosure, he can just go down and check 

that, check that list of plaques. 

 

In 2009, Mr. Glen Kobussen, former CEO of St. Peter’s 

College, Carlton Trail, and some other combined college at the 

same time, made a $1,000 contribution to the Sask Party which 

was not disclosed in the annual return for the year in which it 

was made. St. Peter’s College reimbursed Mr. Kobussen the 

$1,000 he paid to be a member of the Enterprise Club. So the 

taxpayers paid for the donation, which again was not disclosed 

in the fiscal year it was supposed to be. 

 

Considering the discrepancies in reporting and the fact that it 

was taxpayers’ dollars being paid to the Sask Party for the 

Kobussen donation, will the Minister of Justice provide us with 

an update as to the investigation by the Chief Electoral Officer 

into the appropriateness of delaying this, this delay of 

disclosing political donations, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 



7570 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2011 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

chose to communicate with the Chief Electoral Officer. I 

received no information from the Chief Electoral Officer nor 

have I sought any information. The Chief Electoral Officer is an 

independent officer of the Legislative Assembly, and I trust that 

that individual will do whatever investigations he deems 

appropriate. And, Mr. Speaker, it would be inappropriate for us 

to interfere with that process whatever. 

 

I can advise the House, Mr. Speaker, and advise members of the 

public, it is and will always continue to be the practice of this 

government to ensure that the legislation is complied with. And 

I can advise as well that the party chose to provide additional 

information on monies that had been received but tax receipts 

have not yet . . . And, Mr. Speaker, I cannot fault them for 

doing that. In fact the only thing I can do, Mr. Speaker, is to 

commend them for the appropriate full and thorough method in 

which they have chosen to handle their affairs. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this matter we regard as being nothing more 

than the opposition raising issues because they have no other 

real issues to deal with, Mr. Speaker. We have a great province 

and things are going well in our province. And, Mr. Speaker, 

they should be focussing on the strong economy and the robust 

life the people have in our province. 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Relationship With Teachers 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in committee, the 

Minister of Education was discussing a large teachers’ rally that 

occurred here at the legislature last Thursday. I asked the 

following question: 

 

I heard either through a scrum tape or through the media 

that you watched it from your window. Was that an 

accurate description of how you took in the events on 

Thursday? 

 

The minister replied, saying: 

 

No, you didn’t hear that. I’m sorry, but you might have 

thought you heard that. I know for a fact you did not hear 

that in a scrum or otherwise.  

 

Does the minister still stand by the answer she gave yesterday 

evening? 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t recall telling 

anybody that I watched it from the windows, so I do not recall 

saying those words. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, in a media scrum last Thursday, 

the minister said this: “I looked out the window and there were 

a large number of teachers.” 

 

Yet when I asked her about those comments yesterday, when I 

asked her about those comments yesterday, she said: 

No, you didn’t hear that. I’m sorry, but you might have 

thought you heard that. I know for a fact you did not hear 

that in a scrum or otherwise. 

 

It may seem like a little thing, Mr. Speaker, but for a minister to 

say one thing one week and the exact opposite the next is 

deeply concerning. So to the minister: what’s the truth, what 

she said yesterday to the committee or what she told the media 

last Thursday? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

may not be aware, I have windows on two sides of my office. 

To go from the desk, I go past two sets of windows in order to 

go to the front office. Mr. Speaker, I do have interactions with 

the staff in my office, and from time to time throughout the day 

I walk from my desk to the administration . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’m having difficulty 

hearing the minister’s response. Order. Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 

have, as I often do on any given day, will look out the window 

as I walk past those windows, Mr. Speaker. I suppose I could 

cover up the windows. I suppose that I could put blinders on, 

the NDP should know how that works quite well, and not look 

sideways at all. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, yes, I did glance out the window. I did walk 

past my windows a number of times. So I, you know, truly I 

didn’t stand there watching. I do have other things to do, Mr. 

Speaker. But did I look out the window? Yes, Mr. Speaker, I 

probably did. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, again this may seem like a small 

matter, but when you can’t trust someone on small matters, 

when you can’t trust someone on small matters, you certainly 

cannot trust their word on big matters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thousands of teachers came to rally at the 

legislature last week in order for their concerns to finally be 

heard. They invited the minister and the Premier to attend but 

they chose not to, and teachers were curious where they were. 

One day, one day, Mr. Speaker, the minister claimed she was 

looking at the rally through the window. Another day she 

adamantly denied that she was looking at the rally through the 

window. 

 

So to the minister: at a time when teachers are already feeling 

incredibly disrespected and undervalued by the Sask Party 

government, will she apologize to them for her vastly different 

stories about where she was when they came to the legislature 

last Thursday? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I want to share with this 



May 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7571 

Assembly a letter that I received from a teacher from Prince 

Albert who does not agree, does not agree quite frankly with the 

offer that the government has given them. But the letter says 

this: 

 

Dear Mrs. Harpauer [and I’m quoting]: 

 

I wish to express my most sincere appreciation for your 

response to my letter of March 2, 2011, in which I 

communicated my concerns and beliefs regarding the state 

of collective bargaining between the government trustees 

and the teachers of Saskatchewan. 

 

I greatly appreciate the respectful and positive tone of your 

letter. I appreciate even more your recognition of the 

invaluable work that we do as the educators in the publicly 

funded K-12 education system. At the moment, the two 

sides in teacher contract negotiations are very far apart in 

their opinions of what is a fair, reasonable and competitive 

settlement. Nevertheless, it is reassuring that for both sides 

it is possible to disagree without being disagreeable. 

 

[It ends with] Thank you again for your polite, respectful 

letter. It is reassuring that despite our differences, we can 

still remain a positive, respectful relationship. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Response to Rent Increases 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We raised the issue 

some weeks ago about a group of renters in Regina who are 

facing rent increases of as high as 63 per cent. When we 

initially questioned the government about the people from 

Portnall on April 4th, the response was that increases were, and 

I quote, “unacceptable.” 

 

To the minister: now that more than a month has passed since 

our first discussion specifically about the rental situation at 

3211 Portnall and more generally about rent controls, what has 

the government done to protect the tenants from this kind of 

unacceptable rent increase? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I agree at that 

time . . . And I do know the rent controls of 100 per cent are 

totally unacceptable, and that is the only time we’ve heard of 

that time of rent increase. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is many people around this province who are 

looking for homes, and they are actually very pleased with the 

fact that the vacancy numbers have increased right across the 

province. They’ve gone from 1.2 per cent to 2.5 per cent. Mr. 

Speaker, there is opportunities because of the summit and 

because of the consultation work we’ve done and the five-point 

plan on housing where there will be more units. The individuals 

that the member opposite is speaking about have been spoken 

to, not only from individuals in my office but from the 

Rentalsman, and we are working very hard to make sure those 

individuals have a place they can call home. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That’s interesting that 

she’s working with the people. The people at the Portnall agree 

with the government that a rent increase of 63 per cent is truly 

unacceptable. And in your gallery today, Mr. Speaker, is one of 

the residents. In your gallery today, Mr. Speaker, is one of the 

residents, Gaby. A student, Gaby can’t afford such steep 

increases in her rent. Like many in Saskatchewan, Gaby is 

facing economic eviction, and she is feeling like she’s being 

spoken to by the minister. 

 

To the minister: when we spoke about the people at Portnall 

back in April, the government said there might be measures that 

could be taken to protect renters like Gaby. So I want to ask 

what measures, specific measures have been looked into, and 

will any of these come into effect to keep Gaby and her 

neighbours from being economically evicted from their homes? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we all are 

aware that the housing issue is one of the big ones, challenges 

that we have in the province right now, and that’s why our 

government has spent a lot of money on making sure that we 

can have new units that are available so people will have not 

only a home but will be moving out of what is rental space and 

allowing them into the entry-level homes that we have in the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the vacancy rates have increased in seven out of 

nine of our largest cities, and we do know that there is 

opportunities working with the developers to make sure that 

there are more units that we have. Mr. Speaker, at the summit 

not too long ago, we had an opportunity to speak to developers 

who are well aware that Saskatchewan is a great place to invest. 

And they would like to not only build more units, but know that 

we have put more money into the pockets of the people of the 

province so they have money to pay for rent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that there are individuals that are still 

being affected by this, and our government is working very hard 

to make sure that we can look at everybody in an individual 

basis to make sure that there are homes for people. Overall we 

know that we have to have more units and more money in the 

pockets of our people. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well I’m not sure Gaby’s feeling like she’s up 

more money in her pocket after a 63 per cent rate increase. 

 

Now one of the few people in this province, the Premier, has 

the ability to say something is unacceptable and actually take 

the steps to do something about it. And he’s sitting right across 

the aisle. The government has said that this kind of rent increase 

is unacceptable, but nothing has been done. To the minister: 



7572 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2011 

when will this government start taking responsibility for 

protecting the people of Saskatchewan? This government agrees 

this is an unacceptable situation, so I’ll ask again: what steps, 

what specific steps is the government ready to take to protect 

tenants in this province from being gouged by their landlords? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been watching the 

markets. We’re watching rate increases, and we know that 

Saskatchewan’s overall rate increase in the province is not 

higher than any other province. We do know that the vacancy 

rate is improving right across the province. And we know that 

there’s more work to be done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that we have, we’ve put more money into 114,000 

taxpayers’ pockets because they no longer pay taxes in this 

province. Mr. Speaker, we’ve worked ensuring that we’ve 

increased the rental supplements and shelter rates six times and 

indexed them to the cost of living. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do know that there’s more work to do with 

individuals. I am very pleased with the fact that we’ve had 

individuals represented at the housing summit that came from 

non-profit . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Minister of Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — April 19th to 21st, we had people from 

19 different non-profit organizations that came and talked about 

their concerns. I met with these individuals for an hour and a 

half and answered their questions, and they agreed that there’s 

more work to be done, but we have to do it together. Mr. 

Speaker, there’s more work to be done. The work has to be 

done in partnerships, not only with municipalities but with 

developers, and making sure that we work together to 

understand that there is an advantage in our province and that 

everybody has a right to share in that advantage. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, this minister gives us rhetoric 

after rhetoric. She fails to understand the urgency of this 

situation. Vacancy rates won’t help out Gaby today. What 

specific measures has she taken, what this government has 

taken to help out the tenants at Portnall? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, when the issue first came 

forward, there was a number of the tenants from Portnall came 

to our office, and we had a chance with the Minister of Justice 

to sit down and talk with them and talk about some of the work 

that the Rentalsman could do as well. We had a chance to talk 

about their individual needs and to see if there’s other places 

they can be in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite had an opportunity when 

they were in government three and a half years ago to talk about 

things like rent controls and building more houses, but they 

didn’t do that. Instead they decided it would be better to take 

taxpayers’ money and spend it outside of our province, outside 

of the country, and they did not concentrate on our province. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, we know that in the next 

few months there has to be work done to make sure that these 

individuals, who were affected by this tremendous rate increase, 

will have a place to stay. 

 

But I do think that the members opposite have forgotten that not 

too long ago, when they were in government, they thought it 

was okay to raise taxes and not look at all at the people that 

were . . . They raised income taxes twice. They raised PST 

[provincial sales tax] three times. They raised fuel taxes twice. 

They raised tobacco taxes five times. All the time, it was talking 

about individuals, Mr. Speaker, and not looking at the people 

that need their help but looking at their own pockets. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Deputy House Leader is 

asking for a point of order. I ask the member to state the point 

of order. 

 

POINTS OF ORDER 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, during question period, 

the member from Saskatoon Centre referred to the presence or 

absence of a member, which is clearly contrary to the rules and 

practice of the Assembly and has been for some time, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. If you listen 

very carefully to the question that was asked, the member was 

referring to the seat where he sits, Mr. Speaker. He wasn’t 

talking — the chair — he was not talking about his absence. He 

said he sits on the opposite side, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it was clearly, clearly about where the Premier sits. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. The member 

raises a point of order. Order. I’ve listened to the point of order. 

I’ve listened to the response from the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Members have agreed to the rules. Rule 50(b) says, “reflect on 

the absence of another Member.” It doesn’t say anything to do 

with regards to the presence or absence. I find the point of order 

not well taken. 

 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, during question period today, the 

Minister of Education referred to a letter . . . Point of order, Mr. 

Speaker. Referred to a letter, Mr. Speaker. 

 



May 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7573 

The Speaker: — Order. I ask the member to state his point of 

order. 

 

Mr. Yates: — During question period today, the Minister of 

Education referred to and quoted directly from a letter. Mr. 

Speaker, I simply ask that that letter be tabled. Under the rules, 

if a minister reads from a letter — and she referred to it as a 

letter — it is to be tabled in the Assembly upon request. 

 

The Speaker: — I would ask the minister to table the letter, 

and I thank the minister. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Economy 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 157, The Oil and 

Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

request leave to waive consideration in the Committee of the 

Whole on the Bill and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 157, The 

Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 and that the 

Bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move to third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill. No. 157 — The Oil and Gas Conservation 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Energy and Resources that Bill No. 157, The 

Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 be now read 

the third time and passed under its title. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I didn’t get there yet. 

 

Order. I’d ask members to come to order so that we can hear the 

proceedings. 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Economy 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 144, The Litter 

Control Amendment Act, 2010 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’d ask members to come to order so 

that we can hear the proceedings in the Chamber so that 

members can follow and understand when they’re supposed to 

be involved in the Chamber. 

 

We’re discussing Bill No. 144, The Litter Control Amendment 

Act. I’ve asked when shall this Bill be considered in Committee 

of the Whole. 

 

I recognize the Minister Responsible for the Environment. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill be now read for the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has 

requested leave to waive consideration of Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 144, The Litter Control Amendment Act, 

2010. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. And that the Bill be now read 

the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 



7574 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2011 

Bill No. 144 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for the Environment that Bill No. 144, The Litter 

Control Amendment Act, 2010 be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Economy 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 155, The Natural 

Resources Amendment Act, 2010 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill be now 

read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for the 

Environment has requested leave to waive consideration of 

Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 155, The Natural 

Resources Amendment Act, 2010 and that the Bill be now read 

the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 155 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for the Environment that Bill No. 155, The Natural 

Resources Amendment Act, 2010 be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion passes. Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 14:32 until 14:36.] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Those in favour of the motion, please 

rise. Order. 

 

[Yeas — 33] 

 

Morgan Norris Draude 

Krawetz Boyd Eagles 

McMorris Cheveldayoff Duncan 

Huyghebaert McMillan Harpauer 

D’Autremont Harrison Hickie 

Reiter Hutchinson Brkich 

Elhard Hart Schriemer 

Stewart Allchurch Weekes 

Ross Wilson Michelson 

Wyant Ottenbreit Chisholm 

Kirsch Bradshaw Heppner 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion, please rise. 

 

[Nays — 19] 

 

Lingenfelter McCall Belanger 

Harper Trew Higgins 

Atkinson Nilson Forbes 

Vermette Broten Furber 

Morin Yates Iwanchuk 

Taylor Quennell Wotherspoon 

Chartier   

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 33; those 

opposed, 19. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion carries. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Economy 

Committee. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 



May 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7575 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 

Standing Committee on the Economy to report that it has 

considered certain estimates and to present its ninth report. I 

move: 

 

The ninth report of the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — The Chair of the Economy Committee has 

moved: 

 

That the ninth report of the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee of Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 169, The Saskatchewan 

Financial Services Commission Act without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and the Bill be now read 

the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 169, 

The Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Amendment 

Act, 2011 and that the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may move to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 169 — The Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission Amendment Act, 2011 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move this Bill be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 169, The Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission Amendment Act, 2010 be now read the third time 

and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report that it has considered certain estimates and to 

present its 10th report. I move: 

 

That the 10th report on the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred 

in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee: 

 

That the 10th report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred 

in. 

 

Is the Assembly read for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 160 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 



7576 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2011 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 160 — The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to speak to Bill 160, a Bill that proposes amendments to 

The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code. And I want to begin by 

stating, because there’s been a lot of confusion amongst the 

public who are interested in this Bill, what the Bill actually does 

and what the Bill actually does not do, what the Bill is actually 

about and what the Bill is not about, Mr. Speaker, and what the 

government’s Bill will have the effect of doing, what is the 

intent of the Bill to do and what it will not have the effect of 

doing and does not have any intent to do, and what the 

opposition supports in respect to human rights reform and what 

the opposition opposes, and what the public supports and what 

the public opposes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What this Bill is not about is the much talked about by the 

government, the government spokesman, the much talked about 

four pillars. The opposition has no difficulty with the four 

pillars, support the four pillars. It’s our view, and I think of 

reading of the current Human Rights Code unamended by this 

Bill, is that the four pillars are supported by the current 

legislation. 

 

As a matter of fact, in a couple of cases and one case for sure, 

Mr. Speaker, the current Human Rights Code better supports 

one of the pillars, the first pillar, more than the amendments. 

Anything the amendments proposed in this Bill seek to 

undermine one of the four sacred pillars that the government 

uses as a defence and argument for this legislation, for this Bill 

that is before the Assembly. 

 

The four pillars — and now I’ll cite a government document in 

this respect prepared by the Human Rights Commission — the 

first and foremost pillar is investigation, prosecution, and 

gatekeeping for complaints of discrimination. It is the 

prosecution and adjudication of human rights complaints that 

will be greatly diminished towards zero, or as diminished as this 

government can affect, with this legislation. That’s the first 

pillar. That pillar is obviously supported by the current Code. 

Members of the government, the government itself aren’t fond 

of the controversy that is sometimes raised by the investigation, 

prosecution, and adjudication of human rights complaints. And 

this Bill is primarily about ending those adjudications and 

ending that controversy and attendant issues to it. 

 

[14:45] 

 

The second pillar is a focus on early resolution using mediation, 

collaboration, talking circles, and other forms of alternative 

dispute resolution. Well none of those are prohibited from the 

current Code. No changes have to be made to the Code. It still 

doesn’t have to be passed to allow for the second pillar. Matter 

of fact, mediation is often used by the Human Rights 

Commission currently. It’s not the type of coercive mediation 

that is set out in Bill 160. And the other types of dispute 

resolution that are mentioned in the document circulated by the 

government aren’t mentioned in the Bill. The Bill makes 

passing reference and, I would argue given the current Human 

Rights Code, superfluous and redundant reference to seeking 

alternative dispute resolution mechanisms. 

 

The third pillar is systemic advocacy for issues that affect 

multiple persons or groups. And again already that pillar is 

there in the current Code in the objects of the current Act, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And the fourth, and this is the most scandalous, in some ways 

disingenuous, conflation of the Bill, Bill 160 and the pillars, 

because the fourth pillar is in respect to education. And the 

Human Rights Commission wants to develop pre-kindergarten 

to grade 12 civics material and teach citizenship rights, 

responsibilities, and respect in all Saskatchewan schools. A 

high-sounding, high-minded principle and purpose, Mr. 

Speaker. But interestingly enough, Bill 160 does not contain the 

word education. Anything that is done in respect to this fourth 

pillar is being done pursuant to powers that are already set out 

in the current legislation, unamended by this Bill, the current 

Human Rights Code. 

 

Now in passing I’ll say that in estimates we discussed a modest 

increase that was made to the Human Rights Commission in 

this year’s budget — $100,000 has been provided for 

development of this curriculum — another $100,000 apparently 

to the Ministry of Education. The development of this 

curriculum if everything proceeds apace, if the government 

maintains its commitment to it, will take another three or four 

years according to the questions and answers that we received 

in estimates. 

 

At the end of that time, this Bill and this strategy would see the 

front line for solving another social problem — the problem of 

sexual discrimination, racism, homophobia — we transfer it 

from people in the justice system to school teachers. So the plan 

here is to off-load these issues from where they are now 

currently dealt with and load those down on already 

overstressed, overworked teachers who are today still without a 

contract for the work they already do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But that aside, that is the decision, to put a greater emphasis on 

education about human rights and tolerance of diversity into the 

schools. It doesn’t require Bill 160 to do it, Mr. Speaker. It 

simply doesn’t. And Bill 160 doesn’t even contain the word 

education. The government when it drafted the legislation 

didn’t even bother to put the word education in the Bill, 

thinking that if they just kept talking about the four pillars, and 

every time they had occasion to speak to or respond to 

questions about Bill 160, people would assume that the four 

pillars in Bill 160 had something to do with each other. And I 

think it’s been a fairly successful strategy. 

 

On the occasion of the first reading of this Bill, a number of 

representatives of different groups came to this Assembly to 

express their support for the four pillars. And it was interesting 

because often groups are invited to come and hear the second 

reading speech of the minister because when the Bill receives 

first reading, you don’t hear very much about what the Bill 

actually does. But if they had come for the second reading 

speech of the minister, then they would have actually heard 

what the Bill does do. Even given that it would have been the 

best possible light the government could put on the Bill, the 



May 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7577 

minister couldn’t have mentioned really in a second reading 

speech, in defence of Bill 160, an explanation of Bill 160 had 

anything to do with education on human rights issues. Because 

it doesn’t. The word’s not in the Bill. 

 

Now I had occasion to talk to some of the representatives in the 

rotunda before we came into the Assembly, and on that day’s 

business, among other things, had first reading of Bill 160. And 

one individual from one organization had come down from 

Saskatoon to express his support for what he thought was in Bill 

160 because he’s all in favour of anything that has to do with 

education and education to do with social responsibility. Well 

to this day I expect that that individual may not know that Bill 

160 has nothing to do with education, that there is nothing 

about education in Bill 160. It’s simply not there. 

 

The information provided by the government, the frequently 

asked question document about Bill 160, is interesting in some 

other respects besides taking as the number one primary 

paragraph the occasion, the opportunity to conflate and confuse 

the four pillars, which the opposition supports, Mr. Speaker. 

The Amnesty International, who oppose Bill 160, support all 

the people from all the communities . . . And I think I read out 

more than 70 communities today who have signed petitions 

asking for the withdrawal of Bill 160 and public consultations 

on human rights reform. They all expect we’d actually support 

the four pillars, Mr. Speaker, but they don’t support Bill 160 

because that’s not what Bill 160 is about. 

 

Bill 160 is about moving from adjudication of human rights 

complaints, which are sometimes controversial, sometimes 

make the news, which sometimes upset people, moving away 

from that adjudication to coercive mediation or never getting 

very far at all, Mr. Speaker, because what Bill 160 does is allow 

a government appointment, a government appointee operating 

the Human Rights Commission to dismiss human rights 

complaints that have merit, that show that there was 

discrimination but are not, in his opinion, warranted. 

 

And what does that mean? How could a human rights complaint 

have merit, show that there was discrimination, and not be 

warranted? No one knows what that means. I don’t think the 

government knows what that means. When pressed, when 

pressed, a government spokesman will say, well it might not be 

warranted if it would be controversial. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

not, that’s not right that one be denied one’s redress, one’s 

remedy because somebody might be upset even though your 

case has merit, even though your case shows discrimination. 

 

Now there was a check on this discretion which is more limited 

today. It would be much more expansive, this discretion, if Bill 

160 becomes law. There was a check on the discretion of the 

Chief Commissioner of the Human Rights Commission, and 

that check was a tribunal, an independent body, independent of 

the commissioner, independent of the Human Rights 

Commission. There was a check so that if you thought your 

complaint had, indeed it had merit, that there was evidence 

you’d been discriminated against, and now, if this Bill becomes 

law, it’s warranted — whatever warranted or unwarranted 

might mean — and the Chief Commissioner said, no, no one’s 

going to hear your complaint; it’s not going to proceed 

anywhere, well that wasn’t the end of the day. You could go the 

Human Rights Tribunal, and they could overrule that decision. 

Well now the Human Rights Tribunal isn’t going to exist any 

more if Bill 160 becomes law. And there was a lot of talk about 

elevating these matters to the Court of Queen’s Bench and 

providing, you know, better decisions. And I’ll come to that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But now if the Chief Commissioner exercises this much wider 

discretion in a way that the complainant who feels that they’ve 

been discriminated against, and who the Chief Commissioner 

doesn’t argue that they’ve been discriminated against, doesn’t 

argue that the case has merit but says, it’s not warranted 

anyways, what can that individual do? Well if you’re not happy 

with the decision of a board or a tribunal or of somebody acting 

in this capacity of gatekeeper, you can apply for administrative 

review. 

 

Now the law around administrative review I expect is not 

understood by one in 100 citizens of this province. And actually 

my suspicion is that the law around administrative review isn’t 

understood very well by a number of lawyers in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s a rather specialized practice. Labour lawyers 

particularly would be fairly familiar with it, but a lot of lawyers 

would not be. But certainly the idea that somebody would go to 

the Court of Queen’s Bench by themselves, without legal 

counsel, to request administrative review of the decision of the 

Chief Commissioner that their complaint — even though it had 

merit and showed discrimination — wasn’t warranted, well I 

think you’d want to have a lawyer for that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when it’s suggested by the government, as it was in the 

second reading speech of the minister and by government 

spokespeople . . . And I know the minister himself has tried to 

avoid commenting on this legislation, defending this legislation, 

explaining this legislation to the people of Saskatchewan as 

much as he can. But whenever the minister or any delegate of 

the minister comments on this legislation, they say, well you 

know, an individual doesn’t have to pay to have their human 

rights complaint go even to the Supreme Court of Canada. 

 

But that’s actually not accurate, Mr. Speaker, because the 

complaints that go forward, and there’ll be very few of them if 

Bill 160 becomes law . . . That’s the plan. That’s the plan of the 

government. That’s the plan of the current Chief Commissioner 

of the Human Rights Commission. There’ll be very few of them 

that go forward but the ones that go forward are not the 

complaints of the individual. They become the complaints of 

the commission. The lawyer is the commission’s lawyer. If you 

want to complain about the exercise of the Human Rights 

Commission’s discretion, you get your own lawyer. If you want 

to argue your own complaint because you’re not happy with the 

way the commissioner is arguing it, you get your own lawyer. 

 

But of course we know that these individuals, the vast majority 

of them, can’t afford to do that, Mr. Speaker. The suggestion 

that their lawyers would be paid by the public to be in the Court 

of Queen’s Bench is just not the case. Your complaint doesn’t 

get to the Court of Queen’s Bench. It only gets to the Court of 

Queen’s Bench if your complaint becomes the commission’s 

complaint, Mr. Speaker. And this legislation is directed at 

making sure that there are very few complaints by the 

commission, by anybody. 

 

The frequently asked questions document talks about elevating, 



7578 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2011 

elevating the adjudication of human rights complaints away 

from human rights tribunals, which are going to be abolished, 

and into the courts. Now this turns out not to be the case. I don’t 

know when this document was issued, but by March of this 

year, the minister was saying that’s not what’s going on here. 

What’s going on here is we’re not going to have a lot of human 

rights cases. Maybe one a year. Maybe two a year. Three are a 

max, maximum. It’s not about elevating the cases, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s about eliminating the cases from adjudication. 

 

But in the original document, in an earlier document, the 

government isn’t being very upfront, in my view, about the real 

effect of the legislation, which is to dismiss more complaints, 

coercively force settlement of more complaints, and to have far 

fewer complaints heard by anyone, not only to the detriment of 

complainants to actually have their rights treated as important 

rights that, if they are violated, deserve a remedy by an 

adjudicator. And the government, you know, gives a 

backhanded slap to tribunals but then deprives really, or wants 

to deprive really, most complainants of any adjudication at all 

by anybody. 

 

But in this earlier document, the government says these cases 

are too important to be relegated to administrative adjudicatory 

bodies overseen by lawyers acting as part-time quasi judges. 

And it goes on to say how important human rights cases are. 

They ensure, shape, and interpret our rights as citizens. These 

cases should be heard by full-time judges whose neutrality and 

fairness is guaranteed by their judicial independence. 

 

[15:00] 

 

That’s what the government says on one day, but by March of 

this year the minister is saying, well don’t worry about the 

formality of the Court of Queen’s Bench because almost no 

cases are going to be heard. These important cases that need be 

heard by the superior courts of the country, well they’re not so 

important. They’re not going to be heard, so just relax about 

that. We’re not going to be spending a lot of time in the Court 

of Queen’s Bench. 

 

And again, the document that the government had circulated 

stated that if prosecution is required . . . Now that’s in the 

opinion of the commissioner, and the commissioner can decide 

it won’t be prosecuted for a number of reasons. One is that, well 

I think the respondent made a reasonable settlement, and you 

didn’t take it, so I dismiss your complaint. That’s in Bill 160. 

Or I just don’t think it’s warranted; we don’t want to do it. And 

if you don’t like it, you can go off to Court of Queen’s Bench, 

and you’ll have to hire your own lawyer to find out, to define 

for the people of Saskatchewan — because the government 

doesn’t do it — what does warranted mean. 

 

Now what marginalized, impoverished, disenfranchised victim 

of a human rights violation is going to be forced to raise funds 

to get a lawyer to go to the Court of Queen’s Bench to define 

what warranted means in this legislation? Why is this discretion 

even being provided? But for the government to suggest that 

complainants won’t have to hire their own lawyers, well if 

complainants want to argue their own case, complainants will 

have to hire their own lawyers because these are the 

commission complaints. The only complaints that will proceed 

are the complaints the commission allows to proceed, and the 

commission is given a wide discretion and a number of avenues 

to stop complaints from proceeding. So there’s been a lot of 

confusion. 

 

And I expect that this is not a vote-determining issue in any 

constituency in the province of Saskatchewan and that when it 

does come up, a lot of people will be persuaded because a lot of 

people were told that this legislation has something to do with 

the four pillars, that this legislation has something to do with 

elevating cases away from administrative tribunals which, you 

know, can’t make important decisions. 

 

They make decisions about labour law all the time. They make 

decisions about occupational health. They make decisions about 

whether somebody can be released from a mental health care 

facility if they’ve been ordered to be there. They make 

decisions about so many things. They make environmental 

decisions. They make decisions about . . . Well the parole 

board, Mr. Speaker, the parole board is not a superior court. I 

mean whether someone has to stay in prison or not and serve 

out more of the term is not decided by a superior court. Surely 

that’s an important decision. It’s an important decision for the 

individual; it’s an important decision for the society; and there’s 

some very controversial cases, some affecting Saskatchewan 

citizens, about early release. But we don’t have the Government 

of Saskatchewan calling for these administrative tribunals to be 

dissolved, for the parole board to be dissolved, by the Labour 

Relations Board to be resolved. 

 

The board that hears appeals on compensation for automobile 

accidents in this province, Mr. Speaker, no superior court 

judges on that. That’s not the Court of Queen’s Bench; that’s a 

commission. That’s a tribunal very much like the Human Rights 

Tribunal. The only tribunal, the only tribunal so far, so far in the 

province of Saskatchewan this government does not like, is the 

Human Rights Tribunal. 

 

And I can understand some people think that the Human Rights 

Tribunal has misinterpreted human rights law and therefore we 

need to move away from this tribunal. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

those people should look at the record. I don’t believe that there 

is more than one case where the Human Rights Tribunal has 

been overturned by the Court of Queen’s Bench or by any other 

court in Saskatchewan. Ultimately one tribunal decision in the 

history of the Human Rights Tribunal of Saskatchewan has 

been overturned. That’s a pretty good record. I think a lot of 

so-called lower courts, provincial courts, even the Court of 

Queen’s Bench when they’re looking at their decisions going to 

the Court of Appeal, would be pretty proud, nay, surprised, at a 

record like that, Mr. Speaker, where they are so rarely 

overturned. So the Human Rights Tribunal has served the 

province well and served every other jurisdiction in this country 

well. 

 

It was interesting to note that very recently, the leader of the 

Progressive Conservative or the Conservative Party in Ontario 

who’s been committed to, if he becomes premier of that 

province, committed to abolishing the Human Rights Tribunal 

in Ontario, he has reversed himself, Mr. Speaker. He has 

reversed himself on that because the Ontario public thinks that 

that’s a little right wing. And the leader of the Conservative 

Party in Ontario wants to play to the centre. Entirely appropriate 

on his part. He wants to play to the centre and he’s abandoning 



May 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7579 

that promise. So even if a Conservative government is elected 

in Ontario, the Human Rights Tribunal in Ontario will survive. 

But the one in Saskatchewan, if this Bill becomes law, will 

disappear. 

 

And one of our primary concerns is not the one that’s discussed 

much, is not that, only that, not only that the tribunals offer a 

more informative or informal, less intimidating venue for 

complainants to talk about the abuse of their rights and their 

complaints than the Court of Queen’s Bench. Not only are 

tribunal members actually specialized in human rights law 

because they spend a lot more time hearing those cases, 

reviewing those cases, writing those decisions than any member 

of the Court of Queen’s Bench ever will, if you add this area of 

the law to all their other work . . . These are judges who hear a 

lot of family law cases, the more serious criminal law cases, 

most of the commercial cases in the province of Saskatchewan. 

None of them will develop the specialty or expertise in human 

rights law that Human Rights Tribunal members have. But 

that’s only a couple of the concerns. 

 

A primary concern, one that’s less talked about, is that the 

tribunal is a check on the discretion of the 

government-appointed human rights Chief Commissioner, who 

. . . The current Chief Commissioner supports this legislation, I 

believe. But even if he did not, we don’t design legislation 

around one office holder or another. The fact is that the Chief 

Commissioner of the Human Rights Commission in the 

province of Saskatchewan is not like the Chief Electoral 

Officer. He’s not like the Ombudsman. He’s not like the 

Provincial Auditor. He’s not like the Children’s Advocate. He’s 

not an independent officer of this legislature. He’s a 

government appointee, Mr. Speaker. And the public needs to be 

concerned about the discretion and powers granted to public 

appointees by government appointees because they are not 

independent. And we saw what the government was willing to 

try to do in the case of the Chief Electoral Officer and make that 

a government appointment and appoint somebody who we 

expect would have been a lot more supportive of a Bill I will 

speak to later, The Election Act amendments, Mr. Speaker. 

They don’t have to try to reverse the non-partisanship 

appointment of the Chief Commissioner of the human rights. 

It’s not there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the current Human Rights Code, in section 25, 

empowers the commission . . . No, not empowers the 

commission, requires the commission to “develop and conduct 

educational programs designed to eliminate discriminatory 

practices.” The fourth pillar is not enabled by this Bill; the 

fourth pillar is required by the current Act, the current Human 

Rights Code, Mr. Speaker. The current Human Rights Code, 

section 47, requires that: 

 

On the application of any person or on its own initiative, 

the commission may approve or order any program to be 

undertaken by any person if the program is designed to 

prevent disadvantages that are likely to be suffered by, or 

to eliminate or reduce disadvantages that are suffered by, 

any group of individuals when those disadvantages would 

be or are based on or related to race, creed, religion, 

colour, sex, sexual orientation, family status, marital 

status, disability, age, nationality, ancestry or place of 

origin of members of that group, or the receipt of public 

assistance by members of that group by improving 

opportunities respecting . . . facilities, accommodation, 

employment or education in relation to that group or the 

receipt of public assistance by members of that group. 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, Bill 160, which makes passing 

reference to the pillar in respect to systemic advocacy, doesn’t 

advance that pillar and is not needed to promote that pillar. That 

pillar is clearly promoted by the current Human Rights Code, 

specifically section 47, which I have just read. To pretend, as 

the government does, that Bill 160 is required for systemic 

advocacy when the current Human Rights Code already sets 

those powers out and much more broadly and in much more 

detail than the proposed legislation is bordering on the 

disingenuous, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The objects of the current Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 

are set out in section 3 of the code: 

 

(a) to promote recognition of the inherent dignity and 

equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human 

family; and 

 

(b) to further public policy in Saskatchewan that every 

person is free and equal in dignity and rights and to 

discourage and eliminate discrimination. 

 

All the powers that one needs to advance the strategic four 

pillars which the government says they believe in, which the 

opposition certainly supports, is contained in the current code. 

 

What the legislation does is increase the discretion and the 

powers of the Chief Commissioner to dismiss complaints, force 

settlement, or dismiss those complaints or refuse to advance 

complaints of human rights abuses. It removes the tribunal that 

is a check on that discretion and require what some have called 

coercive mediation. 

 

Now we’re all for mediation, Mr. Speaker. If we have a dispute 

with our neighbour about a property line or some such matter, 

as equals it’s best if we can possibly sit down perhaps with the 

help of a mediator and work out that dispute. But we are not, 

Mr. Speaker, talking about people who are acting as equals. 

 

Somebody feels that they have been discriminated by an 

employer in respect to employment because of a prohibited 

ground — race, sex, whatever — Mr. Speaker, or has been 

refused accommodation or has been refused some public service 

or has been . . . Well this is a person in power denying a person 

without power something that to which they are entitled to at 

law. This is not a group of equals. This is not two equals 

coming to mediation. 

 

[15:15] 

 

That said, there are cases that perhaps can be mediated. And 

you never get a perfect balance of power. Nothing is ever equal, 

Mr. Speaker. But Bill 160 allows the Chief Commissioner to 

say, the respondent has made what I consider to be a fair and 

reasonable settlement, and you’ve refused it. And perhaps 

because the complainant wants someone to say what the law is, 

that their rights have violated, but that’s not good enough. If 

there is some kind of . . . Well I don’t know what it would be. It 



7580 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2011 

could be money. I have no idea. The legislation’s not that 

specific. The Bill’s not that specific. 

 

But if some proposals made by the respondent where the Chief 

Commissioner decides it’s fair and reasonable, and it’s not 

accepted by the complainant for whatever reason, the complaint 

can be dismissed. If the complainant makes what the Chief 

Commissioner would consider to be a fair and reasonable offer, 

there is no, there is no equivalent sanction against the 

respondent who turns down the offer. The sanction’s only 

against the complainant. The sanction’s only against the person 

who purportedly has been discriminated against or had their 

human rights, set out in the Human Rights Code, violated, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s the climate in which the coercive 

mediation, as some have called it, within Bill 160 is set out. 

 

Now, the Speaker will know, because he’s been listening and 

members of the Assembly will know because they’ve been 

listening, that Amnesty International, an organization that won 

a Nobel Prize — Peace Prize — for its promotion of human 

rights opposes this Bill. They at least want to see the Bill 

withdrawn and there to be public consultations on human rights 

reform before it proceeds. 

 

And the Speaker will know, and members of the Assembly will 

know, that almost every day of this sitting, I have risen and 

presented petitions, today from, I think, over 70 communities of 

people who want the Bill withdrawn and it become public 

consultations on human rights legislation. The people who think 

they support the Bill often only support the four pillars, Mr. 

Speaker. They wouldn’t support the Bill if they knew what was 

in the Bill. 

 

All these people who don’t support the Bill, what they’ve had to 

say falls on deaf ears. The minister has heard the petitions. He’s 

read, I assume, or he’s responded to actually, so I know he’s 

read them. He’s responded to them March 31st. That’s this year. 

That’s when he said well don’t worry about the Court of 

Queen’s Bench because we’re not going to take very many 

cases there anyways. He’s responded to constitutional lawyers, 

former deputy minister of Justice in the province of 

Saskatchewan, human rights lawyers, and Amnesty 

International, all of whom oppose this Bill and almost every 

aspect of this Bill because of some of the issues that I’ve raised. 

All this falls on deaf ears. They know that there was no 

consultation with the public before this Bill was drafted and 

introduced, and there’s been no consultation with the public or 

listening to the public since then, only a repetition of the four 

pillars because we don’t want to, Mr. Speaker, really the 

government doesn’t want to actually talk about Bill 160. 

 

And I have here an email that was sent to one of my colleagues, 

the member from Saskatoon Centre, from a member of the, I 

believe, of the board of the Individuals with Disabilities Equity 

Alliance of Regina. And that organization had received a letter 

from the minister that said, “As you are aware, Bill 160 amends 

the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code to support the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission four pillars strategic 

plan and provides a renewed mandate for the commission.” 

 

Well if they are aware of that, Mr. Speaker, they’re aware of 

something that’s not accurate, at all true, because that’s not 

what the Bill does. But that is of course the minister’s spin, 

that’s the minister’s sell on it. But nonetheless this individual 

emailed a member of the opposition said: 

 

We also remain concerned about Bill 160. It is not clear to 

us that it will result in enhanced justice or even equal 

justice for people with disabilities. It is not clear to me if 

any effort will be made to monitor complaint satisfaction 

with a new mediation process, or will people be forced to 

accept less than satisfactory outcomes? 

 

The government’s letter, and I just finished quoting to the letter, 

makes reference to extensive SHRC [Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Commission] consultations in regards to Bill 160. All I 

can tell you is that IDEA [Individuals with Disabilities Equity 

Alliance of Regina] was not consulted, and I’m informed that 

neither was the Sask Voice of People with Disabilities, SVPD. 

Given that SVPD represents the largest source of human rights 

complaints in the province, one has to wonder. On the other 

hand, if someone came to me, saying would you support a less 

confrontational complaint process but offered not particulars, I 

might support the general idea also. 

 

And so I think, Mr. Speaker, we see how the Bill has been 

marketed as if it actually enables the four pillars when in fact it 

is the current, the current Human Rights Code that enables 

those four pillars, and any renewal in mandate requires a 

commitment from the government in resources to the Human 

Rights Commission to pursue those pillars. The legislative 

authority exists and has existed for some period of time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to, because I’ve referenced Amnesty 

International and its opposition to the Bill, read into the record a 

letter from Alex Neve who is the secretary general of Amnesty 

International Canada and a human rights lawyer. And this was 

written December 10th, 2010, to the Hon. Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General: 

 

Dear Minister, 

 

Amnesty International is writing this open letter to urge 

you to reconsider the plans for reform of Saskatchewan’s 

laws and institutions for the protection of human rights in 

the province, as contained in Bill 160, which you recently 

introduced in the provincial legislature. 

 

Amnesty International is, in particular, deeply concerned 

about the proposal in the Bill to abolish the Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Tribunal and leave adjudication of human 

rights complaints in the hands of the provincial Court of 

Queen’s Bench instead. We are concerned that this will 

impede access to human rights remedies for many 

individuals, as court proceedings are inevitably more 

complex, formal and time-consuming. 

 

We recognize that Bill 160 also proposes changes to the 

role of the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission, 

including an increased focus on dealing with systemic 

patterns of discrimination and on . . . [matters of using] 

alternative dispute resolution methods, such as mediation. 

Those are enhancements to the system that would very 

likely make positive contributions to greater human rights 

protection. But informality and accessibility of the 

adjudication process itself plays a crucial role in 



May 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7581 

maximizing human rights protection, given the very nature 

of the complaints and the fact that they are often brought 

forward by individuals from marginalized groups and 

sectors in society. 

 

It is well recognized, in Canada and globally, that human 

rights institutions other than the courts have an important 

role to play in adjudicating human rights complaints. 

Notably, the Paris Principles relating to the Status of 

National Institutions adopted by the UN General 

Assembly in 1993 expressly set out that a national human 

rights body “may be authorized to hear and consider 

complaints and petitions concerning individual situations.” 

 

Across Canada, that is precisely the model that has been 

adopted in all jurisdictions. Provincially and federally, 

human rights tribunals with informal procedures that aim 

to maximize accessibility are empowered to make the first 

level decision in human rights complaints which proceed 

to the stage of adjudication. The role of the courts is left to 

hearing appeals and supervising tribunals. Amnesty 

International considers that to be [the] best practice. 

 

Such a significant change to the process available to the 

people of Saskatchewan for enforcing the protection of 

their rights should, at a minimum, be subject to extensive 

public consultation. In fact, given what is at stake there 

should be public consultation before any significant 

changes are made to human rights legislation, institutions 

or procedures. It is our understanding that did not take 

place before Bill 160 was introduced. 

 

Minister, systems for the protection of human rights can 

most certainly benefit from ongoing improvement. I am 

writing to you on International Human Rights Day which 

marks the 62nd anniversary of the adoption of the United 

Nations of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It 

is an apt occasion to call on you and your government to 

commit to an approach to reform that would strengthen 

and not risk undermining provincial human rights 

protection. In that spirit we urge that, rather than proceed 

with Bill 160 at this time, your government launch a 

public consultation process to consider possible reforms 

that would strengthen the province’s human rights laws 

and institutions. 

 

Sincerely 

Alex Neve 

Secretary General 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I also want to cite, and I could in the case of 

Professor Ken Norman, cite a couple of comments that he’s 

provided. One on December 3rd, but there was also another on 

December 11th where he and John Whyte, the former deputy 

minister of Justice in the province, addressed this issue pointing 

out that: 

 

For decades in Canada there was no legal redress against 

racial and other forms of discrimination. However, the law 

relating to compensation for harms is dynamic and, in due 

course, a civil law remedy for discrimination would have 

been created by the courts. As it happens, provincial 

legislatures and Parliament did not wait for courts to 

develop an anti-discrimination law, but, instead, legislated 

human rights codes and created administrative agencies to 

enforce them. 

 

There were three reasons for this. First, statutory rules 

against discrimination were immediate and direct — no 

discrimination based on race, gender, nationality, religion 

(and, now in Saskatchewan, ten other categories) with 

respect to housing employment, education and services 

available to the public. Second, deciding what constitutes 

discrimination and what remedies and accommodations 

will provide the best response is a complex and subtle 

process and there are advantages to having experienced 

adjudicative bodies develop their own procedures and 

rules of evidence. Third, human rights agencies have 

responsibility to bear the substantial costs of investigating 

complaints and seeking effective remedies for 

complainants when their complaints are found to be 

justified. 

 

Now they go on to state that: 

 

All Canadian jurisdictions have adopted less formal and 

more accessible mechanisms of human rights tribunals to 

adjudicate claims of discrimination. But, now, through Bill 

160, the Saskatchewan government has decided to close 

. . . [the] Human Rights Tribunal and, instead, send 

discrimination claims to the Court of Queen’s Bench to be 

determined. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that that in fact is not actually, 

according to the minister in his comments in The StarPhoenix 

on March 31st of 2011, “It’s not the intention of the 

government to send human rights cases from the tribunal but 

instead to the Court of Queen’s Bench but to not have them 

heard by an adjudicator at all.” 

 

In the final paragraph of the column, the opinion piece written 

by Professor Norman and Professor Whyte, who are both 

professors of law at the University of Saskatchewan, they say, 

and I quote: 

 

The shift to Queen’s Bench adjudication will weaken the 

province’s anti-discrimination project. On Nov. 29, Ezra 

Levant, Canada’s most out-spoken opponent of human 

rights commissions and tribunals, was introduced to the 

Saskatchewan legislature as a person who came to Regina 

to mark the introduction of Bill 160. That makes sense. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if Amnesty International opposes this Bill, if 

the professor Ken Norman, was actively involved in human 

rights law for many decades, opposes this Bill, if a former 

deputy minister of Justice and an expert on constitutional law, 

John Whyte, opposes this Bill, if hundreds of Saskatchewan 

citizens from every community in the province have signed 

petitions opposing this Bill, who exactly is happy about this 

Bill, Mr. Speaker, and why? 

 

Members will recall, the public will recall that the government 

had a never say die attitude, to a certain extent, about the 

decision by courts, well really, the Supreme Court of Canada. 

But they were decisions that started with human rights tribunals 

in different provinces, including the province of Saskatchewan, 



7582 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2011 

to the effect that marriage commissioners had to perform civil 

marriage ceremonies to everybody that’s entitled by law to a 

civil marriage ceremony. And the government took taxpayer 

money and hired a lawyer to argue that marriage commissioners 

should be exempt, despite clarity of the decisions that had been 

made all the way up to the Supreme Court, and hired a lawyer 

to argue the other side. And taxpayers paid to have both of 

those sides argued. And of course the Court of Appeal 

unanimously said that the legislation that the government 

proposed was — well some judges went further than others — 

but essentially they said it was outrageous, Mr. Speaker, and 

simply could not be supported in the context of decisions that 

had already been made by the courts in respect to the decisions 

in the Charter of Rights. 

 

Well the government really had no place to go except one place, 

Mr. Speaker, where they did not want to go. The Government 

of Saskatchewan because of the notwithstanding clause . . . And 

there was some discussion about the notwithstanding clause 

recently at a memorial service for Allen Blakeney because he 

was a key proponent negotiating that clause. This government 

has a majority in this Legislative Assembly, and this 

government could have moved the notwithstanding clause — 

notwithstanding the Charter of Rights, notwithstanding those 

interpretations of the Charter of Rights, the law in 

Saskatchewan in respect of marriage commissioners will be 

different. 

 

But the government did not have the political courage to do 

that, Mr. Speaker, and they don’t have the political courage to 

actually amend any human rights law. All they have the courage 

to do, if I can call it that, is give a backhanded slap to the 

human rights tribunals that have successfully and almost 

without exception correctly interpreted human rights law. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And who is made happy by that, Mr. Speaker? Who is pleased 

by this legislation? Well there was an article after January 18th, 

I believe in The StarPhoenix, after the government announced 

that they would ignominiously accept the unanimous decision 

of the Court of Appeal. I don’t think they had very much choice 

about that, Mr. Speaker. There was some discontent amongst 

self-described social conservatives in the province of 

Saskatchewan quoted in the article. And in particular there was 

a Saskatchewan Party member and lawyer — I’m just citing the 

title from the article — Tom Schuck, Mr. Speaker, who was not 

very happy about the government throwing in the towel on the 

issue of marriage commissioners but he, and I quote from the 

article: 

 

Schuck praised the government’s move to scrap the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Tribunal, which he described 

as a “kangaroo court” in favour of having cases heard by 

the Court of Queen’s Bench. 

 

That’s who Bill 160 is for, Mr. Speaker. Bill 160 is for people 

who are unhappy with the state of human rights law in the 

province of Saskatchewan and in the country of Canada and 

who are somewhat appeased to the point of praise by the 

abolishment of the Human Rights Tribunal, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s interesting, the phrase kangaroo court, Mr. Speaker, 

because if one looks it up and the history of that phrase, it has 

nothing to do with Australia. It’s an American term, and it 

refers to sort of ad hoc courts of justice in the frontier of the 

American West where they didn’t have the benefit of the North 

West, later Royal Canadian, Mounted Police and were left to 

their own devices to a certain extent. And some of these courts 

would leap over evidence and law — whether they were aware 

of what the law was or not — to decisions, and they were, 

because of this quick leaping and quick justice, rough justice, 

called kangaroo courts. 

 

Well the complaint against Human Rights Tribunals is just the 

opposite of course. It’s that it takes too long because they do 

consider the evidence, they do consider the law and, as I said, 

have an admirable record of not being overturned by the 

superior courts of the province and the country because they’re 

not kangaroo courts. 

 

And what Mr. Schuck is expressing dismay about is not how 

the . . . I don’t think Hansard will pick up the pronunciation in 

any case. What he’s concerned about . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . And the member from Weyburn’s concerned about my 

pronunciation. Personally acquainted with him, I’m not. But 

what he’s concerned about, Mr. Schuck, is not that the courts 

are too careful, the tribunals are too careful. He’s supposedly 

concerned that they’re not careful enough for their kangaroo 

courts. But of course that’s not the reason the government will 

give. The government will say, well tribunal decisions take too 

long. Now those of us who are familiar and have waited a long, 

long time and our clients have waited a long, long time for 

Court of Queen’s Bench decisions, we have to be a little bit 

bemused by the suggestion that it would be any faster than the 

Court of Queen’s Bench. 

 

But we know that in fact we’re not moving from kangaroo court 

to the Court of Queen’s Bench. We’re moving from specialized, 

expert, capable tribunals that provided a check on the discretion 

of the exercise of government power in relation to powerless 

people, Mr. Speaker, moving from that to not the Court of 

Queen’s Bench but, in most cases, coercive mediation and 

dismissed complaints that in the view of a government 

appointee are not warranted, even if they have merit and show 

discrimination. 

 

All of this is happening. And now there is no prospect of this 

happening in Ontario because the leader of the Progressive 

Conservative Party or Conservative Party of Ontario has 

withdrawn his commitment to abolish that tribunal if he ever 

happens to become premier. All this is happening only in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, only in Saskatchewan, the home of 

John Diefenbaker and Tommy Douglas, the founding authors of 

bills of rights in Canada. That, above all else, is simply an 

embarrassment. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

question presented by the Minister Responsible for Justice that 

Bill No. 160, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 

Amendment Act, 2010 be now read the second time. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 



May 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7583 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee does the Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Government Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — To the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 147 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Hon. Ms. Draude that Bill No. 147 — The Public 

Interest Disclosure Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am very 

pleased this afternoon to enter into this debate on a piece of 

legislation which I would have to say, I think, is well intended 

but, Mr. Speaker, fails to meet the mark or the test that a piece 

of legislation protecting employees from public disclosure 

should, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, first off, looking at a piece of legislation like this, 

you have to look at the background and the purpose behind it, 

Mr. Speaker. And the purpose behind a Bill like this is to 

protect the professional public service of Saskatchewan in the 

performance of their duties, Mr. Speaker. The public service of 

any province in Canada, or for that matter any government in 

the world, are the professional employees who are hired and 

which hired to deliver services on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They’re not hired by a particular 

government. They are not employed by the government, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re employed by the people of Saskatchewan. 

Because the government will come and go, Mr. Speaker, but the 

civil service should be there to provide professional, 

non-partisan advice to any government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to refer to a definition of the civil service 

in any jurisdiction in the country, Mr. Speaker, as the body of 

civilian employees of any level of government not subject to 

political appointment and removal, normally hired and 

promoted largely on the basis of competitive examination, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s in a definition that has long been held in esteem 

by governments who believe in professional civil services or 

public services, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is an attempt by a government to 

allow for disclosure of information, but containing that 

information to within only the government, Mr. Speaker. And 

our system of democracy in Canada, Mr. Speaker, and across 

North America, Mr. Speaker, the premise is that the civil 

service, or public service in the case of the province of 

Saskatchewan, work for the people. And where they see 

something that they believe is, in the public interest, should be 

disclosed to hold the government accountable, Mr. Speaker, 

they should be able to reveal that information without any fear 

of reprisal in any form, Mr. Speaker, should be able to bring 

forward their concerns, Mr. Speaker, because the government is 

the employer of these people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And they need protections to ensure that that government 

cannot act to terminate somebody’s employment if they believe 

they’ve done something, Mr. Speaker, if that information is in 

the public interest to be disclosed. Because those people work 

for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, not for the 

government. That’s a long established definition, Mr. Speaker. 

They are to be non-partisan, Mr. Speaker, and they are to be 

professional in their actions. But, Mr. Speaker, if they see a 

wrongdoing, they also have to have the ability to bring that 

forward if in fact it’s not being addressed within the 

government department or government unit that they work in, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of legislation I think has 

an intent that we admire, Mr. Speaker. But its development, its 

process, and its rules, Mr. Speaker, do not accomplish — do not 

accomplish, Mr. Speaker — what should be intended. Because 

who do you get to report to, Mr. Speaker? Well you get to 

report to an officer appointed within each government agency 

or department, Mr. Speaker. Or you can go to a commissioner 

appointed by this legislation, Mr. Speaker. But it’s still 

controlled and contained within the government because that 

commissioner makes a report one year later perhaps to — who? 

— the very department, the very department or senior officials 

who may be responsible for not protecting the public, Mr. 

Speaker, or not following the rules, the regulations, or policies 

that are in place, Mr. Speaker. So there is no public disclosure. 

 

The public doesn’t know what their government’s doing, so this 

is an attempt by a government to control what the public gets to 

know about the internal operations of the government, about 

how they operate their government, about the things they do, 

about the decisions they make. This is about controlling 

information, Mr. Speaker. It’s not about disclosing information. 

It’s not about making something public so the public know 

what their government’s done. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have a government here that in their 

election platform stated that they were going to be . . . They 

say: 

 

Saskatchewan people expect their government to be open, 

honest, and accountable. A Saskatchewan Party 

government will provide Saskatchewan people with more 

transparency and accountability than any previous 

government [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

Well this doesn’t do that, Mr. Speaker. In fact it puts rules in 

place that prevents any public servant or civil servant from 

making public any information in regards to the operations of 

the Government of Saskatchewan. It allows the information 

only to be disclosed to an official of a department of 

government, Mr. Speaker, or to a commissioner. And that 

commissioner then can make a report back to the department 



7584 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2011 

and in its annual report can make it public without any 

information as to what the details of the files were about, Mr. 

Speaker. So a year later, we might find out some miniscule 

detail, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Why is this a problem? I’ll tell you why it’s a problem, Mr. 

Speaker, and why it’s a very significant problem — because, 

Mr. Speaker, a timely, a timely release of pertinent information 

about the safety or protection of the public, Mr. Speaker, allows 

you to provide that protection and safety. Finding out about it 

10 months later allows you only to ask who made mistakes and 

what mistakes were made, Mr. Speaker. It does nothing to 

protect the public if the government’s not acting in their 

interest, Mr. Speaker. And you need to be able to, be able to act 

in the interest of the public. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s members over there talking about 

particular cases that happened in the past that were brought 

forward to the public and they asked about in this Assembly. 

Mr. Speaker, they were able to ask about those things in this 

Assembly because people were able to bring that information to 

members of then the opposition to ask the government, Mr. 

Speaker. What they’re proposing prevents that from occurring, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So who does it protect, Mr. Speaker? It protects a government 

who’s afraid of the people and afraid to let information become 

public. Mr. Speaker, transparent and accountable and open 

government has no fear of information becoming public. They 

have no fear of being questioned. They have no fear of 

answering the expectations of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So a Bill like this, what’s it do? It contains information or 

controls information and allows the government to suppress 

people versus allowing information to become public. Mr. 

Speaker, who benefits from that? Not necessarily the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The government does because 

they’re able to control what information is made public. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, how does that square round with their 

commitment to being the most accountable, open, and 

transparent government in Saskatchewan history, Mr. Speaker? 

Well that makes that an untruth, Mr. Speaker. It makes it less, 

less than reliable, Mr. Speaker, and it very clearly indicates that 

what they say out of one side of their mouth is not what they’re 

trying to deliver out of the other. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

shameful. That is shameful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, on the contrary, on the contrary, the official 

opposition has put forward two Bills. One, Bill 607, which is 

An Act to provide for the Public Safety, Security and Protection 

of the People of Saskatchewan that allowed any public servant, 

where there were breaches of safety or security or the 

environment or theft, to make that information public, Mr. 

Speaker, without any reprisal whatsoever, including taking it to 

members of . . . taking it to their MLA, to any legal authority, 

Mr. Speaker, to their deputy minister of department, Mr. 

Speaker, any independent officer of the Assembly. It allowed 

that information to be made public, Mr. Speaker. It allowed for 

things concerning the public safety of the people of 

Saskatchewan to be brought forward by an employee, Mr. 

Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is what an open, honest, transparent, and 

accountable government would do, Mr. Speaker. It wouldn’t try 

to control the information that was in its own sphere of control, 

Mr. Speaker, because the public doesn’t know if they’re being 

properly protected if the information’s never allowed to be 

made public, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have had a long history in Saskatchewan 

of leading the nation in progressive legislation in protecting 

people. We were one of the first, if not the first, to have a 

Human Rights Code in Canada. I believe we were the first, Mr. 

Speaker. We were the first to have occupational health and 

safety language, Mr. Speaker. We were the first to do many 

things in protecting individuals, Mr. Speaker, but here we are 

passing legislation that is both regressive, Mr. Speaker, and 

prevents the protection of employees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I could just take a couple of minutes and talk 

about a couple of examples of why this type of legislation isn’t 

meeting the needs of the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to start with, we made a freedom of information request 

on a contract signed by the Government of Saskatchewan with a 

third party, Mr. Speaker. We got more than 1,000 pages of 

blacked out information, Mr. Speaker — 1,000 pages of 

blacked out information. Now how open and transparent is that, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

And then over the next coming months, we got several of those 

pages unblacked out from anonymous sources, Mr. Speaker, 

telling us of a deal that wasn’t fair. It wasn’t in the best interest 

of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but the 

government didn’t provide the information when we requested 

it officially so the official opposition could do their jobs and 

ensure that the province’s finances were being spent 

appropriately and in the best interest of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s the role of the official opposition to hold the 

government accountable, and the government needs to provide 

information in order for the opposition to provide or to be able 

to provide that information to the public and to hold the 

government accountable, Mr. Speaker, through its questions in 

this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, we have a government that is 

trying to hide everything, that’s not being open and transparent 

in any way. And now if a civil servant were to bring forward 

any information, they have to bring it forward in a manner in 

which the government controls its release so that it may never 

be released, Mr. Speaker. How is that open and transparent? 

How is that accountable to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan? Mr. Speaker, if you have faith in a professional 

civil service, you don’t worry about something being brought 

forward unless it should be brought forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, my second major concern is this. In one 

hand, they will deal with one situation one way. In the next, 

they’ll deal with it in a totally different way when you have the 

same problem, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’m going to use an example of a question I raised in this 

Assembly about a convicted sexual offender that was out before 

he was appropriately to be released, Mr. Speaker. And what did 



May 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7585 

we do? We had a denial by a minister and subsequently had to 

admit that it had occurred, Mr. Speaker. And what did they do? 

They went and they fired an employee they believed to have 

provided that information, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A month later or a month and a half later, we in this Assembly 

raised an issue about their budget, Mr. Speaker, which could be 

construed in no other way but as a budget leak, Mr. Speaker, a 

budget leak, something that should be extremely important to 

any government, Mr. Speaker. We brought forward a budget 

leak, and there was a trail, quite frankly, that anybody could 

follow, Mr. Speaker, and they didn’t even attempt to follow it 

up, Mr. Speaker. They didn’t even attempt to follow it up. 

 

So one hand, when a minister is embarrassed, an employee gets 

him fired whether he’s the right employee or not, Mr. Speaker, 

because they want to send a message to the civil service and 

intimidate them, Mr. Speaker . . . Then a month later there’s a 

budget leak, Mr. Speaker, a budget leak, and they don’t even 

take the time to follow up and see if it’s serious who released it, 

Mr. Speaker. And there was a trail that a blind man could have 

followed back to the source, deliberately left a trail a blind 

person could have followed back to the source, Mr. Speaker. 

And what did we find? They didn’t even bother to try. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, we have releases of people’s personal 

information in various government departments, Mr. Speaker, 

what they claimed happened in the Department of Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing, Mr. Speaker. And what did those 

people get, Mr. Speaker? They get moved to another job where 

they don’t have access to some information, Mr. Speaker. They 

get a day’s suspension. 

 

On one hand somebody gets fired. On the other hand somebody 

gets a day suspension for releasing information. What’s the 

difference in those two situations? One, the government was 

publicly embarrassed; on the other hand the minister wasn’t 

asked a question in the House. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, they don’t deal with breaches of information. 

They don’t deal with problems in the same consistent manner. 

They’re inconsistent, Mr. Speaker. And that is why you need to 

have ironclad protection for employees, Mr. Speaker, because 

you got a government that is not consistent in their approach to 

dealing with breaches, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, first of all in all three of those occasions, the 

information had a right to be made public because the 

government was putting at risk the public. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that is what, that is what whistle-blower legislation is about, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what public disclosure information or public 

disclosure legislation and protection is about, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

about protecting employees when and if public information is 

needed to be made public in the public interest and to protect 

the public, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well what we have before us, Mr. Speaker, is a Bill that just 

allows the government to sweep things under the carpet. It 

doesn’t get made public. We don’t know if protections are ever 

taken, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And why are they doing this, Mr. Speaker? Because I think 

they’re afraid, Mr. Speaker. They’re afraid to have the 

information of what they’re doing made public, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s what it boils down to because otherwise they would be 

willing to have total open and accountable transparent 

government as they campaigned on. But yet they don’t want to 

deliver, Mr. Speaker. So they campaign on one thing, Mr. 

Speaker, and then they deliver another. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out a number of things that I 

think that need to be pointed out to the public as well, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they fired a occupational health and 

safety officer for refusing to, Mr. Speaker, to deal in the manner 

. . . They brought forward public information and refused to 

change their report, Mr. Speaker. This occupational health and 

safety officer was fired, Mr. Speaker, later, later, Mr. Speaker, 

had to be rehired. And the taxpayers of this province paid tens 

of thousands of dollars, if not hundreds of thousands of dollars, 

in back pay, Mr. Speaker — tens of thousands, if not hundreds 

of thousands, of dollars in back pay. And that employee was 

reinstated to their job, Mr. Speaker, because a third party, a 

third party, Mr. Speaker, said what they did was appropriate. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have a government here that says they 

want to be open and accountable and transparent, Mr. Speaker. 

The one test, the one test in this issue that’s gone before a third 

party, they’ve lost. They’ve lost after firing that person, Mr. 

Speaker. And there’s more to come. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, you can’t beat up and abuse people. You 

can’t go and fire people because you think they’ve done 

something. And you can’t go and fire people if they brought 

something forward that the public has a right to know, Mr. 

Speaker, because, Mr. Speaker, those people work for the 

people of Saskatchewan, not for a government, not for a 

minister, not for a ministry. They are hired by the professional 

civil service and a professional Public Service Commission that 

have a responsibility, have a responsibility, Mr. Speaker, to act 

in the best interest of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

They don’t have it as their objective to act in the best interest of 

any political party, any minister, or any government, but in the 

public of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the inconsistency and how this government 

applies its own application to two things, Mr. Speaker, and their 

history in being punitive if anybody says anything about them 

or speaks out against them, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why you 

need a piece of legislation that’s open and accountable. And, 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill doesn’t do that. What it actually does is it 

fails to allow the disclosure of information, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

controlled mechanism so the government can control 

employees, and if they don’t like what they’re doing, Mr. 

Speaker, down the road they can punish them and even fire 

them even though they said they won’t. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen this, we’ve seen this already. 

We’ve seen them fire employees already, and we’ve seen them 

had to rehire an employee in the occupational health and safety 

branch, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and to define it right down 

to where it was, it was in the harassment branch of the 

occupational health and safety unit, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s because this civil servant, professional civil 

servant disagreed with the minister’s office, disagreed with the 

government, Mr. Speaker, wouldn’t back down when the 

government demanded that she back down. Well, Mr. Speaker, 



7586 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2011 

they got rid of her. They fired her. But, Mr. Speaker, when it 

got before a third party, Mr. Speaker, what happened? The 

person was rehired. They were rehired, Mr. Speaker, and why is 

that? Because this person did their job because she was a 

professional career civil servant that stood up and did what was 

appropriate and what was right. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s what we ask of our civil servants. 

That’s what we ask of those we employ. They’re to be 

professional, non-partisan, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, that 

doesn’t mean that they may not have political beliefs, because 

we believe every citizen has political beliefs, but it’s how they 

do their job on the job, Mr. Speaker. It’s how they do the job, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I’ve known many, many people 

who’ve supported other political parties and were very adamant 

about it and had the opportunity, could have done the similar 

things that we see this government do and behave in a similar 

way — didn’t do it, Mr. Speaker. Why would we? They were 

doing their job, Mr. Speaker. They were professional and doing 

their job, and that’s what we need to gauge. That’s what we 

need to do, Mr. Speaker. We need to gauge the role and job 

they’re doing, Mr. Speaker, and not whether we believe as 

politicians we like what they’re doing or not. They’re paid to do 

a job for the people of Saskatchewan not a political party, not a 

minister, not a government but the people of Saskatchewan. 

That’s what a civil servant is about and what a professional civil 

service is about. And, Mr. Speaker, we need to keep that in 

mind as we’re looking at what role we want our civil servants to 

play. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been on both sides of the House. I’ve 

been both in government and opposition. And seeing the now 

members of the government bringing forward information 

provided by civil servants, Mr. Speaker, that hurt the 

government, severely hurt the government, Mr. Speaker, and 

we didn’t fire any of them. We didn’t fire any of them, Mr. 

Speaker, and there’s a reason for that. We didn’t fire anybody. 

Mr. Speaker, you can go to the nine women who brought 

forward the Murdoch Carriere issue, Mr. Speaker. None of 

them were fired by this government. Mr. Speaker, they weren’t 

because they had a right to bring that information to the 

opposition. They had the right to make the information to the 

opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they can laugh and they can, you know, play 

up anything they want, Mr. Speaker, but the reality is the role of 

the opposition is to hold the government accountable, Mr. 

Speaker. To do that you need information, Mr. Speaker. And 

the civil service role is, in fact, to act in the best interest of the 

people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, not of a political party. 

So, Mr. Speaker, they should not be intimidated. They should 

not fear reprisal. They should not have their ability to bring 

information forward stifled, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s what this piece of legislation does. 

 

Mr. Speaker, who is this piece of legislation in the interest of? 

It’s in the interest of a government who wants to stifle 

information from becoming public. It’s not in the interest of the 

people of Saskatchewan, and that’s the role that legislation 

should play. It should be good public policy for the people of 

Saskatchewan, not in the interest of a government, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, we wouldn’t know about things like St. Peter’s 

College, Mr. Speaker, and the problems to do with St. Peter’s 

College, Mr. Speaker, if people hadn’t brought that information 

forward. We had a minister deny it when we brought it up in 

committee. It’s not till we had the facts and the proof did we get 

to the point of having a real investigation to what was going on, 

Mr. Speaker. And those investigations are in the public interest, 

Mr. Speaker. They’re in the public interest. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

things are in the interest of the public, Mr. Speaker. That is 

what you need to do. You need to stand up for what you believe 

in, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we need to act in 

the interest in the public. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the members opposite is saying 

something opposite . . . I don’t know what he’s speaking about. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Nothing to do with the Bill. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Mr. Yates: — Nothing to do with the Bill? All right. I won’t 

pay much attention to what he’s saying. But, Mr. Speaker, what 

we’re talking about is a piece of legislation that needs to be in 

the public interest. And, Mr. Speaker, you need to do things that 

are in the public interest, and you need to stand up for what you 

believe in, Mr. Speaker. And civil servants have to have the 

right to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this Bill, if you look at it and its 

construction and design, is about controlling information. It’s 

not about disclosure of information. It’s about controlling 

information, who you can disclose the information to. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t fire people for disclosing 

information ever. We didn’t fire people for disclosing 

information. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they’re trying to twist something around or 

do whatever, but we have, Mr. Speaker, we have an adjudicated 

case where an occupational health and safety officer in the 

harassment unit was fired for not being willing to change her 

report and her mind when ordered to by the government. Mr. 

Speaker, she was dismissed. Fired. Fired. A third party, Mr. 

Speaker, a third party reinstated her, put her back to work, and 

taxpayers paid tens of thousands, if not hundreds of thousands 

of dollars in back pay, Mr. Speaker, taxpayers’ money. Because 

a government ministry acted, acted not in the best interest of the 

public, but in their own best or self-interest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this Bill that we have before us, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 147, 

An Act respecting the Protection of Public Servants who make 

Disclosures, is all about controlling information, Mr. Speaker, 

not about information ever being made public, but about 

controlling information and controlling what civil servants can 

do, Mr. Speaker. And it allows information to only be disclosed 

to two people: an officer appointed by the deputy minister in 

each department or the commissioner who then can report back 

to the deputy minister of that department, Mr. Speaker, and in 

an annual report — much like the Ombudsman’s report or the 

Children’s Advocate’s report or even the Provincial Auditor’s 

report — make something public months and months later, Mr. 

Speaker, when the pertinence and the timing of the information 

is irrelevant, Mr. Speaker. 

 



May 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7587 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is about controlling information. This is 

about a government preventing information from being made 

public that may in fact hurt them politically, Mr. Speaker, rather 

than having respectful public disclosure of information if civil 

servants believe it should be made public. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

Mr. Speaker, the information that civil servants would feel 

important enough to be released, Mr. Speaker, that they are 

prepared to risk dealing with, Mr. Speaker, they need protection 

to bring forward information. And they need greater protection 

even, Mr. Speaker, when you have a government who believes 

to fire people if you bring information forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the government of today is a 

government that tries to prevent information from being made 

public. We saw it in St. Peter’s College, Mr. Speaker. We saw it 

in Carlton Trail and St. Peter’s College merger, Mr. Speaker. 

We raised questions. We couldn’t get answers. It wasn’t until 

we had concrete evidence of wrongdoing, Mr. Speaker, that 

there was any action, Mr. Speaker. And there were civil 

servants who wanted to bring forward information much earlier, 

Mr. Speaker. They wanted to bring information but they were 

afraid, Mr. Speaker. They were afraid. They were afraid of this 

government, Mr. Speaker, because this has a pattern of firing 

people who bring information forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, people who behave in this 

manner aren’t behaving in the public interest. People who fire 

people for bringing information forward, they’re behaving in 

their own interests, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, are they 

protecting the public interest when they bring forward a Bill 

that prevents openly accountable transparency, Mr. Speaker? 

No. No, Mr. Speaker. No, Mr. Speaker, they’re looking after 

their own self-interest, Mr. Speaker. They have a belief that 

they’re always right and everybody else is always wrong, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And we see that. We see that, Mr. Speaker, when in the whole 

Carlton Trail issue, we asked public questions, Mr. Speaker, in 

committee. We get no answers. We get sloughed off by the 

minister. He doesn’t do anything about it, and the more, it takes 

more than a year, Mr. Speaker, before we get that concrete 

proof, concrete proof of wrongdoing, Mr. Speaker. And then we 

get some action. In the meantime it cost taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan an incredible amount of money. We don’t know 

the total number yet because it’s going to take months before 

the auditors will be done their reviews, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s why you need to have the ability of civil 

servants to come forward without any reprisal, Mr. Speaker, 

without any fear of reprisal, Mr. Speaker. And this Bill doesn’t 

do it. 

 

This Bill is about containing information, allowing the 

government to block, block information from being made 

public, Mr. Speaker, through a process that contains it and 

closes it within the government structures which the cabinet can 

control. That’s what it’s about. It’s about cabinet control of 

information, Mr. Speaker. It’s not about public disclosure. It’s 

about anything but public disclosure because it prevents it from 

ever being made public. It allows you to tell it to an official that 

ends up going full circle back to the deputy minister in a 

department. That’s what happens. Mr. Speaker, it’s not about 

public disclosure. The only thing that is about public disclosure 

in this Bill is using the words public disclosure. The Act has 

nothing to do with public disclosure, Mr. Speaker. In fact it’s 

the furthest thing from it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill that serves the self interest of 

the Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker, certainly does not 

serve the interests of the people of Saskatchewan, certainly does 

not serve the interests of the public service of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, it should not surprise the 

members when this comes to a vote that we won’t be supporting 

this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this government truly wanted to live up to what 

they said in their platform, Mr. Speaker — and I’d like to read 

that again — if they’d like to live up to what they said in their 

platform, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Saskatchewan people expect their government to be open, 

honest and accountable. A Saskatchewan Party 

government will provide Saskatchewan people with more 

transparency and accountability than any previous 

government [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill doesn’t do it and the members opposite 

over there are talking a lot from their seats and chirping a lot 

about things, Mr. Speaker, because they’re uncomfortable 

because they know this piece of legislation is not in the public 

interest. They know it’s not good legislation. They know it’s 

not in the interest of the civil service of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re trying to ram something through that’s in their 

own self-interest, a way to control — to control, Mr. Speaker — 

any information that’s within the civil service and prevent 

public servants from ever bringing that information to the actual 

public, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, clearly this Bill is not in the interest of the 

people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker and clearly, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ll have many, many questions in committee, Mr. Speaker, to 

get things on the record, Mr. Speaker, and we will want to do 

that, Mr. Speaker. So at this time, I simply want to state that this 

Bill is in the interest of a government that wants to control 

information, not in the interest of a professional civil service, 

not in the interest of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

but in the interest of a Sask Party government that wants to 

control people and control information. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — The question before 

the Assembly is the motion by the Minister of Social Services 

that Bill No. 147, The Public Interest Disclosure Act be now 

read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 



7588 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2011 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — To which committee 

shall this Bill be referred? I recognize the Deputy House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, to the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 161 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 161 — The 

Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise today to address amendments to The Election 

Act, specifically Bill 161, The Election Amendment Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill to a certain extent is historic. Now 

usually when one rises and says that something is being done in 

the Legislative Assembly and it’s historic, one means that with 

praise. But in this case, the history, historic occasion is the 

breach of a long-standing convention of this Assembly and a 

practice in respect to election law, which long-standing 

convention and practice I think is unique to election law in the 

province. And in this Assembly, has been a long time, Mr. 

Speaker, a long, long time — certainly precedes me and 

precedes the history of most of the members in this Assembly 

— since a government has brought in changes to election law in 

this province without the agreement of the opposition. 

 

So this legislation is being brought in, changing dramatically 

election law in the province of Saskatchewan, without the 

agreement of the opposition. And that truly, Mr. Speaker, is 

historic. But it is a retreat, an historic retreat back to a history 

when a majority government would force election law changes 

— whether or not the opposition agree with them — on the 

opposition, and change the rules of elections to, you would 

assume, Mr. Speaker, given where the legislation is coming 

from, to suit the government of the day. That practice was 

abandoned a long time ago, Mr. Speaker. It is being resurrected 

with this Bill. 

 

And that is not the most significant aspect of this legislation, 

but it is not insignificant. It is not unimportant. It is certainly 

worth noting, Mr. Speaker, today that that convention has been 

breached — and breached in quite an interesting way, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think it shows the little power that the Attorney 

General has in the Saskatchewan Party government and the lack 

of respect for the minister responsible for ensuring the 

government governs by the rule of law, because the Minister of 

Justice said that he would honour that convention. 

 

There were a number of recommendations made by the Chief 

Electoral Officer coming out of the last election and the last 

by-elections that have been held since the last general election 

in the province of Saskatchewan, a number of recommendations 

made by the Chief Electoral Officer to make elections more 

efficient, more effective, more adapted to modern 

circumstances to improve voter turnout. 

 

The government ignored those recommendations and ignored 

them and ignored them. And for a number of terms, a 

government prior to this first Sask Party government, long ago 

there would have been an all-party committee of this 

Legislative Assembly looking at the recommendations of the 

Chief Electoral Officer and agreeing which ones would go 

forward into legislation. And that didn’t happen. Well it hasn’t 

happened, Mr. Speaker. It’s not going to happen. There’s no 

time for it and the government has no will to do it. So all those 

recommendations are ignored, and something that the Chief 

Electoral Officer does not recommend and we believe does not 

actually approve of or see the need for is going ahead. 

 

But the Minister of Justice said the practice of the two parties 

— or if there’s more in the Legislative Assembly; there happens 

to be two today — getting together, working over the 

recommendations by the independent officer of the Legislative 

Assembly and other concerns, and determining how election 

law should be updated, that practice would be followed. I don’t 

think that the Minister of Justice and the Attorney General 

believed anything other than that would be the case, but that is 

not what has happened. 

 

And so the Premier’s office said no. Despite the promise to the 

Attorney General, that convention’s going to be breached, and 

we are not going to have an all-party agreement on the updating 

election law and we’ll do it unilaterally. And it is the hubris and 

arrogance of the Sask Party government that we will breach that 

convention. We will break the promise made by the Attorney 

General and just as a matter of style, we will do both those 

things in a Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Imagine the surprise of members of the Legislative Assembly, 

aware of the convention that election law would be updated by 

agreement — and only election law, Mr. Speaker, only election 

law, and I’ll come to the reasons for that — election law would 

be updated by agreement between the parties. Imagine the 

surprise to members of the Legislative Assembly when that 

convention, having been recommitted to by the Attorney 

General of the province, was breached in a Throne Speech. 

 

When I first saw the Throne Speech last fall, Mr. Speaker, I 

thought well they’re going to break their convention if they’re 

going to break their undertaking to the opposition and to the 

people of Saskatchewan, if they’re going to do that and they’re 

going to put it in the Throne Speech, well why don’t they just 

bring in a property requirement to vote or why don’t they bring 

in the kind of literacy test we used to have in the Deep South, 

United States if they just want to restrict people’s voting? Why 

do this? 

 

[16:15] 

 

Well why do this, Mr. Speaker? Because this will pass muster. 

Those would have been too outrageous. This is as far as this 

government can go to restrict people’s voting rights, and they’re 

going to go as far as they can go. And they know the opposition 

wouldn’t agree, and that’s why the convention was broken and 

that’s why the commitment of the Attorney General was broken 

because they know we wouldn’t have agreed. 

 

Why did that convention come into place in the first place, Mr. 

Speaker? It was very unusual when opposition are consulted on 



May 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7589 

any other legislation, doesn’t expect to be in advance of it being 

introduced into the Legislative Assembly. Well that convention 

is there because the people of Saskatchewan want to be assured 

that the rules by which elections are conducted are fair. 

 

And the people of Saskatchewan know that those rules are fair 

if the major parties, the parties who are represented in the 

Legislative Assembly, agree to them. If the party that’s in the 

minority or parties that are in the minority in the Legislative 

Assembly agree to the changes, then the people of 

Saskatchewan have confidence that the changes in election law 

are fair. The people of Saskatchewan can have no such 

confidence in the motive of the government in making these 

changes and breach of that convention, the intent of this 

legislation or the effect it will have on voting turnout. 

 

Now before I forget this comment, Mr. Speaker, the provisions 

are similar in this Bill to provisions that have been adopted 

federally. And at least one minister of the Crown thinks that has 

allowed for a record turnout. In fact, in the last federal election 

under those rules, the turnout wasn’t the lowest it’s ever been, 

but it was pretty close, Mr. Speaker. It’s close to the lowest it’s 

ever been. 

 

And the minister said, the Minister of Municipal Affairs said in 

committee — because there’s also a Bill dealing with municipal 

election law, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll come to that — said in 

committee, well I didn’t have any trouble voting in the federal 

election. Well, Mr. Speaker, that misses the point and makes the 

point at the same time. Of course the minister didn’t have any 

problem voting. The legislation, the federal legislation isn’t 

designed to stop him from voting. It’s not designed to stop him 

from voting, Mr. Speaker. It’s not designed to decrease the 

likelihood that he will vote — a white, privileged male with a 

driver’s licence and a passport. That’s not going to be the effect 

of this legislation. 

 

And I don’t know if the Minister of Municipal Affairs was 

assuming some persona of naïveté or something, but surely he 

doesn’t believe that the concern of the opposition and people of 

Saskatchewan about this legislation, federally, provincially, or 

municipally, was that it would stop a minister of the Crown or 

impede a minister of the Crown from voting in an election. 

 

But I think at some fundamental level this legislation 

demonstrates — and quite dangerously because of its possible 

effects, its likely effects as some have said — a fundamental 

misunderstanding on the part of the government and members 

of the government about the right to vote. And the analogies 

that ministers of the Crown and members of the government 

draw between the right to vote and other human activities in an 

industrial economy, in a modern economy are quite remarkable. 

 

Ministers and government MLAs will say well it’s, you know, 

if you want to apply for a credit card, you want to open a bank 

account, you want to borrow money, you have to be able to 

prove who you are. You have to have identification. You have 

to have all these, whatever the bank requires to lend you money. 

Well you want the bank’s money, you want to borrow the 

bank’s money, you have to make the bank feel secure within the 

restrictions of the law on what the bank can require. 

 

The ability to borrow money, if you can persuade a financial 

institution that you can pay it back or provide sufficient security 

so that they can feel secure in lending you the money, the 

ability to do that and the right to vote are fundamentally 

different things. And the government doesn’t seem to 

understand the difference between Saskatchewan residents as 

consumers and Saskatchewan residents as citizens, between 

whatever privileges come with status or wealth or income, and 

what rights exist whatever those statuses might be. It’s because 

they just don’t seem to understand that and the analogies that 

they put in place to argue in defence of this Bill, an historic Bill 

but historic for fundamentally bad reasons, Mr. Speaker, show 

that they don’t understand that fundamental difference. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the statement by the Attorney General and the 

Minister of Justice in defence of the Bill in the Throne Speech, 

because this was, this breach and this broken promise was made 

in the Throne Speech, which has also got to be historic, Mr. 

Speaker. At least, I hope it remains unique. This was defended 

by the Minister of Justice saying, well you know, if people want 

to vote, it’s like — and he used the example of opening a bank 

account — they’ll have to have their identity papers in order. 

 

And as I said in my response to the Throne Speech, Mr. 

Speaker, it had the whiff of the authoritarian about it that people 

would have to have their identity papers in order if they wanted 

to vote in a provincial or municipal election in the future in 

Saskatchewan. Because the benefit of the doubt doesn’t go to 

the citizen; the benefit of the doubt goes to those who would 

challenge the citizens’ right to vote. 

 

Perhaps the most telling in some ways and disturbing analogy 

was made by the government member from Regina Qu’Appelle 

who, following my remarks said, well you know, in my former 

career and life as a police officer, when I pulled somebody over, 

I expected them to be able to produce a driver’s licence and 

show who they are and that they have a right to drive that car. 

And, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly I was a little shocked by that. 

The analogy between policing and democratic elections is not 

one that is made in any state that anybody in this Assembly or 

anybody in Saskatchewan would want to live in. 

 

The policing around the privilege of driving and policing the 

participation in democratic elections, Mr. Speaker, is an 

analogy that could best be drawn in states in which elections 

can’t really be called fair at all. As someone once said, policing 

is only easy in a police state, and policing elections and treating 

elections as police action would only be done in a police state. 

And there are citizens in Saskatchewan, there are citizens in 

Saskatchewan . . . I think the member from Regina Qu’Appelle 

is rethinking her remarks. There are citizens in Saskatchewan 

who have left places where the attitude is that you demonstrate 

that you have a right, you demonstrate that you should be able 

to vote here. 

 

So there’s a fundamental, I think, misunderstanding that 

grounds, that grounds this legislation. And I think there’s also, 

to be fair to the members opposite, some of them are adherents, 

and I think sincere adherents perhaps, to an urban myth. The 

Minister of Justice, I think even the Premier mentioned cases in 

Saskatchewan of buses of people voting in constituencies — 

busloads of people, excuse me; buses don’t vote — busloads of 

people voting in constituencies where those people aren’t 

entitled to vote. 



7590 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2011 

Now when pressed by reporters or anyone else, they quickly 

backtracked. Because there are no examples, Mr. Speaker, there 

are no examples you can point to. As the member from 

Meadow Lake says from his seat, never happened. There’s no 

evidence of it. There’s no proof of it. There’s no reported case 

of it. But it fuels, I think, particularly for the Deputy House 

Leader, the member from Meadow Lake, it fuels the animus 

behind this Bill and the requirement that we have a Bill that 

removes the benefit of the doubt from the citizen coming 

forward to say, I live here. I’m a citizen here, I want to vote 

here. 

 

And if this election is close, then that’s going to be examined. 

And nobody thinks they’ve won a provincial election unless 

they’ve got more than 100 votes over their nearest opponent, 

Mr. Speaker, because you know that under that number there’s 

going to be a recount. Your opponent’s going to be looking for 

irregularities. If they’re there to be found, they’re going to be 

found and there could very well be a by-election. I mean there’s 

a remedy. There’s a remedy. And the remedy is not to, before 

the vote, deprive people of their vote. That’s not the remedy, 

The remedy is to address those rare cases where irregularities in 

people voting in the wrong place, whether intentionally or not, 

usually not, Mr. Speaker. There’s a remedy to address those, 

but it’s after the fact. And in the cases where there’s, it’s 

actually an issue and not in the many constituencies, the many 

local elections where if there is, of course, no issue. 

 

Some members in this debate have quoted from a New York 

Times editorial which I’m going to read in its entirety, partly 

because it’s not very long and because it’s almost exactly on 

point with the Bill that’s under consideration. Matter of fact 

when I first read it in April it, I thought well, change the names 

and the locations and we could be talking about the same 

legislation that’s before the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It’s entitled, well, it’s dated April 26th, 2011. It was in the New 

York Times. It’s an editorial and it’s entitled “The Republican 

Threat to Voting.” And I quote: 

 

Less than a year before the 2012 presidential voting 

begins, Republican legislatures and governors across the 

country are rewriting voting laws to make it much harder 

for the young, the poor and African-Americans — groups 

that typically vote Democratic — to cast a ballot. 

 

Spreading fear of a nonexistent flood of voter fraud, they 

are demanding that citizens be required to show a 

government-issued identification before they are allowed 

to vote. Republicans have been pushing these changes for 

years, but now more than two-thirds of the states have 

adopted or are considering such laws. The Advancement 

Project, an advocacy group of civil rights lawyers, 

correctly describes the push as “the largest legislative 

effort to scale back voting rights in a century.” 

 

Anyone who has stood on the long lines at a motor vehicle 

office knows that it isn’t easy to get such documents. For 

working people, it could mean giving up a day’s wages. 

 

A survey by the Brennan Center for Justice at New York 

University School of Law found that 11 per cent of 

citizens, 21 million people, do not have a current photo ID. 

That fraction increases to 15 per cent of low-income 

voting-age citizens, 18 per cent of young eligible voters 

and 25 per cent of black eligible voters. Those 

demographic groups tend to vote Democratic, and 

Republicans are imposing requirements that they know 

many will be unable to meet. 

 

Kansas’ new law was drafted by its secretary of state, Kris 

Kobach, who also wrote Arizona’s anti-immigration law. 

Voters will be required to show a photo ID at the polls. 

Before they can register, Kansans will have to produce 

proof of citizenship, such as a birth certificate. 

 

Tough luck if you don’t happen to have one in your pocket 

when you’re at the county fair and you pass the voter 

registration booth. Or when the League of Women Voters 

brings its High School Registration Project to your school 

cafeteria. Or when you show up at your dorm at the 

University of Kansas without your birth certificate. Sorry, 

you won’t be voting in Lawrence, and probably not at all. 

 

That’s fine with Gov. Sam Brownback, who said he signed 

the bill because it’s necessary to “ensure the sanctity of the 

vote.” Actually, Kansas has had only one prosecution for 

voter fraud in the last six years. But because of that vast 

threat to Kansas democracy, an estimated 620,000 Kansas 

residents who lack a government ID now stand to lose 

their right to vote. 

 

Eight states already have photo ID laws. Now more than 

30 other states have joined the bandwagon of 

disenfranchisement, as Republicans outdo each other to 

propose bills with new voting barriers. The Wisconsin bill 

refuses to recognize college photo ID cards, even if they 

are issued by a state university, thus cutting off many 

students at the University of Wisconsin and other 

campuses. The Texas bill, so vital that Gov. Rick Perry 

declared it emergency legislation, would also reject 

student IDs, but would allow anyone with a handgun 

license to vote. 

 

A Florida bill would curtail early voting periods, which 

have proved popular and brought in new voters, and would 

limit address changes at the polls. “I’m going to call this 

bill for what it is, good-old-fashioned voter suppression,” 

Ben Wilcox of the League of Women Voters told The 

Florida Times-Union. 

 

Many of these bills were inspired by the American 

Legislative Exchange Council, a business-backed 

conservative group, which has circulated voter ID 

proposals in scores of state legislatures. The Supreme 

Court, unfortunately, has already upheld Indiana’s voter 

ID requirement, in a 2008 decision that helped unleash the 

stampede of new bills. Most of the bills have yet to pass, 

and many may not meet the various balancing tests 

required by the Supreme Court. There is still time for 

voters who care about democracy in their states to speak 

out against lawmakers who do not. 

 

[16:30] 

 



May 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7591 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s not much time left for voters to 

speak out here because we know the majority Saskatchewan 

Party will be driving this Bill through. And we know that, Mr. 

Speaker, well, because when haven’t they, Mr. Speaker? I mean 

I just spoke about human rights legislation a few moments ago 

that hundreds of Saskatchewan people from over 100 

communities have petitioned against, professors of law and 

former deputy ministers of Justice have spoke out against in 

editorial comments. The secretary general of Amnesty 

International, Nobel Prize winning organization which won the 

Nobel Peace Prize for its work on human rights internationally, 

opposes that human rights legislation, Mr. Speaker. But before 

we leave this spring, that legislation opposed by so many 

thoughtful people, that legislation will no doubt be given Royal 

Assent. Mr. Speaker, it will certainly be given third reading. 

 

So of course that’s one way I know that this Bill is going to go 

through. I mean if the government wanted to listen to people 

about these election changes, it would have honoured the 

long-standing convention of this Assembly to consult the 

opposition. It would have honoured the promise of the Attorney 

General and Minister of Justice to do just that. It would have 

sought support from the independent Chief Electoral Officer, 

Mr. Speaker. But they did none of those things. So this is 

obviously a Bill that the Sask Party government wants to see for 

effects that The New York Times comments upon in similar 

legislation being passed by state legislatures in the United 

States of America. 

 

Now in defence of the Bill, the government will argue that they 

sort of indirectly consulted on this Bill because this Bill is the 

mirror image of the municipal election law changes and they 

consulted on that Bill. At least that’s what some government 

members believe. It may not be the case. It is actually decidedly 

not the case, Mr. Speaker, which I think will become clear. 

 

I believe on March 17th, 2011, there was a debate, a 75-minute 

debate in this Assembly initiated by the government. And the 

House Leader, the member from Cannington for the 

government, the Government House Leader got up and said that 

the municipal election law changes that mirror the ones in this 

Bill, Mr. Speaker, were requested by, among others, but 

primarily the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, 

Mr. Speaker. They wanted this photo ID [identification]. They 

wanted voter ID requirements, new voter ID requirements. And 

so since the municipalities wanted them, Mr. Speaker, it would 

only make sense — I’m not sure why because the 

circumstances are different — but it would only make sense 

was the argument from the Government House Leader, it would 

only make sense that the province have similar rules, not 

identical rules. 

 

Now when the member from Cannington, the Government 

House Leader, said that SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association] had been consulted and SUMA had 

requested these changes to election law in the province of 

Saskatchewan, I believe that the member from Cannington 

believed it or why would he say it in this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker? But in fact it’s not the case. Not only did SUMA not 

ask for the voter ID requirements, did not promote the voter ID 

requirements, did not agree with the voter ID requirements, 

SUMA doesn’t like the photo ID requirements. SUMA wanted 

the voter ID requirements removed from the municipal election 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in a letter to the Minister of Municipal Affairs dated April 

19th, 2011, the president of SUMA says: 

 

We ask the government to remove the voter ID sections of 

Bill 162, the amendment, during committee deliberations 

after which SUMA will be prepared to work with the 

government to draft voter ID provisions that are practical 

and effective. 

 

The president of SUMA goes on to say in the same letter that 

the proposed voter identification amendments in the municipal 

election Bill and in the provincial election Bill — but he is 

speaking of course to the municipal election law — as they 

stand “present numerous challenges.” Including “they appear to 

be unnecessary.” And they “raise the possibility of voter 

intimidation.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let me comment on that phrase, voter 

intimidation, which was used by the president of SUMA in 

criticism of voter ID requirements that the government wants to 

impose in municipal elections and in provincial elections. 

That’s a phrase that I would not have used in this debate if it 

had not been in this letter. That’s pretty strong language, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I think the language that’s in the editorial is understandable 

language. The intent and effect of this type of legislation seems 

to be to suppress voting by groups that already 

disproportionally don’t vote compared to the general 

population. But the phrase voter intimidation is a phrase that I 

will now adopt because it is used in criticism of the legislation 

of the government, and I think it’s a fair phrase. And the reason 

I believe that the phrase is fair — and again it’s not mine, but 

it’s one I adopt — the reason the phrase is fair is because the 

deputy returning officers at polling stations, whether they 

understand the law and all of the exceptions that the 

government puts in by regulation or doesn’t put in by regulation 

or talks about putting in regulation or, you know, and the 

difference between the regulations of municipal elections and 

provincial elections and federal elections around these voter ID 

requirements, the DRO [deputy returning officer] is going to be 

assumed, at least by the DRO, to understand what these all are. 

 

And the person who’s maybe voting for the first time, maybe 

voting with some trepidation because it’s not the practice in 

their family — it certainly hasn’t been their individual practice, 

but they decided that they want to vote; they want to exercise 

their right as citizens — maybe they don’t have the kind of 

identification that would allow one to open a bank account. 

Maybe they don’t have the driver’s licence because they don’t 

drive a car, so there’s no concern about being pulled over by the 

member from Regina Qu’Appelle and asked to identify herself. 

Maybe they don’t have any of that. But they know where they 

live and they know they’re a citizen and they know that in some 

cases their people have been here for thousands of years and 

that they’re entitled to vote. They know all that. But they don’t 

know the law, Mr. Speaker, and I sometimes wonder how much 

law some of the legislators know. But they don’t know the law 

around election Acts. And if their right to vote is challenged, 

they are not going to be able to mount a defence. They are 

going to be intimidated. They are going to withdraw. And they 



7592 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2011 

are going to lose their vote. And the likelihood of them wanting 

to go out and vote again and confront that again in the future, 

well it’s small, Mr. Speaker. It’s small. And the DRO may not 

even be right. 

 

Because the response of the government to the criticisms of this 

legislation is not to withdraw these requirements. The response 

of the government is, well we’ll have this exemption, we’ll 

allow this, we’ll allow that, and we’ll allow the other thing, 

requiring every deputy returning officer in the province to be an 

expert on exactly what these are and to enact them in the spirit 

of, or what should be in the spirit, of election law that people 

are entitled to vote and they should lose that vote only if they’re 

not entitled, Mr. Speaker. And the onus should be on somebody 

to establish that they’re not entitled to vote, not the onus on this 

person who perhaps is not comfortable — because this is the 

first time they’ve ever been in a polling station — to explain the 

law to a deputy returning officer. 

 

But that’s what this legislation is aimed at doing, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s the effect that this legislation will have, and that’s where 

the concern of the president of SUMA about possible voter 

intimidation, the possibility of voter intimidation arises from, 

Mr. Speaker. And that concern, which I’m sure is shared by 

many other people, not just by SUMA, although that’s a large 

institution and addressing an issue about law about which they 

clearly were not consulted, Mr. Speaker. If they’d been 

consulted and listened to, the Bill wouldn’t had the provisions 

that they’re asking to have removed as late of April 2011. 

 

But that’s where the concern about voter intimidation comes 

from. It’s a real concern. I think I would have expected 

members of the government to be making light of my use of 

that term, but they can’t do so because it’s not mine. It’s the 

president of SUMA’s term, and they can’t do that, Mr. Speaker. 

I think they have to treat that concern with a little bit more 

respect because it’s not coming from a member of the 

opposition but from another leader, a civic leader within the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And another reason in the letter that they want the voter 

identification amendments, which are identical to the ones in 

the Bill that is now under discussion, removed is that they are 

“likely to negatively impact voter turnout,” Mr. Speaker. So 

here we have legislation that the government promised not to 

bring in without consultation with the opposition, then broke 

that promise, brought in without the consultation with the 

opposition. And civic leaders have said the identical legislation 

in respect to municipal law would possibly cause voter 

intimidation and likely negatively impact voter turnout. And 

that’s the Bill that we have. That’s the Bill that we have before 

the House. That’s the Bill that we’re debating now. 

 

The president of SUMA goes on to say in the April 19th, 2011 

letter: 

 

The primary argument to justify requiring voter ID is the 

ability to limit voter fraud during local elections. SUMA 

supports the principle of voter fraud reduction and 

enhancing legitimacy by democratic institutions and 

processes; however, in discussion with urban elected 

officials across Saskatchewan . . . 

 

This is a quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

. . . we are hard-pressed to identify occurrences of local 

election voter fraud, or urban election results that are 

called into question due to potentially illegal practices. 

With no obvious fraud issues to resolve, SUMA believes 

that there is no immediate need to introduce voter ID 

provisions. 

 

Now what was the government’s response to a major, one of the 

two major municipal government organizations saying, we 

don’t want the voter ID requirements that are in your 

legislation. We don’t want them. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Hart: — With leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Last Mountain-Touchwood 

has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to thank the member opposite for yielding the floor. 

 

With us this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, in your gallery, are three 

very important people in my life. My wife, Marlene, who I’ve 

introduced once or twice before, and with her are our two 

granddaughters, Tenaisha, if she’d give us a wave — that was 

Alyx that just waved — and our youngest granddaughter Alyx. 

 

As members would know, they are living with us now and 

keeping grandma mostly company. They seem to manage quite 

well while I’m here and they’re at home at Cupar. In fact they 

tell me on the odd occasion that sometimes they think they do 

better when grandpa stays in Regina, Mr. Speaker. Both of the 

girls are involved in activities in the school. Tenaisha’s in grade 

8 and involved in volleyball and in dance and currently in 

drama. I believe today she’s actually missing a practice; their 

drama club is getting near their performance. And Alyx, the 

younger one, is also very involved in hockey and in soccer and 

in dance. 

 

And one further thing I might say, Mr. Speaker, all the years 

when we were raising our older family we never allowed, and 

that was mainly me, never allowed any pets in the house, but 

Alyx managed to talk grandma into a having a cat in the house, 

Mr. Speaker. So I think we mellow with age. 

 

And I would just ask all members to welcome them to the 

Assembly. 

 

[16:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 



May 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7593 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 161 — The Election Amendment Act, 2010 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to say to the 

member from Last Mountain-Touchwood that I had no 

difficulty yielding the floor to him. I know the member from 

Last Mountain-Touchwood very well. I did not for a second 

suspect a legislative tactic. I knew he would want to be 

introducing people that are, as he said, important in his life. 

And I have no difficulty in yielding the floor to him to do that. 

I’m glad that, I’m glad that we were able to accommodate him. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I was saying before I was so courteously 

interrupted, politely interrupted, as I was saying, what was the 

response of the government to being told that, by SUMA, that 

they didn’t want the voter ID requirements? 

 

And since the election, the next municipal elections are in 2012, 

we have lots of time to draft another Bill. We can deal with the 

four-year terms. We can deal with everything in this municipal 

election Act, Bill, that we all like. We can deal with all that. But 

we have a year. We have a year to draft new voter ID and put, 

new requirements, and put that in the Bill, in the Act, where it 

should be, not in regulation, Mr. Speaker. We have time to do 

that. 

 

The government has demonstrated with this legislation, 

provincial election law legislation, that we can change election 

law legislation on the very eve of a provincial election. There’s 

not very many sitting days before the next provincial election, 

Mr. Speaker, and at this point, without any consultation, 

without, you know, looking to the recommendations of the 

Chief Electoral Officer, we’re changing provincial election law.  

 

Next year we could bring in voter ID requirements for the next 

set of municipal elections in 2012 that SUMA actually do 

support, they’d actually been consulted on, they actually agreed 

to. But SUMA was given a false choice, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s clear from the letter of April 27th, 2011, one of the letters 

that the Minister of Municipal Affairs thinks settles the issue of 

the failure to consult with SUMA and the imposition of voter 

ID requirement in municipal election law, that one of the 

organizations representing municipal governments and the 

majority of people in Saskatchewan, I expect, one of those 

organizations doesn’t support. And in the April 27th, 2011 

letter, the president of SUMA says, and I quote: 

 

Based on our recent discussions with your officials it was 

our understanding that our interest in making changes to 

the provisions could not be accommodated within the 

remaining sitting days of the Twenty-sixth Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, nothing could be further from the truth. At 

that time, Mr. Speaker, at that time there were at least another 

three weeks, another 12 sitting days of the twenty-sixth 

Legislative Assembly. And as I’ve said before, when the 

opposition and the government agree, we can draft and pass 

whole Bills, Mr. Speaker. 

And one of my examples was the profits against criminal 

notoriety Act, which the government was dragged kicking and 

screaming to. One argument was that it wouldn’t be 

constitutional, and the other was, well we don’t have time, Mr. 

Speaker. But the opposition continued to press, and lo and 

behold, we had time. A whole Bill was drafted. And not only 

was a Bill drafted, and in a day received — almost I think 

within a day — first, second, and third reading, Mr. Speaker, or 

certainly within two days. Not only was that done, but the Bill 

was no hurried, rushed affair. 

 

It didn’t collapse at its challenge. It was challenged by Colin 

Thatcher who was going to be the first subject of the legislation. 

It was drafted really so he couldn’t profit from telling the story, 

his version of the story, about the murder of his ex-wife, JoAnn 

Wilson, of which he was convicted. But not only was the 

government and the opposition willing, able to draft an entire 

Bill, when the government finally surrendered on their 

arguments about constitutionality and the time required, but the 

Bill withstood the constitutional challenge, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

good law. It’s a precedent for the country. 

 

So both the government’s arguments failed, but the government 

is making those same arguments again to SUMA. They’re 

saying, well there’s no time. There’s no time to make the 

changes. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs says there’s no time to make these changes because we 

need extensive consultations, well the argument is laughable. 

It’s ridiculous. It’s absurd. There were no extensive 

consultations on the Bill. There were no extensive consultations 

on voter ID requirements. If there had been, SUMA wouldn’t 

have been making the objections in the first place. 

 

So now there’s going to be extensive consultations on their 

reaction to the legislation, now that they know what’s in it. It’s 

absurd. It’s ridiculous. But it’s also a false choice, Mr. Speaker, 

because that’s not what SUMA asked for. SUMA didn’t ask 

that new, practical and effective voter ID requirements be 

drafted and put in this legislation by amendment within the 

sitting of this Legislative Assembly that ends on May 19th, 

2011. That’s not what they asked for, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What they asked for is to simply have excised — which we 

could do in 10 minutes in committee, we still have a number of 

days to do that in, Mr. Speaker — excised from the Bill the 

voter ID requirements. Just remove them and deal with the issue 

when they’ve been consulted in a future Legislative Assembly, 

preferably before 2012. That’s what they asked for. They didn’t 

ask for extensive consultations on new, new voter ID 

requirements. They asked to have these ones removed because 

they may result in voter intimidation. They will likely lower 

voter turnout. 

 

That’s what they asked for, and they were told that can’t be 

done. That can’t be done. There’s no time left. It can’t be done 

within the twenty-sixth Legislative Assembly which doesn’t 

rise till, as you know, Mr. Speaker, May 19th. Simply not the 

case. 

 

But why were they told that, Mr. Speaker? Well to go back to 

the March 17th comments of the deputy, of the Government 



7594 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2011 

House Leader, excuse me, of the Government House Leader, to 

go back to those comments, the support for these provincial 

election law changes that are likely to lead to voter intimidation 

and lower voting turnout, support for them is, well we’re going 

to have those changes municipally, and the support for having 

them municipally is SUMA asked for them. 

 

And so if you admit that SUMA didn’t ask for them and you 

remove them at the request of SUMA, then what defence is 

there now for the provincial election law that will possibly lead 

to voter intimidation and likely negatively affect voter turnout? 

In the words of the president of SUMA, what defence is there? 

There is no defence any more. 

 

They can’t, they can’t admit they didn’t consult with SUMA. 

They can’t admit that what’s in there is not requested by the 

municipal organizations and municipal governments. They 

can’t admit that because then there is no defence for the 

provincial election Bill that is before this Assembly. 

 

The Minister of Justice made another analogy in defence of this 

legislation. He said well there’s always a trade-off. There’s 

always a trade-off in criminal law. You don’t want to send 

innocent people to jail, and you don’t want to let guilty people 

go free. I think that is actually an excellent analogy, Mr. 

Speaker, because it is a foundation of our democratic society 

which respects the rights of individuals and the rule of law. It’s 

a foundation of our society that we don’t send people to jail 

unless they’re guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. And so it is 

often said better that 10, better that 100 guilty people go free 

than one innocent person go to jail. 

 

And that’s the beauty of this analogy of the Minister of Justice. 

It’s actually better that dozens of people vote where they’re not 

entitled to because we can correct that if the election is close 

and irregularities are investigated. It’s better that dozens of 

people vote where they’re not entitled to — not that there’s any 

history of that in the province, not that there’s any evidence of 

that happens — but better that dozens of people vote where 

they’re not entitled to than one person who has the right to vote, 

who’s a citizen of this country and this province, be denied the 

right to vote. 

 

The analogy is ideal, Mr. Speaker. That should be our principle. 

Better that there be some voting irregularities than that we be 

depriving people of their right to vote because they do not have, 

as this government would require, their identity papers in order, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 161, The 

Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now moved the second time. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee does the Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Government Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — To the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. I 

recognize the Government Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Being near 

the time of adjournment, I move that this House do now adjourn 

to facilitate the work of committees. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Government House Leader has 

moved the House do adjourn to facilitate the working of 

committees. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 

until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:57.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7563 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7563 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7563 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7563 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7563 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7563 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7563 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7592 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7564 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7564 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7564 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7564 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7564 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7565 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7565 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7565 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Champions of Mental Health Awards 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7565 

 World Lupus Day 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7566 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7566 

 Family First Radiothon 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7566 

 National Mining Week 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7567 

 Head Office Relocates to Saskatoon 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7567 

 Bargaining With Teachers 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7567 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Negotiations With Teachers 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7568 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7568 

 Membership in the Enterprise Club 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7569 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7569 

 Relationship With Teachers 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7570 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7570 

 Response to Rent Increases 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7571 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7571 

POINTS OF ORDER 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7572 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7572 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7572 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7573 

 Standing Committee of Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7575 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill. No. 157 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7573 

 Bill No. 144 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7574 

 Bill No. 155 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7574 

  Recorded Division ................................................................................................................................................................... 7574 



 

 Bill No. 169 — The Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7575 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 160 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7576 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 7583 

 Bill No. 147 — The Public Interest Disclosure Act 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7583 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 7588 

 Bill No. 161 — The Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7588 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 7594 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


