




















































Hansard: March 16, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 32A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 16, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6729 

 March 16, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn-Big 

Muddy, the Minister Responsible for Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the House I 

would like to introduce a number of special guests that we have 

seated in the Speaker’s gallery. 

 

It was a bit of a surprise visit for me about an hour and a half 

ago when I ran into them in the hallway. Of course, I think 

members of the Assembly will notice the familiar face of Kim 

Heidebrecht who works in our Legislative Library and does an 

excellent job for not only members and staff but also the 

visiting public. 

 

Joining Kim are her mother, Colleen, from Weyburn and also 

Norm and Bev Alexander and a special friend of theirs, 

Manuel, who is a new resident to the city of Weyburn. And I 

had the opportunity to say hello to them, Mr. Speaker. Members 

may know that I’m related through marriage to the Alexander 

family, and so I will certainly be on my best behaviour this 

afternoon. And I’d ask all members to welcome our special 

guests here to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the House a 

very special group sitting in the east gallery. It’s a group of 

students, new Canadians coming here from around the world as 

part of the English as an additional language program offered 

by the Open Door Society in my riding in Saskatoon. There are 

55 students here today. We had a chance to talk earlier about 

what will happen in the proceedings here, and they’re looking 

very much forward to the day’s proceedings. 

 

I’d like to mention the teachers: Don Campbell is up here, 

Sylvia McCorkindale, and Tsering Mullens. And I’d just ask all 

members to give these folks a warm welcome to their 

legislature. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join the member opposite 

in welcoming these individuals, those that are taking this 

English language course, to their legislature. We know how 

significant immigration is for the new Saskatchewan, and we’re 

absolutely delighted that they’re helping to contribute to our 

increasingly diverse, dynamic, and cosmopolitan communities, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m absolutely delighted, and I’d ask 

all members to join me in welcoming these people to their 

legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

introduce to you and to all members of the legislature 17 grade 

11 students who are in the east gallery. They’re part of the 

Regina Trek School program which is based at 

Sheldon-Williams Collegiate, and they’re accompanied by their 

teacher, Karen McIver. So I ask all members to welcome them 

here to the legislature. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan, in 

particular renters, Mr. Speaker, that are facing a combination of 

rising rents and some extremely low vacancy rates in many 

communities across the province. Many of these folks have 

been dealt rental increases of almost double to what they were 

paying, and they are feeling the pain, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they also acknowledge that a majority of Canadians 

now live in provinces where rent control guidelines are evident 

and that the argument that the private market will deliver 

sufficient affordable housing in the absence of rent control has 

proven to be false. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the government to consider enacting some form of 

rent control with a view to protecting Saskatchewan 

renters from unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed on behalf of citizens in 

Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Saskatoon, Clavet, and Regina. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition on behalf of the residents of Saskatchewan 

who wish to bring to our attention that Saskatchewan Seniors 

Association that has approximately 180 seniors’ centres 

throughout the province, and the vast majority of them are 

located in rural Saskatchewan, that these centres provide 

much-needed recreation and social activities as well as 

important health clinics and workshops and contribute to an 

enhanced quality of life for many of the seniors who use them. 

And due to skyrocketing costs of utilities, insurance, taxes, etc., 

approximately one-quarter of these centres will close in the next 

18 months, and the closure of these centres will lead to the 

deteriorating mental and physical health of seniors, which will 

lead to an increased stress on long-term care in facilities such as 

hospitals. 

 



6730 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2011 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

cause the Government of Saskatchewan to provide the 

much-needed funding to assist seniors’ recreation centres 

to remain open and active within their communities. 

 

And this petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by over 40 people 

from Carrot River, St. Walburg, Meota, and Codette. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. And we know that freedom from poverty is an 

enshrined human right by the United Nations and that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security. 

Saskatchewan’s income gap between the rich and the poor 

continues to grow, and now one in five children in 

Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the government to act as quickly as possible to 

develop an effective and sustainable poverty elimination 

strategy for the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I do so present. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

stand today and present a petition on behalf of my constituents 

who live in Hampton Village, concerning the need for a new 

school for their children: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes, including education property taxes; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to 

neighbouring communities to attend schools that are 

typically already reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition live in 

Hampton Village. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today 

to present a petition signed by citizens in Saskatchewan 

concerned about the introduction of Bill 160 before the 

Legislative Assembly and the detrimental effect it will have on 

the development of human rights law in the province. And the 

prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

withdraw Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public 

consultations informed by a public policy paper before 

any amendments to the Human Rights Code, the law that 

supersedes all others in our province, are even 

considered. 

 

Today this copy of the petition is signed by residents of Regina, 

Moose Jaw, and Melville, Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again today to present petitions on behalf of concerned 

residents from across Saskatchewan as it relates to the 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the two consecutive deficit budgets, the two years of debt 

growth, Mr. Speaker, and the burden and consequence this has 

for Saskatchewan people. This year alone, at a time of 

unprecedented highs in revenues, adding $400 million to our 

public debts bottom line simply isn’t acceptable, Mr. Speaker. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask 

Party government for its damaging financial 

mismanagement since taking office, a reckless fiscal 

record that is denying Saskatchewan people, 

organizations, municipalities, institutions, taxpayers, and 

businesses the responsible and trustworthy fiscal 

management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Estevan. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs. 

 

Saskatoon’s Citizen of the Year 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Last Friday I had the opportunity to bring greetings on 

behalf of the Premier, the Government of Saskatchewan, and all 

members of the House at a luncheon in Saskatoon to honour the 

recipient of the CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.] 



March 16, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6731 

Citizen of the Year, Ms. Lisa Rendall. 

 

I commend CTV on the excellent job they do in recognizing 

Saskatoon’s outstanding citizens with this annual award. 

 

Lisa joins other influential Saskatoon citizens that have been 

recipients of this award such as Senator Sid Buckwold, former 

mayor Cliff Wright, Peter Zakreski, and a former member for 

Saskatoon Northwest, Ted Merriman. 

 

Saskatchewan’s provincial motto is “from many peoples, 

strength.” The CTV Saskatoon Citizen of the Year award has 

been bestowed on a recipient that is the epitome of this model. 

Lisa Rendall was diagnosed with breast cancer in 2000, some 

11 years ago, and she has faced her battle with an upbeat 

attitude. Shortly after her initial diagnosis, Lisa made it her 

mission to raise as much money as possible for breast cancer 

research. To date, over $2.5 million has been raised through 

events such as the C95 Radio Marathon and the Lisa Rendall 

Golf Classic. 

 

Lisa is a dedicated warrior in the fight against breast cancer and 

an engaging speaker who brings audiences to laughter and tears 

as she tells a compelling story of diagnosis and living with 

incurable cancer. Lisa demonstrates not only true Saskatchewan 

spirit, but her display of courage has had a positive impact on 

the many lives that she has touched. What an inspiration to us 

all. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Ms. Lisa Rendall on this well-deserved award as Saskatoon’s 

Citizen of the Year. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Homelessness Awareness Campaign 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to honour the 

consciousness-raising efforts of the students at the universities 

of Regina and Saskatchewan who are taking action to draw 

attention to the issue of homelessness. 

 

Sleeping outside with none of the comforts of home for five 

days, Mr. Speaker, these students are raising money for 

Carmichael Outreach in Regina and Egadz in Saskatoon, 

community organizations that serve the marginalized and youth 

at risk. From March 13th to the 18th, they eat and drink only 

what is donated to them, and they sleep only with pillows and 

sleeping bags and do it all while attending their classes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the five days for homelessness national campaign 

began at the School of Business at the University of Alberta in 

2005 when three students decided to live without the comfort 

and safety most of us take for granted to raise money for local 

youth emergency shelters. 

 

Since that group of three raised $2,000, the campaign has 

spread to 22 campuses this year, and its 2011 goal is to raise 

200,000. More importantly than the money raised though is the 

awareness this student campaign is raising about the issue of 

homelessness in our society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I conclude by pointing out that the social work 

students took the lead role in organizing yesterday’s rally in 

support of affordable housing here at the legislature. The 

principled dedication of all these young people can teach us all 

a lesson about working together to build a society where 

everyone can feel at home. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Senior Girls’ Basketball Team Wins Playoffs 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Biggar Central 

2000 senior girls’ basketball team went to Unity for conference 

playoffs on Saturday, March 12th. The senior girls’ team 

consisted of eight players: Jordyn Litwinow, Julianna Tan, 

Ashley Ries, Stephanie Lichkowski, Edyn Keith, Carlyn 

Brandt, Ceejay Lehnert, and Sabrina Yurchak. Coached by 

Cindy Weekes and assisted by Karen Litwinow, the team 

played against Onion Lake and won, which advanced them to 

the playoff game against Unity, who they defeated by just one 

point. The girls now advance to regional play in Shaunavon this 

Friday and Saturday. 

 

The senior girls’ team started out their season with about 13 

players, but because of other commitments in the community 

and some girls having after-school jobs, they were down to 

seven very dedicated players. The coach pulled up a player 

from grade 9 to help fill the roster in case of injuries; however 

she proved to be an asset to the team. 

 

The girls have had a remarkable improvement over the season, 

therefore were able to pull off that exciting conference win. 

They haven’t been able to advance to regional play in quite a 

few years, so were absolutely ecstatic when they realized they 

had made it. Cindy and Karen are very proud of the girls for 

how hard they have worked. It has certainly been a great season 

for everyone, especially for the three grade 12 players who will 

be ending their high school year with exciting playoffs. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Crime Prevention in North Battleford 

 

Mr. Taylor: — The city of North Battleford last year rated 

number one on the Statistics Canada crime severity index — a 

position we are not proud of and do not want to repeat. And yet 

year-end statistics reported to the end of December 2010 seem 

to indicate that the city will once again find itself in that 

number one position. 

 

There is mounting evidence that North Battleford needs 

provincial assistance and support to deal with what appears to 

be high and growing criminal activity within the city. We need 

to reduce the incidence of crime and that means putting a plan 

in place. The RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] officers 

working in North Battleford have the highest caseload per 

officer in all of Canada. If North Battleford officers are going to 

be able to take time to be involved in a number of specific 

crime prevention activities, there is going to have to be 

additional funding available here. 

 

Some have argued the addition of four new police officers 



6732 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2011 

would help a lot. Other ideas that would benefit from provincial 

government attention include greater support for citizens’ 

organizations like Concern For Youth, Neighbourhood Watch, 

and Citizens On Patrol. And let’s not forget that some have 

argued that we need to pay greater attention to things like more 

affordable housing in the community and overnight shelters for 

youth and young adults. 

 

There are good ideas for helping North Battleford reduce the 

incidence of criminal activity. There is a role that the provincial 

government can play in helping. I renew my call for the 

ministers responsible to come to North Battleford to meet with 

the mayor and council and others who are working to make this 

a better place to live, work, and raise a family. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Farm Equipment Company Recognized 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 

rise in the House today to talk about a remarkable farm 

equipment company with a branch in Davidson. This past 

February, Western Sales was recognized as one of the top 50 

Best Managed Companies in Canada for the year 2010. This is 

the first time the company, a John Deere dealership, has been 

granted this honour. 

 

I’m sure that the members from Rosetown-Elrose, Biggar, and 

Thunder Creek will all join me in congratulating Western Sales, 

which was established in Rosetown in 1947 and later expanding 

to locations in Biggar; Central Butte; Elrose; Outlook; and 

2007, Davidson. 

 

In his statement, Western Sales president Fred McGrath said 

the company’s success was a testament to the strong 

relationships between its employees, the customers, and the 

communities they serve. He thanked the customers for the 

continued support over the last 64 years. He also said, “When 

you have the good fortune of working with quality employees 

and customers over the years, the actual management has not 

been difficult. We are proud to be part of the west central 

Saskatchewan business community.” 

 

I would ask that all members of the legislature join me in 

offering their congratulations to Western Sales upon their 

recognition as one of Canada’s top 10 best managed companies 

of 2010. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Radio Interview 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Normally we offer 

words of welcome to special guests joining us in one of the 

Chamber galleries but today, Mr. Speaker, is an exception. I 

rise today to offer greetings to somebody who isn’t actually 

with us today, though she found out yesterday exactly what it’s 

like to hear questions answered by the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Pre-tweeted as an interview with Saskatchewan’s Minister 

Responsible for Uranium, his appearance on CBC’s [Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation] Power and Politics had everybody 

atwitter with anticipation. But then the questions started, and 

the interview began to follow a pattern all too familiar with 

those in this Chamber. CBC’s Rosemary Barton asked a direct 

question about the percentage of Saskatchewan’s uranium used 

to generate power around the world, but the only firm figure 

that she established was the percentage of the minister’s 

verbiage used to generate vagueness and confusion. Mr. 

Speaker, that figure was at 100 per cent. 

 

As the minister rambled to a close, Ms. Barton was left to utter 

the phrase that makes her an honorary guest in this Chamber. 

She says, I quote, “Okay. I’m sorry again, but I’m sure that 

time you didn’t answer the question.” Rosemary Barton, 

welcome to our world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I close by thanking you for this opportunity to 

update this Chamber on how this minister’s miscommunication 

strategy is working for the government nationwide. And I know 

that if it continues, I will be welcoming many more of Ms. 

Barton’s colleagues, in spirit at least, to Saskatchewan’s 

legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Resource Royalties 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Leader of the 

Opposition must be confused. Depending on who he’s talking 

to, the current NDP [New Democratic Party] leader is telling 

two different stories about his job-killing resource tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in an interview with the Mississippi broadcasting 

corporation, the Opposition Leader told the reporter he was not 

sure whether an increase in uranium royalties was needed. But 

as the Opposition Leader always says, how does that square 

because in the latest NDP television commercial he states, here 

are some things government needs to do: charge more royalties 

on our potash and uranium. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here we can see another vintage NDP flip-flop. 

Since being elected as the NDP leader two years ago, the 

member from Douglas Park has been consistently inconsistent 

— saying one thing and then doing another. Mr. Speaker, this is 

just another example of the NDP putting their mouth into gear 

before engaging their brain. When the leader is talking to 

people in northern Saskatchewan, he isn’t sure whether an 

increase in royalty rates is needed, but then in his own TV 

commercials he promises to do just that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we will be looking forward to more 

flip-flopping on issues because I’m sure there’s more to come. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

 



March 16, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6733 

Negotiations with Health Care Workers 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party gave 

the CEO [chief executive officer] of the Regina Qu’Appelle 

Health Region a 24 per cent pay increase to over $376,000 per 

year and the CEO of the Saskatoon Health Region a 40 per cent 

wage increase to over $400,000 per year. The rationale behind 

the increases is to keep them competitive with their 

counterparts in other provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the over 3,000 health sciences professionals are 

being offered a measly one and a half to two per cent wage 

increase annually, leaving them making 25 per cent less than 

their counterparts in Alberta. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why doesn’t the same rationale of 

competitive wages with their counterparts not apply to health 

sciences professionals? Why the double standard? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to say at the outset how valuable all the health 

sciences workers are, not only to the people that they serve each 

and every day in this province but absolutely valuable to this 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, right now the negotiations are being conducted 

between SAHO [Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations] and the Health Sciences Association. Those 

negotiations have been under way for a long time. I would hope 

that they continue to talk till they find a collective agreement, 

Mr. Speaker, because what we have seen in this province is that 

there have been fair and competitive wages offered to many 

unions across this province, whether it’s the SMA 

[Saskatchewan Medical Association], whether it’s CUPE 

[Canadian Union of Public Employees], whether it’s SGEU 

[Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union], 

Mr. Speaker. All have come up with a fair and collective 

bargaining agreement, Mr. Speaker, that’s been good for the 

employee, good for the people of Saskatchewan, and most 

importantly, competitive across Western Canada. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. Order. Order. I would ask . . . Order. I would ask 

guests in the gallery not to participate in the debate. I recognize 

the member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad the minister 

mentioned SAHO, because talk about setting the stage for 

disrespect. The ads that SAHO has set out now against Health 

Sciences are totally uncalled for and unprecedented in this 

province. 

 

The over 3,000 Health Sciences Association professionals, 

many of who are in the gallery today with their leadership, have 

seen the minister turn his back on them. They’re the very health 

providers that look after our grandparents and our parents, our 

children, and our partners. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the Sask Party is serious about recruiting and 

retaining health professionals, providing quality care to 

Saskatchewan people, and bringing down wait times, they 

should start by offering the very people that provide the care a 

competitive contract now. 

 

To the minister: how does he think he’ll recruit and retain these 

professionals when he’s keeping them earning 25 per cent less 

than their Alberta counterparts? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said from the outset, 

all the workers within our health care system are absolutely 

valuable. They work 24-7 to provide care across this province 

from the northern regions, Mr. Speaker, right through the 

southern regions, and do an excellent job. 

 

That’s why we’ve been able to offer, I believe, competitive 

wages for all the unions that have settled, Mr. Speaker, 

competitive across Western Canada. That being said, it’s not 

higher in some cases, Mr. Speaker, but it’s far from the lowest. 

The opposition critic talks about Alberta and, you know, her 

leader would know all about that province and the wages 

offered in that province, Mr. Speaker. We haven’t met every 

wage in Alberta, Mr. Speaker, but I can tell you it’s fair and 

competitive and, Mr. Speaker, if we’re not number one, we may 

be number two but not far behind number one. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. If I’ve ever heard number 

two, that was it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only are health science professionals being 

offered a contract that will pay them 25 per cent less than their 

Alberta counterparts; they will receive no top-up if they go on 

maternity leave. Other government employees receive up to 100 

per cent top-up for anywhere up to 52 weeks when they go on 

maternity leave. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these health care providers spend as much as 

$80,000 educating themselves, are offered 25 per cent less than 

their counterparts in Alberta, and given no top-up when they go 

on maternity leave. 

 

To the minister: why is he jeopardizing the health care of 

Saskatchewan people by giving the very people that provide the 

care no incentives to stay in the province, and basically 

discriminating against the professional women represented by 

Health Sciences? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I have been very 

consistent in the three and a half years that I have had the 

privilege to serve this province as a Health minister. Not once 

have I ever engaged in negotiations on the floor of this 

Assembly, and nor will I ever engage in negotiations on the 

floor of this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, having said that though, I was very heartened to 

read in the Leader-Post not very long ago when they were 

talking about the negotiations between the Health Sciences and 

SAHO and hearing that it sounded like there was really a 



6734 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2011 

couple of outstanding issues, maybe maternity leave and some 

extra pay, Mr. Speaker. I would ask those two parties to get 

back to the bargaining table, Mr. Speaker, and iron out those 

two issues, maternity leave and extra pay for extra hour of 

work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, Health Sciences represents over 

3,000 health care providers from more than 30 health care 

professions that include paramedics, hospital pharmacists, 

perfusionists, physical therapists, speech language pathologists, 

and social workers, to name a few. These are the people 

working to ensure that Saskatchewan people receive timely, 

quality health care. Mr. Speaker, it’s Saskatchewan people that 

will suffer when these professionals leave for jobs outside of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: he’s risking the health of 

Saskatchewan people by undervaluing the work of the health 

sciences professionals. When will he offer a fair and respectful 

contract to HSA [Health Sciences Association]? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, these health 

workers, professionals, supply an excellent service to the 

people of Saskatchewan, as do all health care providers within 

the province, Mr. Speaker. That’s why this government, 

through SAHO, has been able to offer a fair and competitive 

wage, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s the CUPE or SEIU [Service 

Employees International Union], Mr. Speaker, the SMA. And I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, once this contract is settled, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ll continue to see the in-migration at record amounts, Mr. 

Speaker. Never has this province seen the in-migration that it 

has seen under a Saskatchewan Party government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Environmental Issues 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 

we asked the government what it’s doing to protect 

Saskatchewan people from contaminants being dumped from 

the Alberta oil sands in the water systems that flow into 

Saskatchewan. Based on the acting minister’s responses, the 

answer, we believe, is nothing. But the danger from the oil 

sands does not just travel in water, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 

is also inundated by airborne pollutants being dumped out by 

the oil sands. 

 

The acting minister yesterday said this province is aggressively 

monitoring for acid rain in northern Saskatchewan, although 

there is no evidence to support his comments. Why won’t the 

minister commit to aggressive action to deal with this air 

pollution coming to Saskatchewan from Alberta? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. We certainly believe in a science-based approach on 

this issue and an approach based on collaboration and not 

confrontation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government believes in ensuring that our 

boreal forest lakes remain pristine, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we 

signalled our intentions in the fall legislative session with a 

Throne Speech. And we’ll be coming forward, Mr. Speaker, 

with new initiatives such as an acid deposition management 

framework and also an enhanced monitoring program to assess 

cumulative impacts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a significant, a significant amount of work has 

been done since this government was elected in 2007, Mr. 

Speaker. And one only has to look at a report issued by the 

Pembina Institute and the Saskatchewan Environmental 

Society, and it says — the article is titled Carbon Copy — and I 

quote, “Prior to the autumn of 2007 there had been very little 

monitoring for acid rain in northern Saskatchewan, but that is 

now beginning to change.” Mr. Speaker, one of the co-authors 

was Mr. Peter Prebble. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. There was of course 

another study done, Mr. Speaker. It was released in December 

by the Royal Society of Canada. The Royal Society of Canada 

said, with rapidly increasing production in the oil sands, the 

amount of gases being released into the air is growing rapidly 

as well. Those toxins are drifting into Saskatchewan and 

affecting people close to Alberta, including those of us who live 

in The Battlefords or even Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. Poor air 

quality creates more cases of respiratory illness, exacerbates 

existing ailments, forces more people into ER [emergency 

room], and drives up the cost of health care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister says Saskatchewan is working with 

Alberta — who by the way has cut their monitoring programs 

— but why is the Saskatchewan government not doing anything 

to ensure that Alberta actually works at reducing those toxic 

and damaging gases coming across our common border? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we are certainly committed 

to keeping our environment clean, particularly in northern 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from another 

report submitted to the federal Minister of the Environment by 

the Oilsands Advisory Panel just this past December. And it 

says, and I quote: 

 

We make one over-arching recommendation. We 

recommend that a shared national vision and management 

framework of aligned priorities, policies and programs be 

developed collaboratively by relevant jurisdictions and 

stakeholders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Council of Ministers of the 

Environment are currently working on a Canada-wide 

comprehensive air management system, something that we 

approved in October at our ministers’ meeting last year, Mr. 



March 16, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6735 

Speaker. And the Ministry of Environment is playing an active 

and leading role in pursuing a national understanding and a 

solution for acid rain through the acid rain task force. Mr. 

Speaker, we are taking clear action on this file after many years 

of inaction by the NDP government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. With the 

release of that Oilsands Advisory Panel, the New Democratic 

Party immediately in December put forward a letter to the 

federal Minister of the Environment to say we want to see 

Saskatchewan and Alberta working together, Mr. Speaker. We 

need that federal help, Mr. Speaker. The New Democratic Party 

wrote that letter. 

 

I ask the minister opposite to tell us how he responded to the 

federal government’s response in this regard, Mr. Speaker. And 

will he tell us why the Saskatchewan government is not yet 

working publicly with Alberta to reduce the impact of oil sands 

pollution on this province? And why won’t he provide us with 

the interprovincial working agreement that will in fact protect 

Saskatchewan from this dangerous pollution? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we are certainly working 

very closely with our federal counterparts and also the 

Government of Alberta. In fact yesterday I was in Edmonton 

meeting with Minister Renner to discuss this and other issues 

that we have in common, Mr. Speaker. But I want to inform the 

people of Saskatchewan that there was very little action under 

the NDP government on this file, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There was a mobile monitoring lab that was purchased by the 

NDP government that was not operational, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

hired the people to make that operational. Air quality focused 

on local issues: Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert. Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve deployed that mobile unit to Buffalo Narrows, 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, Loon Lake, Cluff Lake, Beauval, to name a 

few. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the NDP there was insufficient internal 

capacity within the Ministry of Environment to do statistical 

analysis and modelling. Mr. Speaker, we have doubled the 

FTEs [full-time equivalent] that are working on this important 

file, including two individuals that have Ph.D.s [Doctor of 

Philosophy] in this area, Mr. Speaker. And through the 

northwest sustainable development program plan, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve tested 300 lakes in northern Saskatchewan since 2007. 

The federal government has tested 600 lakes, and now we have 

that internal capacity, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The minister’s time has elapsed. I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Minimum Wage 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, a report on minimum wage 

was due to the government by December 31st of 2010. When 

they couldn’t hit this deadline, the government rescheduled the 

date to February 28th. This is the second deadline for the report 

as the government already missed its first deadline. 

 

To the minister: where is the report that was promised to be 

delivered to this body by February 28th? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The report’s 

been received by the government and will be released before 

the end of the month. The government would like a chance to 

review the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Which month? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — By this month, Mr. Speaker. I hear the 

members opposite. 

 

The Minimum Wage Board panel had asked for an extension. 

We granted them an extension to February 28th. They provided 

us with a copy of the report on February 28th. The Premier’s 

been away. And we will be able to table the report in the 

Assembly before the end of the month, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of 

Social Services was calling minimum wage increases Sask 

Party increases. Well, Mr. Speaker, any minimum wage 

increases in Saskatchewan during the past three years have been 

NDP wage increases. 

 

To the minister: with the Sask Party announcing that they’re 

freezing minimum wage until after the election, putting 

adequate housing out of reach for those on minimum wage, is 

the government going to rethink its minimum wage freeze? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, at current minimum wage 

of 9.25 an hour, we have one of the higher minimum wages in 

Canada. But I would like to correct the minister opposite. Since 

2008, Mr. Speaker, this government has increased the minimum 

wage by 16 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is an important thing to us to look carefully at 

minimum wage. These are some of the lower income people in 

our province. These are people whose income needs to be 

carefully looked at. We look at the income of these people in 

the context of what needs to be done for housing and a variety 

of other initiatives to ensure that lower income people are 

adequately and appropriately protected and are able to deal 

appropriately with the effects of inflation, Mr. Speaker, and that 

is why we called for a report on minimum wage indexation, Mr. 

Speaker, because that is the goal of this government, is to deal 

appropriately, carefully with lower income people. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we will take every step to ensure that they are dealt 

with appropriately. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I see the member from 



6736 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2011 

Saskatoon Silver Springs sitting over there smirking. It was he 

that went around prior to the last election saying we’re going to 

index minimum wage. They’re going to index minimum wage. 

And then, Mr. Speaker, they handed it over to the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone who not only can’t answer questions, but 

he’s just sat on his hands when it came to doing anything for 

three and a half years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these costs of food are spiralling out of control. 

Gas, electricity, telephone service, and everything is rising 

sharply. To the minister: how long will it take before the 

government takes appropriate action to address the affordability 

in Saskatchewan and lift the minimum wage freeze? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I remind the member 

opposite that we are the government that asked for the review 

on indexation, Mr. Speaker. That review will be released 

shortly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the members opposite as well, 

we are the government that doubled the low-income tax credit. 

We’ve reduced provincial income tax and removed some 

80,000 low-income people from the provincial tax rolls. We’ve 

increased funding for housing programs by 45 per cent. We’ve 

increased shelter rates in the Saskatchewan rental housing 

supplement four times and we’ve indexed those to the cost of 

living. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 16 years the NDP failed to increase shelter 

rates. For 13 of those 16 years over that same time, there was an 

inflationary increase of 30 per cent, Mr. Speaker. We have as 

well offered over 700 additional affordable housing units, as 

well approximately 1,250 more units are in development or 

planning stage. Mr. Speaker, during the time of the government 

was in their last full year, 58 units, Mr. Speaker — an 

embarrassing record. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Situation of Low-Income People 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we hear it again right here, 

right now, Mr. Speaker. This government continues to boast 

about 92,000 people being removed from our provincial tax 

rolls as a result of tax measures two years ago. They continue to 

celebrate, but that this is only a good news story, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the Minister of Finance: what is the average income of those 

92,000 people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite will 

know, the member opposite will know that during the 

Saskatchewan Party’s term in government, we have made the 

largest change to the personal income tax system — $4,000 

increase to the personal exemption has resulted in 92,000 

people not on the tax roll. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was interesting when that group over there, who 

are now in opposition, were in government, Mr. Speaker. What 

they used to do is they used to increase the minimum wage, Mr. 

Speaker, without changing the personal exemptions. What it 

really meant, Mr. Speaker, is that someone on a minimum wage 

would end up paying more tax to the NDP government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — If that minister, Mr. Speaker, would 

take just an ounce of the phony outrage he displays in this 

Assembly and focus it towards Saskatchewan people, we’d be 

in a lot better shape. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister is willing to grandstand, to press 

release, but he doesn’t know the facts. The question was, 

average income. The unfortunate reality is that of these 92,000 

people, many are making 12, 15, $20,000, as examples. It’s fair 

to say the average income would not paint a positive story. 

Question to the minister: what is the average savings of those 

92,000 people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, one of the other revenue 

initiatives that our government has implemented is, in fact, the 

very indexation of those brackets, Mr. . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Numbers have always been a mystery. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Well, you know, Mr. Speaker, the 

comment by the member opposite deserves some comment. Mr. 

Speaker, we’re going to talk about some numbers. We’re going 

to talk about the fact that indexation, the very indexation of 

those brackets is going to mean the following, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Last year, an individual, a senior, Mr. Speaker, a senior who 

was earning $20,000 worth of income through pensions, Mr. 

Speaker, that individual last year paid $15 worth of personal 

income tax because of the changes that we have made in the 

past, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, because of the indexation that we 

have introduced, effective January 1, where all of the personal 

exemptions of individuals, the spousal exemptions, the 

dependent child exemptions were increased, Mr. Speaker, do 

you know what? Now someone who is earning $25,000 worth 

of pension income will only pay $536 worth of tax. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, again that minister is 

willing to grandstand, to celebrate, but has no facts, no answers 

to the two questions that were put to him. The two questions 

were average income . . . The other question was average 

savings. The fact would be that the individuals in question 



March 16, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6737 

include many people saving only a few dollars; to the high end, 

a few hundred dollars, Mr. Speaker. And this is what’s being 

celebrated by this government. While at the same time and 

through the same period, they have faced annual increases to 

the cost of living in the many thousands of dollars through 

housing, utilities, food, and gas. For example, a monthly rent 

increase of $400 is almost $5,000 a year. Any small gain has 

been entirely eaten up and absolutely outstripped by the 

thousands of dollars a year increase, representing a net loss for 

Saskatchewan families that are being squeezed and that are 

under great strain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with these facts on the table, will the minister 

commit today to cut the use of this sound bite? The fact is it’s a 

complete disrespect to the hard-working families and the 

individuals that he references and the real hardship and strain 

that they face. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the number of people that 

are paying taxes at the lower income are lower. The numbers 

are lower. There are 92,000 less people paying tax than there 

were before we made the changes. Now, Mr. Speaker, the 

member opposite is asking about what kinds of savings do these 

people really have. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, since we’ve made this largest personal 

income tax saving, reduction, I want to talk about low-income, 

single parents, Mr. Speaker. Low-income, single parents are 

saving $2,800 annually, 2,800. Senior couples, Mr. Speaker, 

senior couples are saving $2,200 annually. Single seniors, Mr. 

Speaker — and I’ve just indicated to you what, in fact, even 

indexation is going to do — single seniors are saving $1,300 

annually. So, Mr. Speaker, when we start to look right across 

the piece, even a family of four, Mr. Speaker, is going to be 

saving over $2,600. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that minister’s completely 

out of touch. For him to highlight those numbers that don’t 

reflect the real numbers of this program, Mr. Speaker, and even 

in the case of an individual that maybe did fully exercise the 

program and save $1,000, to be outstripped many times over for 

rent, utilities, and cost of living, Mr. Speaker. They’re losing 

ground. 

 

This government has not only grandstanded and celebrated this 

reality as a positive circumstance, but they have shamefully 

used it to rebut and spin when defending itself against the 

concerns of families and individuals facing unmanageable 

increases to cost of living. 

 

The fact is that this pool of workers, 92,000 people, represents 

18 per cent of the entire Saskatchewan workforce. This is a sad 

story, not only for the individuals and families facing costs of 

living that are putting them under water, displacing them from 

their homes, that are not able to make ends meet, but sad that 

we have a government that is not only out of touch with the 

reality facing Saskatchewan families but that deliberately spins 

the numbers to try and dismiss the real concerns of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, disingenuous spin doesn’t cut it. When will this 

government put forward a plan to start action to address the true 

and real hardship facing so many across this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to ask the 

people of Saskatchewan: do you want to have today, because of 

the indexation, a personal exemption that is $13,535 tax free? 

Mr. Speaker, there’s no tax being paid on $13,535. Or do you 

want to go back to the NDP years when that exemption was just 

in the $8,000? 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are the numbers. The member opposite can 

multiply the difference between those two values by 11 per 

cent, and he’ll know what the savings are. But you know what, 

Mr. Speaker? What the NDP don’t want to talk about, they 

won’t want to talk about the fact that when the Leader of the 

Opposition was in NDP government — 17 tax increases. PST 

[provincial sales tax], PST raised three times, Mr. Speaker. 

Income tax raised twice. Business taxes raised four times. Fuel 

taxes raised. Tobacco taxes raised. Alcohol taxes raised. Mr. 

Speaker, 17 tax increases by that NDP government when they 

were there. Mr. Speaker, we never want them back on this side 

of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Why is the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow on her feet? 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, to request leave to introduce a 

guest. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 

thanks to the House for leave. It gives me great pleasure to 

introduce a constituent and someone sitting behind the bar who 

is no stranger to people here in this Assembly. I’d like to 

welcome Mr. Rick Swenson who is the leader of the 

Progressive Conservative Party. And I don’t know whether he 

likes to admit it, but I am his MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly], Mr. Speaker, and we have chanced to run into each 

other numerous times in Moose Jaw. 

 

And I have on the golf course, I chanced to run into his father 

on the driving range. So, Mr. Speaker, I spent a fair bit of time 

— didn’t get much practice done on the driving range — but 

spent a fair bit of time speaking to his dad about a variety of 

political issues. So I know where Rick gets his dedication not 

only to the community but the province, and his ability to 

express a point, Mr. Speaker. So I’d ask all my colleagues to 



6738 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2011 

please welcome Mr. Swenson to the Assembly. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 805 through 852. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 805 through 852 are tabled. I 

recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — I wish to order the answers 853 through 855. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 853, 854, and 855 are ordered. I 

recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to 856 through 868. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 856 through 868 are tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill. No. 164 — The Police Amendment Act, 2011 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the 

end of my remarks today, I’ll move the second reading of Bill 

No. 164, The Police Amendment Act, 2011. In spring 2007 the 

Ministry of Justice, which was the ministry responsible for 

policing services at that time, invited members of the police 

community to consult on amendments to The Police Act, 1990. 

Consultations were ongoing over the course of three years, 

concluding in the spring of 2010. They included the 

Saskatchewan Association of Chiefs of Police, the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Police Officers, the Saskatchewan 

Police Commission, municipal boards of police commissioners, 

and the Ministry of Justice and Attorney General. 

 

The recommended amendments which emerged from the 

consultation process were either fully supported by the 

stakeholders or were considered a reasonable compromise that 

served the public interest. The proposed amendments are 

largely procedural changes to improve fairness, efficiency, and 

transparency among Saskatchewan municipal police services. 

They apply to discipline process, public complaint process, 

police boards, and the role of independent observers to internal 

investigations of police actions. 

 

Proposed amendments relate to enhancing the police discipline 

process by making it faster, ensuring cost isn’t a factor in 

constraining police services from using the discipline process, 

encouraging timely and cost-effective mediation processes, 

balancing public openness and transparency with the privacy 

needs of police officers, protecting police officers who in good 

faith report misconduct by a police chief, ensuring appropriate 

disciplinary action is taken in all related matters, and making 

the discipline process fair and more equitable while discipline 

proceedings are pending. 

 

Another aspect of the proposed amendments will require all 

members of municipal boards of police commissioners to take 

mandatory training. It is also proposed that the independent 

investigation observer process be improved. These 

improvements include having both the deputy minister of 

Justice and Attorney General and the deputy minister 

responsible for Policing receiving the observer’s report. 

Currently only the deputy minister of Justice receives the 

report. The amendments will also provide municipalities with 

flexibility in choosing their own police service provider. 

 

Finally the Ministry of Justice and Attorney General has 

proposed amendments related to their responsibilities for the 

Public Complaints Commission. These amendments will 

improve the timeliness of investigations into complaints against 

police officers and police services and will help increase 

openness and transparency throughout the complaint process. 

 

The financial implications of these amendments apply to the 

appointment of an investigation observer and the costs of police 

discipline and oversight. Costs related to these processes will be 

absorbed by CPSP [Corrections, Public Safety and Policing] 

and are estimated to be in the range of 55,000 to $85, 000, 

depending on the number of cases annually. Cost implications 

relating to disciplinary hearings and oversight are not 

considered significant, representing less than 1 per cent of the 

current $150 million investment that the province makes in 

policing each year. 

 

These amendments to The Police Act, 1990 serve to strengthen 

the support that this government provides to police services. 

The partnership between municipal police services and the 

province is tangible evidence of our commitment to public 

safety. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move that The Police 

Amendment Act, 2011 be read a second time. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing has moved second reading of Bill 

No. 164, The Police Amendment Act, 2011. Is the Assembly 

ready for the questions? I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

want to say to the minister, I appreciated his comments, looking 

at the changes that are being proposed in the amendment to The 

Police Act. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Police Complaints Commission and the 

improvements that are being made there, I would have to say 

that on first glance, I would agree that most of them seem to be 

improvements. The minister talked about openness and 

transparency, also making sure that the discipline process is fair 

and balanced, and touched on a number of areas. When you go 

through the legislation and have a look at it, it seems to be good 

changes. 

 

But I have to say, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of areas 

where I do have some questions, and I suppose many of those 

will be addressed specifically when it comes to the discipline 



March 16, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6739 

and the process and when complaints are filed with the 

commission. And that’s something that we’re going to have to 

go through and look at a little more closely what the previous 

process was and what improvements and how they will actually 

work and come into play. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what I was listening for, and the minister 

touched on it quite quickly, one sentence I believe, talked about 

municipalities choosing their police service provider. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that was one of the first things that jumped out at me. 

And when we look at the explanation of what’s in the existing 

legislation and what change is being made, we’re seeing that 

there is a cap reduced . . . And I’m looking for . . . Oh here it is, 

Mr. Speaker, 23.1, right now: 

 

23(1) Subject to the approval of the Lieutenant Governor 

in Council, a municipality having a population greater 

than the minimum size prescribed in the regulations, but 

not greater than 20,000, may enter into agreement with 

the Government of Canada to employ and pay for a 

sufficient number of members of the Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police to provide policing services within the 

municipality. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that could change quite significantly the 

services that are provided and how those services are provided 

in communities across the province. And I think it really 

deserves a little more than one sentence. It needs to be given a 

little higher level of scrutiny. And I also lacked I think a 

number of areas of consultation. When the minister talked that 

this consultation process has gone on for three years, I didn’t 

hear any consultations done with municipalities if they were 

requesting this change, if there are municipalities out there that 

are looking at the idea of getting rid of their police force and 

looking at changes to the RCMP, utilizing the RCMP. That’s 

what this removal of the cap on the size of communities in 

effect does, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So there’s a number of questions as to how far the consultations 

went. I didn’t hear municipalities being discussed or police 

associations. I didn’t hear that being commented on by the 

minister. So when we’re talking about three years of 

consultations, I think there’s been a few folks that have been 

missed that could be impacted by that one change that the 

minister obviously felt was insignificant enough that he only 

addressed it with one sentence in his second reading speech. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, without a doubt we need to go through the 

process, look at it in more detail to make sure that the new 

initiatives are adequately addressing the issues that have arisen 

out of the previous process. But also there needs to be a great 

deal more consultation done on the changes proposed to 

allowing the RCMP access to municipalities or municipalities 

access to the RCMP. That’s something that is open for a 

broader discussion, I have to say. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know there are a number of my colleagues 

that want to make comments on this Bill and the proposed Bill, 

and also there is consultations that we need to do. So at this 

point in time, I’ll adjourn debate on Bill 164. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 164. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 165 — The Adult Guardianship and 

Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Adult Guardianship and 

Co-decision-making Act, 2011. Mr. Speaker, this Act sets up 

procedures for the appointment of a personal or property 

decision maker to assist in the day-to-day affairs or property 

management of adults who are incapable of or need assistance 

in managing their personal or financial affairs. 

 

The Act provides for a range of decision makers depending on 

the person’s needs. A personal or property co-decision maker 

may be appointed for a person who requires help with decision 

making but does not need full guardianship services. Where an 

adult is unable to make his or her own decisions, a personal or 

property guardian may be appointed pursuant to the Act. 

Finally where an adult needs a guardian for a short time, a 

temporary personal or property guardian may be appointed for 

no longer than six months. Once appointed, the Act also 

establishes the duties and requirements of an individual 

appointed to act as a personal or property decision maker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the abuse of vulnerable adults is an issue of 

ongoing concern for this government as well as for the public. 

Some adults, including the elderly, who are unable to protect 

themselves are at risk of both personal and financial abuse. This 

Act protects such people by establishing specific criteria for 

persons applying for guardianship orders. The Act also protects 

adults by establishing duties for guardians, such as to account. 

 

The protections in place are of course balanced against the 

desire to encourage family members and friends to pursue 

applications by keeping those applications and the duties upon 

decision makers as streamlined and transparent as possible. 

Several amendments have been suggested to enhance operation 

of the Act while continuing to ensure that vulnerable adults and 

their property are protected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendment adds protection that will allow the 

court to recognize foreign guardianship orders. Jurisdictions in 

Canada and other countries have established legislation and 

procedures for the appointment of personal and property 

decision makers. Currently a decision maker appointed in 

another jurisdiction cannot reply in the appointment order in 

Saskatchewan either to deal with property in Saskatchewan or 

because the adult has moved here. Instead the decision maker 

must bring in an entirely new application before the court. 

 

The amendments will allow guardians appointed in a 

recognized jurisdiction to apply to the court to have the 

appointment order resealed in Saskatchewan. In some 

circumstances, a guardian may still want to pursue an entirely 



6740 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2011 

new application, but a valid, existing order from a recognized 

jurisdiction should not be entirely disregarded. 

 

The amendments will also clarify inventory and accounting 

provisions to make it clear when and what a property decision 

maker is required to provide. A property decision maker is 

currently required to provide an inventory of the adult’s assets 

within six months of the application date. This delay is often 

necessary, as individuals may not be able to obtain all the 

information they require without a court order. Still a property 

decision maker could cause substantial damage in six months, 

so these amendments will reduce the filing time to three 

months. 

 

Property decision makers are also currently required to file an 

annual accounting outlining the adult’s property as well as any 

decisions made in the previous year. A form providing the 

regulations that decision makers are not required . . . is 

provided in the regulations, but decision makers are not 

required to use it, which results in decision makers not 

providing enough information. Currently the Act does not 

specify when the annual accounting must be provided. The 

Public Guardian and Trustee’s office receives and reviews all of 

these accountings and ensures that the accountings are complete 

and accurate. Mr. Speaker, requiring that the annual accounting 

be in a prescribed form and be filed with the court and the 

Public Guardian and Trustee within three months of the 

anniversary of the appointment will assist the Public Guardian 

and Trustee’s office, as it will know when to bring an 

application forward. It will also assist the property decision 

maker, as he or she will know what is required. 

 

Currently the Act does not require a final accounting. A final 

accounting may be necessary when the adult dies so that their 

executor or administrator is aware of the status of the estate. A 

final accounting may also be required where a decision maker 

is discharged or removed. That way the adult or future decision 

maker will have an accurate accounting of the estate. The 

amendments will add a new provision for a final accounting 

within six months of the adult’s death or the decision maker’s 

discharge or removal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amounts will also allow the court to require 

that a temporary property guardian file a bond. At present 

temporary guardians are not required to file a bond. Temporary 

property guardians are tasked with protection of the adult’s 

estate for a short period of time; however substantial harm can 

be done in six months. The amendments will grant the court the 

discretion to require that the temporary property guardians file a 

bond if the value of the estate is above a prescribed amount. 

 

The amendments will also provide that a fee schedule may be 

established for the regulations. The Act currently allows the 

decision maker to charge fees only if fees are set by the court. If 

an order for fees is not made, the decision maker cannot charge 

a fee. In practice, however, decision makers either fail to 

request a fee at the time the original application’s made or do 

not know how much the appropriate amount is to request, or 

else they will indicate they will not charge a fee and later 

change their minds at the accounting stage. A fee schedule will 

provide decision makers with a guideline as to the fees that they 

may charge. It will also make it clear that if they want to charge 

more than the schedule permits, they will need a court order. 

Mr. Speaker, in some situations, a decision maker will no 

longer be able to act or will be discharged by the court. If an 

adult is still in need of a decision maker, an entirely new 

application needs to be made before an individual can act on 

behalf of the adult. The amendments will allow the court to 

appoint an alternate decision maker at the time the original 

order is made. This alternate will be entitled to act if the 

original decision maker is unable to act by simply notifying the 

court and the Public Guardian and Trustee but without further 

application or court order. 

 

The amendments will also specify that a property guardian can 

make payments for the maintenance, education, or benefit of 

the adult’s spouse or dependant children, including the property 

guardian if he or she is the adult’s spouse. There is no question 

that the property guardian can spend funds on the adult, but the 

current Act does not specifically consider what payments can 

be made for the ongoing support of the adult’s family. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the amendments will add a new provision 

that authorizes property decision makers to make gifts out of 

the adult’s estate if the requirements set out in the Act and the 

regulations are met. A property decision maker has the 

authority to make decisions with respect to the adult’s property, 

but the Act is presently silent on the issue of gifts. As a result, 

property decision makers sometimes make gifts to family 

members and to themselves, but they were not required to 

specifically account for those gifts, and the Act establishes no 

restrictions. 

 

The new provision will allow a property decision maker to 

make gifts out of the adult’s estate only if the gift is not 

required to meet the needs of the adult and there are reasonable 

grounds to believe that the adult would have made the gift if he 

or she had capacity. Also the value of the gift must not exceed 

an amount that will be prescribed in the regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments will clarify powers and duties 

of decision makers. They will allow individuals who have 

already been appointed under a court order to act without 

further application and continue to provide protection for 

vulnerable adults. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second 

reading of The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making 

Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 165, The Adult Guardianship and 

Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2011. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

privilege to rise and make comments on Bill No. 165, An Act to 

amend The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Act 

which also makes some consequential amendments to The 

Public Guardian and Trustee Act and The Public Trustee 

Amendment Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think listening to the minister and his comments 

on second reading, he was fairly thorough in his comments. 

And by all of the information that I’ve seen when looking at the 

explanatory notes and going through the Bill, it seems to be 

really an updating and addressing of the Bill to make sure that it 



March 16, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6741 

is current and appropriate for the situations that it needs to 

address. 

 

I believe a little more discussion needs to happen. And I know I 

need to do some work on my side because, Mr. Speaker, this is 

something that it’s pretty rare to run into in our constituency 

offices when there is decisions that have been made by a 

personal decision maker or property decision maker on behalf 

of an adult when there is a guardianship circumstance or 

situation. But I know that there can be many situations that will 

fall through the loopholes or the cracks in a piece of legislation 

and that when we have had these cases brought to the 

constituency, which is pretty rare, they can be pretty difficult to 

deal with. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take the time to be able to go 

through the changes that the minister is proposing. It seems to 

cover off many areas. It seems that there has been a number of 

areas that have been updated and some accountability issues 

that have been addressed and also, Mr. Speaker, the idea of an 

alternate decision maker, which I think will fill a gap that has 

probably arisen a number of times, and also the issue of these. I 

think we have to be very clear when we come to adult 

guardianship and what decisions are made, how those decisions 

are made. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while there is a little bit more work to do on 

this Bill and actually work through it, see how it would actually 

apply to cases we have run across or situations that we know of, 

until that work is done, Mr. Speaker, and some of my other 

colleagues have a chance to make comments on the Bill, at this 

time I’d adjourn debate on Bill No. 165. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 165. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 157 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 157 — The Oil and 

Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 

rise to speak to the Bill No. 157 for a number of reasons. But 

certainly in looking at the Bill and having gone through it in 

some detail, it’s interesting that while the Bill is 29 pages long, 

which is quite lengthy for a Bill, the explanatory notes are 44 

pages long. So it’s a very comprehensive and complex Bill that 

we have before the Assembly today. 

 

Now the Bill is a serious Bill in that it makes some pretty 

dramatic changes to legislation governing The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Act currently. And because of the importance of 

the changes and the depth and breadth of them, it’s important to 

do proper consultation, Mr. Speaker. And we have just in this 

past few years of this government witnessed occasions where 

they have failed to consult. And it’s numerous occasions, Mr. 

Speaker, if you want to talk about Bills 5 and 6 where they 

were cited by the ILO [International Labour Organization], an 

international body, for having not consulted, when the minister 

in her second reading speech said that they had consulted on 

The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, and she named specific 

groups who refuted what she’d said in her second reading 

speech. 

 

Their history of consultation on important Bills in this 

legislature is sadly lacking. However in this case they have 

gone out and they have spoken with a number of companies, 

organizations that represent them, small producers, large 

producers, through the Canadian Association of Petroleum 

Producers and organizations like that, Mr. Speaker. So I will 

commend the government for having consulted on this Bill. 

They’ve done a good job there and in this case. 

 

Now the history of governments consulting on oil and gas Bills 

in Saskatchewan is a good one. Certainly the royalty regime 

structure that we own currently, the minister responsible 

currently from the Saskatchewan Party has given credit to the 

New Democratic Party for setting that regime structure. We’re 

proud that we did that entirely in conjunction with the oil and 

gas industry. 

 

Certainly if you look at what it takes to explore and extract a 

barrel of oil, there are enormous capital investments that have 

to take place. Certainly there’s some enormous volatility in the 

marketplace. The capital that they employ is as liquid as the oil 

that they extract. It can move from jurisdiction to jurisdiction at 

will. And certainly unlike other strategic resources we have in 

the province, oil and gas has a very . . . We own a very small 

percentage of the world’s reserves and production of oil and 

gas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So it’s important that the Bills are modernized to keep up with 

what is an exciting but ever-changing circumstance for oil and 

gas companies. There isn’t another industry that employs so 

many different types of technology in their work, that works so 

hard at research and development, mostly by companies on 

their own to develop their own technology in very specific 

places in the world because of different geographies . . . sorry, 

geologies that are existing in Saskatchewan right now. 

 

Each different geology requires a different technology to 

extract oil. If you look at the North in terms of the oil sands in 

Saskatchewan, there’ve been many different technologies that 

have been attempted to employ there. We have heavy oil in the 

West and light sweet crude in the East in the Bakken. And so 

each of these technologies or each of these circumstances 

requires a different technology. 

 

In the past, vertical drilling was sort of the benchmark and was 

essentially all that existed for a large number of years in the 



6742 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2011 

industry. But in the last number of years, we’ve used horizontal 

drilling, which is very prevalent in Saskatchewan, fracking, and 

multi-fracking. There are companies employing THAI [toe to 

heel air injection] technology, SAGD [steam assisted gravity 

drainage] technology. They use fire floods and water floods. 

And certainly there are a number of companies, especially in 

the Bakken, that use carbon sequestration which is a technology 

that we pioneered or helped to pioneer so many years ago in 

Saskatchewan. We’re world leaders in that area. 

 

So as you will note, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of technologies 

that are employed and it’s important that government keeps up. 

And this Bill certainly does some of that, and so we appreciate 

that. 

 

Now how does the Bill keep up, Mr. Speaker? Well in one of 

the ways, it’s in record keeping. And it seems a pretty standard 

thing that now you would want to modernize that because oil 

and gas companies do a lot of their work in the field, and they 

work 24 hours a day, seven days a week all over the province of 

Saskatchewan. And so they want to access records and submit 

records to the government on their own time frame. And so to 

modernize the climate in Saskatchewan for oil and gas 

companies to better enable their work here, I think is important 

and good work that the government’s doing. 

 

Now there are many different types of records that are utilized 

by oil companies and that they’re asking that we convert and 

are able to manage electronically. Applications to government, 

records, stats, forms, reports, maps, plans, and surveys are all a 

part of this legislation, Mr. Speaker. So again it’s important that 

we get this done for the industry. 

 

In addition to some of the other things I’d mentioned about 

technology and capital investment, I don’t know that there’s 

another industry in the world outside of farming that is as 

multi-jurisdictional as oil and gas is, Mr. Speaker. It’s all over 

the world with exploration and extraction, production. And so 

it’s helpful to industry, in the consultation that I’ve done, that 

the access to records and the records that they have to provide, 

it’s better for them if they’re uniform. And so certainly we’re 

pleased that the governments have been able to make a change 

again to streamline the regulatory structure in that case. 

 

Now one of the other things that this legislation does is increase 

fines for non-compliance, especially when it comes to the 

environment. And I would argue that moving the fine to 

$25,000 or five times what it was before is a helpful step 

because it serves to provide a more adequate deterrent for oil 

companies that are outside of the Act. 

 

Now interestingly, and we’re pleased about this, that the Bill 

has come before the legislature, but I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

mostly because it had to. The minister referred in his comments 

to the fact that this is one of the early deliverables out of the 

New West Partnership. Now that is a sweeping change in 

Western Canada that was not brought before any legislature. It 

was an agreement that was signed that the Saskatchewan Party 

government said that they would not sign. 

 

And so we’re pleased to see Bill 157 before the legislature for 

the scrutiny of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and I 

will have some questions for the government in committee on 

this Bill. And with these comments and with future questions, I 

would ask that we move this Bill to committee. Thanks, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Minister of Energy and Resources that 

Bill 157, The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 

be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Minister Responsible for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — To the Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Committee on 

the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 159 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 159 — The 

University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 

afternoon to join in on the discussion on Bill 159, The 

University of Regina Amendment Act. There’s been a few 

members from the opposition who’ve had a chance to share 

some thoughts on this proposed piece of legislation, amending 

the U of R [University of Regina] Act. And I’m happy, as critic 

now, to be able to do the same, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Certainly the University of Regina plays a very important role 

here in Saskatchewan. It’s an important institution for the city 

of Regina, for our province, for our country, and on the 

international level for the fine research and scholarship that 

occurs on campus at the University of Regina. So when dealing 

with proposed amendments to an Act affecting the institution, 

it’s certainly important to do so in a thoughtful manner and with 

proper consultation with relevant stakeholders and in a manner 

that truly serves the best interests of the institution over the long 

term. 

 

The proposed changes to The University of Regina Amendment 

Act cover a number of areas. And I would, Mr. Speaker, like to 

speak to the different areas that are being covered, providing 

my view on certain aspects of the legislation. 



March 16, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6743 

The first area, Mr. Speaker, that is suggested as a change, and it 

should say . . . I should mention that these changes come at the 

request of the University of Regina’s administration, and I will 

take the minister at his word that the proper consultation 

occurred with the U of R to ensure that these changes do in fact 

reflect the wishes of the university. 

 

The one change, Mr. Speaker, is repealing the visitor section. 

As has been the existing legislation dealing with the U of R, if a 

student wanted to make a claim that he or she was not treated 

properly, they had the option of requesting that the visitor of the 

university review their case and make a ruling. In practice, Mr. 

Speaker, this has been the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

What has been happening, Mr. Speaker, actually, at the U of R, 

as is indicated in the minister’s remarks, that this aspect of the 

legislation has not been used since its inception in 1974. And in 

cases where it does occur, the Lieutenant Governor would refer 

the item to the court system. So this change simply does 

streamline the process. And I have to say, Mr. Speaker, in my 

opinion it does make good sense, and it’s similar to the actions 

that we’ve seen in recent legislation with the University of 

Saskatchewan for changes that have come through earlier on in 

this government’s term. 

 

Another area, Mr. Speaker, where changes are being requested 

is in the area of increasing the number of members to call an 

extraordinary meeting of convocation. And the change, Mr. 

Speaker, is from 25 to 50, simply increasing the threshold for 

the number of individuals requesting such a meeting. To me, 

Mr. Speaker, given the high number of graduates from the U of 

R, with so many members belonging to convocation at this 

time, in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, this seems like a reasonable 

increase and not an unnecessary or not an inappropriate change. 

 

There are other changes, Mr. Speaker, which have to do with 

the composition of the senate as well as how the position of 

chancellor is selected for the university. There are changes, Mr. 

Speaker, that address how an interim chancellor can be 

provided or installed, how the senate reps are elected by region, 

and also how professional organizations choose who is their 

representative on the senate. And all these changes, Mr. 

Speaker, allow the senate to make bylaws for the ongoing 

administrative functions, thereby allowing the senate to choose 

the chancellor. 

 

As I said, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the visitor section, as 

we have seen with changes to The University of Saskatchewan 

Act, this follows on the heels of that, and it seems to be a 

reasonable request in my opinion, Mr. Speaker. Also for 

meetings of convocation increasing the threshold from 25 to 50, 

I also do not see major problems with that and it would seem 

like an appropriate change given the number of members of 

convocation now that do belong to the University of Regina. 

 

As for the changes to the senate, Mr. Speaker, in having an 

ability to select an interim chancellor, that too makes sense if a 

chancellor is selected and for whatever reason he or she is 

unable to serve the full duration of the term. It would be 

appropriate to have a means by which an interim chancellor 

could be selected before a scheduled selection date for a future 

chancellor. 

 

And on the topic of professional bodies choosing who they send 

to senate to represent their professional organization, that too, 

Mr. Speaker, seems like a reasonable idea because it is the 

professional organizations. If they are self-regulated and have 

the ability to determine the future or determine the aspects and 

the enforcement of the rules for their profession, so long as 

there’s a proper selection process within those professional 

organizations to choose who the representatives should be, that 

makes sense. 

 

Another change under the senate, Mr. Speaker, is the change in 

that when a district representative is selected to serve on the 

senate, it is the members of convocation who live in that 

particular geographical region who choose who that person is. I 

think that provides an important tie to the local community. 

 

The biggest change, Mr. Speaker, and the one that some 

members in the Assembly and some members of the public may 

not be fully supportive of, Mr. Speaker, is how the position of 

chancellor is selected. And we had this debate when the 

Assembly considered the changes to The University of 

Saskatchewan Amendment Act, and the change from having all 

of convocation, or every graduate of the institution, having the 

option to vote in a process to select the chancellor as opposed to 

the senate having the option through a democratic voting 

process to select the chancellor. 

 

[15:00] 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, given . . . I know the arguments in favour 

of changing to the senate being allowed to choose the 

chancellor. The arguments are those of that it is an expense to 

mail out the ballots and have that electoral process occur, and 

also the participation rates may not be as high as many would 

like in order to be a true reflection of what is the will of 

convocation. So the thinking is, as I would understand it, Mr. 

Speaker, is that members of the senate who are engaged with 

the university and do have a fairly broad representation in 

Saskatchewan society, that they are in an appropriate position 

to make those types of decisions. So that is the request 

occurring here by the university, that changes would occur to 

The University of Regina Act. 

 

Now as the minister recognizes in his remarks, Mr. Speaker, not 

everyone agrees with that change. There is some controversy 

around it, Mr. Speaker. But it is an approach that has been 

adopted at the University of Saskatchewan and is at present in 

other Canadian institutions of post-secondary education. So I 

know that does perhaps provide a reason for a time of 

questioning in committee to ensure that the process by which 

the chancellor is selected maintains aspects of democracy with 

respect to how the senate does select the chancellor, and I look 

forward to asking those questions in committee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I will say in general principle I support the changes that are 

included in The University of Regina Amendment Act, although 

there are certain questions about particular aspects. But I’m 

happy to carry on that discussion in committee. So at this time, 

Mr. Speaker, I would move that Bill No. 159, The University of 

Regina Amendment Act be moved to committee. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 



6744 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2011 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister Responsible for Advanced Education 

that Bill No. 159, The University of Regina Amendment Act, 

2010 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 159, The 

University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010 be referred to the 

Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Committee on 

Human Services. 

 

Bill No. 144 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 144 — The Litter 

Control Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again it’s a 

pleasure and an honour for me to have the opportunity to enter 

into debate in this fine Assembly on behalf of the good folks of 

Regina Northeast and to have the opportunity of sharing some 

of their thoughts and some of my thoughts as it applies to this 

particular Bill, this Bill of course being Bill No. 144, The Litter 

Control Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve been, through some of my preliminary 

research, I’ve been led to believe that this Act originally came 

into being, originally was passed in 1973. And it was passed 

with the purpose of providing the provincial government with 

the authority to address the litter-related issues. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think we all would agree that that is a 

well-meaning piece of legislation and certainly something that 

we all need to ensure that we have a mechanism in place to 

address the environmental issues. We certainly want to see litter 

controlled. We don’t want to find ourselves in a situation where 

we have no control over the environment and have no control 

over the littering aspect of our society. And I think for the most 

part, Mr. Speaker, as we travel around I think we see that the 

vast majority of Saskatchewan citizens certainly respect and 

show respect for our environment by containing their litter and 

handling it in the designated areas, designated ways. But, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s always the need to ensure that in those rare 

instances where it doesn’t happen, then we have a way of 

addressing it or a way to ensure that there is a mechanism in 

place to address any litter issues as they come along. 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, this Bill that was introduced for the 

first time in 1973, and passed, was certainly a step in the right 

direction. And we must take off our hats to those legislators of 

the day who possessed the vision and the forethought to enter 

into such a legislation so that we could have a mechanism to 

protect the people of this great province and to ensure that our 

environment is protected at the same time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it went on to this particular legislation and 

through the regulations that accompany the legislation. They 

established a provincial beverage container collection and 

recycling program. And that, Mr. Speaker, I think is certainly a 

visionary step and a step in the right direction that enabled our 

society to have a way to control and to be able to handle 

beverage containers. 

 

Particularly, I think it was about that time when we started to 

see an uptake on beverage containers being used to provide 

themselves to people of Saskatchewan as well as otherwhere in 

the world, otherwhere in this great country, through not only 

the tradition of soft drinks being available through containers 

but also we started seeing the expansion into fruit juices and 

bottled waters and that sort of stuff which meant then there 

would be a lot more containers within the system. And certainly 

a mechanism was required to be able to address the need to 

have those containers handled in a way that was 

environmentally friendly. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, once the collection and recycling program was 

in place, it certainly indicated some very serious foresight of 

those who took their places in this legislature in 1973 to bring 

in such legislation and to introduce it and to pass it. That simply 

went a long way to respect and protect our environment. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, if we look a little further ahead we 

once again see that there were changes made to this Act in 1988 

where The Litter Control Act was amended to create a program 

for recycling designated containers. That, Mr. Speaker, 

certainly is the containers that we would commonly use today, 

which would include containers that would probably be 

purchased at local grocery stores and service stations that 

provide us the opportunity to pick up a bottle of pop or a jug of 

milk or bottled water, which really is becoming a very popular 

item these days, Mr. Speaker with more emphasis in our society 

on health care and looking after ourselves and finding ways and 

means to provide ourselves with good health care. 

 

We see more and more people have turned to the consumption 

of simple water. We’ve seen today a real market in bottled 

water, which is a very healthy item, and one even I myself 

subscribe to, Mr. Speaker. And it is certainly a plus, I guess you 

would say, as far as maintaining our health is concerned. And if 

we look at many of the issues that are pressing North 

Americans particularly, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to health 

issues, it’s the question of overweight or in some sections, 

obesity. And one of the mechanisms used by health care 

providers to suggest that we need to do something about the 

weight of our nation is to look at various forms of dieting and 

look at various options within our food intake. 

 

And one of recommendations that has been made very clear by 

our health care providers is that the increased consumption of 

water is a benefit to addressing weight problems, addressing 



March 16, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6745 

weight loss issues. And that, Mr. Speaker, has probably led to 

the increased amount of bottled water being available on a 

regular basis, whether it’d be at service stations, or whether it’d 

be in the grocery stores, or whether it’d be in convenience 

stores. And that in case, Mr. Speaker, most of these are 

provided in containers that a lot of times is a pick up and go. 

We’re in a hurry; we’re perhaps travelling someplace. You 

want to have something to refresh yourself with, so you buy a 

bottle of water and it thusly comes in a container. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is to provide the opportunity for 

management of those containers, there is a deposit that you pay 

when you purchase that particular item. That deposit then, Mr. 

Speaker, turns into a rebate when that item, when that bottle, 

when that empty bottle is turned in, it of course results in a 

rebate. So what it does, Mr. Speaker, it creates the ability to 

control and to ensure the control of beverage containers 

particularly that would otherwise perhaps litter our highways 

and certainly litter our public areas and that would not be a 

friendly asset to our environment. So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s a 

very thoughtful program. 

 

And now that the program at this time has . . . We pay, as I said, 

Mr. Speaker, a deposit and then that deposit turns into a refund 

when we return the container to basically Sarcan. And most of 

us use Sarcan. And that certainly, Mr. Speaker, creates the 

program that ensures that we have a system in place to handle 

the containers that we simply do not want. And in a situation 

where they’re going to clutter our environment or certainly 

have a negative affect on our environment, what we want to see 

is a mechanism in place that certainly addresses that. And this 

certainly does, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think, once again, we have to recognize the foresight of 

those legislators who were in government at the time in 1973 

that brought in the legislation and those who have served in this 

great Assembly over the years who saw the need from time to 

time, particularly 1988, to make amendments to make the 

program even more effective and more efficient. And that I 

would say, Mr. Speaker, is something that we all as legislatures 

. . . legislators, rather, would strive for.  

 

And I think again, Mr. Speaker, each member of the Legislative 

Assembly will agree that Sarcan does a tremendous job, does a 

tremendous job in this program of providing the opportunity for 

those containers to be recycled in a very positive program. And 

I have to say, within the foresight of those who in 1973 and the 

work that was done in 1988 to create legislation was 

forward-looking and forward-thinking. It was welcomed by all 

of us today who, simply we all benefit from that program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I look at the amendments suggested by the 

government here on this particular Bill, I see that it seems to be 

that is more about the government protecting itself and taking 

away the rights of individuals to seek compensation when they 

feel that they are wrongfully done by. And this piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, is I think more to do with the 

government trying to protect itself through some retroactive 

legislation, as taking away the rights of individuals to seek 

compensation when they feel that they have been wrongfully 

done by, by a particular government or by this particular 

program. 

 

And this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, is retroactive 

legislation. And this legislation is retroactive, to my 

understanding goes back as far as 1998 so that it would 

basically erase 12 years of history. And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

done so that the government can protect itself by taking away 

individual’s rights to seek compensation for what they believe 

was mistreatment. And I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s regrettable that 

the government has decided to do this because I think there is 

mechanisms in place. It’s called a court of law that would settle 

that and should allow the individual to have that right to be able 

to seek compensation for what may be a wrongdoing, or what 

may or may not be a wrongdoing, but that would be settled in a 

court of law, Mr. Speaker, and not in a legislature through 

retroactive legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our job of course as government is to consult with 

the good folks of this great province of ours when such 

legislation is put forward. And that’s the role of opposition is to 

consult with the people of Saskatchewan to find out what effect 

this particular legislation would have on them, how they feel 

they may be impacted. 

 

[15:15] 

 

It saddens me, Mr. Speaker, that the government hasn’t taken 

that initiative because I would think the government would feel, 

a government of any political stripe, Mr. Speaker, would feel 

the need to be able to represent the people of this great province 

in a way that best protects the interests of people of 

Saskatchewan. In order to do that, I think, whenever a 

government wants to make changes to legislation, they should 

only do so after they’ve done consultation with stakeholders, 

after they’ve done consultation with the people of 

Saskatchewan who may be impacted upon by these changes. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, once again it raises the question as who asked 

for these changes? Who in this great society of ours came 

forward to the government and said, we need these changes and 

we need these changes because . . . Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen no 

evidence, and the government hasn’t provided us any evidence 

to suggest that anybody has come forward in urging the 

government to make these changes and asking for these 

changes because there’s nowhere in the information that’s been 

provided by government in support of the amendments to The 

Litter Control Act, nowhere does the government provide any 

of that information suggesting that any groups or individuals 

have come forward with credible and legitimate concerns 

requiring changes to this particular piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the government would be how was 

it determined that these changes were needed? How did the 

government come about determining that these changes were 

needed? What mechanism did they use? Who did they talk to? 

Did they talk to anybody or is this something that’s in-house. Is 

this desire only in-house to make these changes? Because, Mr. 

Speaker, once again the government has not provided any 

indication at all that there was any groups that are concerned 

about our environment that came forward and asked the 

government to make these changes because it would further 

protect the environment. We see none of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before the government brought these amendments 

forward, what consultations did they do? What consultations 



6746 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2011 

did the government do? Who did they talk to? What groups did 

they talk to? What individuals did they talk to? Did they carry 

out the consultations in an open manner, Mr. Speaker, and 

that’s just simply going out and holding public hearings and 

asking the good folks of this province for their input. Or did 

they, if they did consultations, did they narrow those 

consultations down to simply the amendments? And did they 

go out and say, here’s the amendments we’re proposing. What 

do you think? Did they limit that discussion only to those 

amendments, or did the government have an open consultation 

process where the public could have made their points and their 

concerns known? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, once again the government hasn’t answered 

any of these questions. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, we have no 

evidence of the government doing any consultation on this. But 

I’m going to give them, for argument’s sake, the benefit of the 

doubt and suggest that perhaps they did do some consultation. 

Perhaps they did talk to some groups. Perhaps they did talk to 

individuals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I would like to know is, what was the 

reaction from the good folks of this great province that they did 

talk to? If they did talk to groups or if they did talk to 

individuals, what was the reactions from those folks? Were they 

positive? Were they supportive of these amendments? Or did 

they have concerns about these amendments and the impact that 

these amendments may have on the people of this great 

province? That, Mr. Speaker, once again the government hasn’t 

provided that information. They haven’t provided that 

information to the opposition. They certainly haven’t provided 

that information to the general public, Mr. Speaker, to support 

their claims for the need for these amendments to be passed 

here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the government did do consultations with 

groups or individuals, what form did those consultations take? 

Did they hold public meetings across this great province in 

every corner of Saskatchewan so that the general public would 

have reasonable access to these hearings, would have 

reasonable access to being able to make their points known to 

the government? Was there perhaps a communications, a 

questionnaire sent out, mailed out so everybody in 

Saskatchewan would have the opportunity to answer that 

questionnaire and on that questionnaire express their thoughts 

and their opinions and mail back to the government, back to 

government at parliament, back to the minister’s office? Did 

that happen, Mr. Speaker? We don’t know. 

 

Or, Mr. Speaker, did they do a poll? Did they do a poll or did 

they do some type of communications with the great people in 

Saskatchewan to get a sense of what it is Saskatchewan people 

are thinking on this particular issue before they brought these 

amendments in? Mr. Speaker, all of these questions remain 

unanswered. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, one of the questions I would like to ask the 

government is, have they done any research? Have they done 

any forward thinking as to what would be the impact upon 

Saskatchewan people as a result of these amendments? If these 

amendments get passed in this legislature — and likely they 

will because the government of course has the majority — but 

if they do and they go through the committee stage and they get 

passed in this legislature, has the government contacted 

anybody in Saskatchewan to get an understanding of what 

impact these amendments would have on the people of this 

great province of ours? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as you can tell, there are a number of 

questions that the opposition have that the government certainly 

has failed to answer. You can tell that there’s a number of 

questions, Mr. Speaker, that the opposition have that reflects 

the questions of the people of Saskatchewan. And simply, that 

this government has once again not been forthright with its 

process, has not been forthright with the opposition and/or the 

people of this great province in regards to the reasons for the 

amendments that the government is proposing on this particular 

Bill. And, Mr. Speaker, that of course is a concern with all of 

us. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the opposition is certainly going to need more 

time to do further research on this Bill and further 

consultations. Probably we’re going to do the consultations that 

the government never did. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s a real 

need to ensure that the wants and the needs of Saskatchewan 

people are going to be addressed in the amendments as the 

government has suggested that they would like to see done. So 

with that, Mr. Speaker, in mind, I would move adjournment of 

debate on this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Northeast has 

moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 155 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 155 — The 

Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise and make some comments about Bill No. 155, An Act to 

amend The Natural Resources Act. Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

always interesting to figure out why particular Bills are brought 

forward at any particular time within the legislative cycle of a 

government. So we are now in the fourth year of this particular 

government, so I think it’s appropriate that we look fairly 

carefully at the proposals that are brought forward. 

 

When one looks at this Bill, which is not that long, you see that 

the, sort of, the main theme is changing the name of the 

department that’s involved here to the ministry. So that really 

doesn’t have too much affect on what is happening. But when 

one looks at this a little more closely, one can see that it has a 

certain connection with a number of other Bills that we’ve been 

dealing with in the House. 

 

And let me explain what I’m talking about here. We know that 



March 16, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6747 

this government has set out some goals for itself, which include 

diminishing the role and the size of the civil service. And 

they’ve said, oh they can do that without diminishing the 

service that is provided. And so each year we’ve had some 

legislation which has an aspect of allowing for the moving out 

of the civil service into other places of work that is presently 

being done in a particular department. And, Mr. Speaker, I will 

show, in a few minutes, how this Bill has that aspect of moving 

or contracting out work from the Ministry of Environment 

which for many decades has been a sole or a main part of 

providing the best professional advice to the Ministry of 

Environment as it does its work within the total government. 

 

But before I go there, I want to just say that this has some 

similarities to a few other Bills that we’ve seen in this particular 

legislature. And the ones that I’m talking about are The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, The Provincial Court 

Consequential Amendment Act, which are Bills 153 and 154, 

and then also the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 

amendment which is Bill No. 160. 

 

And the Provincial Court Bill effectively responds to the 

Minister of Justice’s comments by saying that we’re not going 

to have any more Provincial Court judges, even though the 

amount of, the number of criminal cases that are showing up in 

our courts as a combination of both some of the things the 

provincial government has done but more importantly what the 

federal government has done as its relates to the Criminal Code, 

we’re not going to appoint any more judges to handle those 

cases. So therefore we’re going to eliminate the civil division 

and get justices of the peace in to help with matters that have 

been traditionally been Provincial Court judge work. So there 

you have sort of a budget decision in that one. 

 

You end up, in the Human Rights Code amendment, a similar 

control on the costs and the number of people involved by 

transferring a fair bit of the work that’s there now to another 

place for hearings. And so it also has a budget emphasis coming 

out of the Department of Justice. 

 

So in this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, we get into a more 

difficult to ferret out — if I can put it that way — issue which 

is, what’s going to happen with the Fish and Wildlife 

Development Fund? 

 

Now at the present time, the Fish and Wildlife Development 

Fund has a long, good history of providing for the enhancement 

of fish stocks and basically dealing with the purchase of 

property and enhancement of habitat across the province. And 

the legislation quite clearly sets out what this fund and what the 

assets of the fund can be used for. And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 

well worth quoting what is presently the law, and then we’ll go 

and see how the minister wants to change this. The present law 

says that the assets of the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund 

can be used for: 

 

the acquisition, by purchase, lease or otherwise, of any 

equipment or materials or the retention of any services 

that the minister considers necessary to restore degraded 

fish populations or fish habitat, to create new fishing 

opportunities or to manage fish habitat or wildlife habitat. 

 

They can also be used for “the design, development and 

operation of facilities to enhance fish habitat and fishing 

opportunities.” It can be used for “the acquisition of fish for 

fish stocking projects.” And I know that’s one that most 

fishermen in the province are very pleased about, is there can 

be fish purchased to stock various lakes and reservoirs across 

the province. And also the fund can be used for “the assessment 

or evaluation of any waters in Saskatchewan for their fish or 

fish habitat potential or any land for its wildlife or wildlife 

habitat potential.” 

 

So that’s the law as it stands right now, and it’s work that’s 

been done through that particular fund. Some of it’s done 

obviously within the Ministry of Environment, and much of it 

is done in partnership with other groups. And those groups 

include the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation. It includes the 

Nature Conservancy of Canada, Ducks Unlimited Canada, and 

there are other groups that have some of this work. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Now what’s interesting and perhaps troubling about the Bill 

that we have before us today, Bill 155, is that they’re changing 

the nature of what’s actually going to be done with these funds 

without necessarily explaining what’s going to happen. And the 

key part that causes me some difficulty relates to the fact that 

they’ve put in a blanket clause that says, “the engagement of 

any services that the minister considers necessary to manage the 

fund” and then further, “the payment of the expenses of the 

council.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what this appears to allow, and I think in 

fact is intended to allow because it sets right out in the 

explanatory notes that we have, it says: 

 

The amendments to this section also include the addition 

of two new subsections to allow the Fund and the 

Advisory Council to contract services that are deemed 

necessary for the management of the Fund. 

 

And in this note it says: 

 

These services could include contracting expertise from 

groups such as the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, the 

Nature Conservancy of Canada or Ducks Unlimited 

Canada for management of land within the Fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time and with the present legislation, we 

have a number of professionals, whether they’re biologists or 

water specialists or other people with broad experience who 

work within the department, who will provide these services 

and will also then manage the contracts that the ministry might 

have with some of the outside agencies. What this amendment 

appears to do is it allows for a number of those in ministry jobs 

to be eliminated and transferred out to some of these agencies. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this may accomplish the Minister of Finance 

or, I think more appropriately, the Premier’s goal of trying to 

flatline or reduce the size of the civil service. But it goes right 

to the heart of hollowing out or causing difficulties within the 

professional civil service to have the sufficient expertise to 

manage some areas which we think, on this side of the House, 

are crucial for the future of this province. And, Mr. Speaker, it 

moves people to some of these non-profit organizations. 



6748 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2011 

Now what we do also know is that there are decisions made that 

sometimes cut back or limit the ability of some of these groups 

to continue the work that may have been contracted to them, or 

some other contractor may come in and take over some of this 

work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we fundamentally disagree with this style of 

organizing a government because what we need are the . . . 

What we need is a strengthening of the Ministry of 

Environment so that we can deal with the acid rain issues from 

Alberta, so that we can deal with a number of the substantial 

issues that are happening right across this province. As I’ve said 

in this House many times, Mr. Speaker, we are a great green 

space in Canada, and we have a certain obligation, a certain 

responsibility to make sure that we’re not in any way 

jeopardizing the role that we have within Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that some of the underlying rationale for 

the changes that are made here goes fundamentally against the 

principle of making sure that the role of the government as the 

monitor of industry, of the people of this province and their use 

of the environment, of the parks, everything else, I think it all 

goes against the principle that we need to have the best people 

possible working in secure jobs within the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I’m very concerned that this step will 

allow for a further diminishment of the capacity of the Ministry 

of Environment to do the job which the public expects them to 

do. I’m not in any way saying that these various organizations 

don’t do a good job in some of the things that they do. But I 

think they would agree with me that it takes a combination of 

the kind of work that they’re doing — as the Wildlife 

Federation or the Nature Conservancy of Canada or Ducks 

Unlimited — it takes a combination of the work that they do 

together with good, solid, secure expertise within the Ministry 

of Environment to make sure that the goals of all Saskatchewan 

citizens are met as it relates to the protection of the 

environment. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that there are some fundamental 

questions around how this particular Bill has been brought 

forward. And I want to make sure that we also follow very 

carefully — and I’m sure the auditor will be following very 

carefully — how jobs may be transferred out of the records of a 

department to accomplish some of the other goals. I think it’s 

unfortunate that some of those political perspectives of the 

government are going to influence and affect and I think 

substantially damage the capacity that we have in this province 

right now to protect our environment. 

 

And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, some of the actions last spring 

as it related to the wildlife habitat lands don’t give us any 

comfort that there is a respect by this Premier and this 

government for the environment here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know other of my colleagues will want to speak 

about this, and at this point I will adjourn the debate. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — The member from 

Regina Lakeview has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 

155, The Natural Resources Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Bill No. 149 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 149 — The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I recognize the 

member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I join in on 

Bill 149, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010. I have a few 

things to comment on. I think in general, it looks like they’re 

trying to bring in legislation that may help the industry and 

create jobs. In that way, it’s looking like it’s a good Bill. It has 

some good things. 

 

And they’re referring to giving tax holidays, tax breaks to 

companies that want to bring in minerals from other parts of 

Canada into Saskatchewan to process and to move forward, 

which sounds positive. It looks like more jobs. Maybe there’s 

an opportunity for higher paid jobs than minimum wage jobs. 

And people are looking at it; so that, to me, could be seen as 

positive. And it’s nice to comment on some of the positive 

things that are going on, and that’s all right to do that. 

 

But also I want to make very clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

the process and how we get there and to ensure that people’s 

rights — First Nations and Métis people — making sure that 

anything that impacts areas of land, whether they’re going to 

create this employment, that there’s opportunities for First 

Nations and Métis Saskatchewan residents to have those jobs. 

 

I want to be very clear. In light of some of the numbers we’ve 

seen, shocking numbers, with the Aboriginal employment in 

our province . . . And we have a large Aboriginal population. 

To see the numbers going down with employment is pretty 

shocking. And, unfortunately, at a time where we have a young 

Aboriginal population, you would hope the current Sask Party 

government would be working in a positive way, not hurting 

them the way they are doing. And that I cannot say I support, in 

what they’re doing that way. 

 

But to bring legislation to employ people and jobs is good. But 

I’m hoping at the end of the day that if this legislation does pass 

and goes through, you know, debate it . . . And we’re going to 

do that here in the House, and the committee will have a chance 

to go over it. And I know a lot of people will have discussions 

and prior to me talking have spoken on this and had a chance to 

debate the Bill. 

 

But I want to be very clear. We want to make sure people and 

communities that are impacted where these, I guess, jobs will 

be coming or the industry will be developed . . . And they might 

be new companies. It might be old companies trying to give it a 

go or are trying to . . . And there’s nothing wrong with it, like I 

said. But I think at the end of the day, we have to make sure, in 

light of some of the numbers we’re hearing with the Aboriginal 

population growing, young people, and the jobs and seeing 

unfortunately what this Sask Party government has done to the 

Aboriginal population. Not supporting it in the way they have 



March 16, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6749 

really speaks to their commitment to the Aboriginal population 

very clearly. 

 

I think their commitment to the Aboriginal population has been 

made very clear when you have people and professors from 

universities and people referring to economic disasters. That to 

me says something very clear and loud. And it says something 

to the Aboriginal population in our province — that the Sask 

Party government is not supporting them, is not giving them the 

access to opportunity and a life, a quality of life, that they have 

a right to. 

 

So there is many issues that may come up yet and people will 

want to ask and want clarification on. And overall like I said, 

the legislation, Bill 149, it might do some good. I hope that 

when it does that good for a company, and the company 

benefits on a tax holiday, that it will definitely be Aboriginal 

people who will benefit, and Saskatchewan people. But when 

we look, and I want to be very clear, the Aboriginal population 

is not doing so well with the economic going on the way they 

are. People are doing really well. Some people are doing great. 

But there’s a lot of people, especially the Aboriginal people, 

that are not doing as well. 

 

So I want to make it very clear that, you know, in general one 

might think this is a good Bill and a good legislation. And we 

might say it creates employment. And that’s good. We want to 

create jobs, lots of jobs for Aboriginal people and 

Saskatchewan people. They have a right to that. 

 

But I want to go back, you know, and just say the process will 

happen. And the process will be that we will discuss these Bills 

and issues. 

 

And people . . . You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it goes back to 

a trust thing too. And I’ve said this before, and I will say that 

people trust their government will do what’s best for them. 

And, you know, currently what we’ve seen from the Sask Party 

government, they haven’t done good for a lot of Saskatchewan 

people, low-income or seniors. We’re seeing housing issues. So 

really at the end of the day, to sit here and say that that group 

will benefit from this, I don’t see it. 

 

And they can cheerlead on all the different things they’re doing 

for low-income people and taking some people off the tax. We 

try to get questions answered. They won’t answer them, but 

they spin. And unfortunately that spin’s not working because 

people out there that are suffering with rents, with utilities, 

groceries, trying to provide for their family, people losing their 

homes — they’re losing their homes because they can’t afford 

to pay the rent. They can’t afford to. They have to balance 

everything out. It is sad. 

 

So when I see jobs coming in and, you know, it might be 

good-paying jobs, I hope for all our Saskatchewan residents 

that there is an opportunity to have a good-paying job to pay the 

rent, to pay for the food, the clothing for their children. But I 

hope that there is that. That’s a dream for a lot of people, but 

you have to give people a level playing field. And this current 

government is not giving Aboriginal people a level playing 

field. 

 

So when I think about it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, when 

I think about the questions that Aboriginal people have and 

people in my constituency have, and a lot of the other 

constituencies out there, they’re wondering, why are they left 

behind? Why doesn’t this economic success and story they’re 

hearing about, how come it’s not impacting them and their 

families and their children and their grandchildren? There’s a 

few benefiting greatly, but there’s so many that are not. They’re 

feeling the hardship, struggling. The food bank numbers are 

going up. We see it all the time, people losing their homes. I get 

phone calls from people because they can’t afford to pay their 

rents. They have to be . . . Well they’re being removed from 

their homes because they can’t afford to. How do you balance it 

out? 

 

So when we hear all this positive stuff, and I see a Bill like this 

149, and it sounds really positive, you know. They spin it out 

that there may be good-paying jobs, and that’s great. For 

Saskatchewan people that’s great. And someone might get a tax 

break and encourage them to invest in our province. There’s 

nothing wrong with that. But don’t forget the people out there 

that are suffering, and suffering under the Sask Party 

government’s, I guess, direction, decision making, picking 

winners and losers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So when I say that, at the end of the day, we have to speak up 

for the members out there of our province that belong to this 

beautiful province, that are suffering, that aren’t doing so well. 

And that’s why we’re here debating Bills that will affect them. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And I want to make it very clear: our First Nations and Métis 

community must be consulted. All of our province should be; 

residents should be consulted. But I think very clearly under 

constitution, very clear, makes it clear, very clear that First 

Nations, Métis must be consulted when things are impacting 

them — their lands, their communities, their way of life. And I 

think that’s very clear. 

 

But at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know some of my 

colleagues want to go ahead and get in on the different debates. 

So at this time, I am ready to adjourn debate on Bill 149, The 

Income Tax Amendment Act. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — The member from 

Cumberland has moved adjournment of Bill 149, The Income 

Tax Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 150 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 150 — The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I recognize the 

member from Athabasca. 

 



6750 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2011 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to get in and join the debate on Bill 150, which is the 

superannuation supplementary provisions Bill that’s being 

presented by the Minister of Finance. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, based on some of his notes, there’s actually 

a few things that he’s indicating that he wants to do. One is to 

certainly look at the notion of how spousal benefits would be 

calculated in the case of a person who may have been married 

more than once, and certainly there’s also some provisions in 

relation to The Income Tax Act. And of course the publication 

issue, that a lot of people don’t realize that the superannuation 

Act allows some of the names and the amounts of people that 

do get superannuation benefits be published. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on Bill 150 we wanted to have a look at this, 

and certainly from the perspective of the intent of the Bill, we 

see that there is some certain sections that do have merit. 

Certainly if you look at the provisions as it relates to somebody 

marrying twice, you know, obviously as the superannuation 

person that would get some of these benefits there’d be some 

discussion on whether the first spouse or the second spouse, 

how you would certainly look at the divvying up of the benefits 

under the superannuation Act if the person who certainly 

received a pension had passed away. And some clarification on 

how we’d break up that estate, so to speak, is something that’s 

always a tough task to do in not only going through the loss of a 

loved one, but certainly when you have two marriages that 

occurred over one person’s life. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the other notion that we have in relation to 

this Bill is also The Income Tax Act. And there’s a bit of worry 

that I have because certainly when you look at the whole notion 

of how you’re able to garnishee some of your pension plans — 

some of it is child maintenance orders; others of course there’s 

other provisions in there as well — this may open up a few 

other avenues of, certainly from the income tax perspective, of 

how you’re able to garnishee the pensions of different people. 

 

And as long as the whole notion around The Income Tax Act 

itself applying to the pensions, if it’s confined to that . . . And 

obviously everybody has to pay their taxes, and certainly if you 

don’t there ought to be ways and means that the federal or 

provincial governments or the territorial governments can 

collect those taxes. So there is that qualification that I have that 

we ought to make sure that it is confined to that, that there’s 

obviously that protection and provision there for folks that may 

have tax owing to the governments. 

 

The third component, according to the minister’s notes, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is the fact that some of these people that are 

receiving these benefits, that their names not be published. And 

certainly I think there’s a lot of merit in that point because, as 

they served their public and as they served their years to the 

province and to the people of our great province, then as they 

retired, they obviously put some of this money away. And 

there’s benefits attached to that, and the province certainly 

helps in many ways as well. 

 

And to have their names published as to how much they’re 

getting each year, I don’t know if it’s very productive. And 

certainly I think in the whole notion of accountability and 

transparency you can go a bit too far in that regard. So if 

somebody such as yourself or myself who, we’ve designed a 

pension plan for ourselves and after we’re done, retired from 

whatever we do, then having that out in the public domain, you 

know, some people think it’s the right to know and other people 

say, well that’s privileged information. There’s always that 

balancing act. 

 

And I think in some instances it’s not really necessary to having 

somebody that’s getting a superannuation benefit having their 

names published every year. I’m not certain that there’s a lot of 

value to that — unless and until that individual is, say for 

example, hired by the government. In that instance, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, if you are a superannuate . . . [inaudible] . . . pensioner 

and you come back and you work for the government, then you 

ought to be . . . That information ought to become public then. 

 

But if you’re retired, you’re living on your pension plan and 

living your life in peace, then obviously having everybody 

know what you’re getting as part of your superannuation plan is 

not really productive, nor is it necessary to protect 

Saskatchewan’s interests. 

 

But if you start working for the government or working for the 

Crown corporation, then I think you’re game to having that 

information become available. Because you don’t want to see 

people double-dip, and you certainly don’t want to see people 

try and hide behind the provisions that protect the identity of 

the people receiving those benefits because all of a sudden they 

got a contract offer from the government. And then that’s what 

I think we want to make sure that there is that qualification as it 

comes to the provision of public disclosure as to who’s getting 

what and how much are they getting each year. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, again based on those comments, as I 

mentioned, the first provision of this Bill is to clarify how 

spousal survivor benefits will be calculated in the case of 

persons married once or twice. 

 

Secondly, there’s a bit of reaching out in terms of The Income 

Tax Act to make sure that there are provisions to accommodate 

that federal Act, that there is some provisions there. And we 

would say, don’t go too far. As an example I would use 

collection agencies and so on and so forth, that may want to eye 

your pension as you get older. 

 

And of course the third point is the public disclosure aspect that 

there is again, as I mentioned, merit in not having all the 

information and all the people getting benefits from the 

superannuation plan, having their names and how much they 

get each year. I don’t think it’s productive. I think it’s 

counterproductive. It’s not fair to their privacy situation. 

 

However if they do come out of retirement and they do work 

for a company or work directly for the government that is in 

somehow being paid by the province, then that information 

ought to come forward. Because what you don’t want to do is 

you don’t want to see double-dipping, nor do you want to see 

people, through the back door, being hired to do certain work 

without people knowing that they are retired and they’re being 

paid extra. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those are the very brief comments I 

have on Bill 150. As always, you know, there’s been a lot of 



March 16, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6751 

opportunity for us to reach out to different groups and talk to 

them about certain Bills. And we will do the same in this 

regard, because in any Bill that you bring forward, there’s 

always intended consequences. There’s always unintended 

consequence. We want to know why the Bill was presented. We 

want to know what the implications are, who is it affecting, 

who is asking for it. We want to know who is not supportive of 

it and these kinds of questions go on and on. 

 

And that’s why it’s important in this Assembly and for those 

that may be listening to realize the importance of debating each 

of these Bills through processes such as this to make sure that 

we hold this government to account, and to make sure that the 

consequences are pure, that the consequences are 

straightforward, and that the consequences of this Bill is 

fair-minded and intended to do good for not only the people 

that we serve, but the people that may have served in previous 

years. So in that regard, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn 

debate on Bill 150. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — The member from 

Athabasca has moved adjournment of debate on Bill 150, the 

superannuation amendment Act. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question . . . ready to adopt the motion? Excuse me, is the 

member . . . He’s adjourning debate. Is the Assembly ready to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — Okay. Carried . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . I did ask the right . . . No. Sorry. I 

did put the question to the adjournment. It was agreed, so we 

will move on. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 153 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 153 — The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I recognize the 

member from Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

join the discussion here this afternoon on Bill No. 153, An Act 

to amend The Provincial Court Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we think about the aspects that make 

Saskatchewan a great place to live with respect to being a 

strong democracy, an important part of that, Mr. Speaker, is the 

court system. The judicial branch, Mr. Speaker, that ensures 

that citizens can trust in the court system, that proper decisions 

are made, and that when an individual breaks the law that there 

are consequences for that individual, that rulings are handed 

down by a judge. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at possible changes to The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, we should never do so in a 

light manner. It should always be done with thoughtful 

consideration, because the implications for our court system 

and citizens’ trust in that system can be so directly related to the 

changes that are occurring or being proposed. 

When we look at Bill No. 153, Mr. Speaker, there are a number 

of changes that are suggested in this proposed piece of 

legislation. Changes, Mr. Speaker, that address the nature of the 

court system here in Saskatchewan and also changes that affect 

the day-to-day operations of judges, who can be a judge in the 

province, as well as some of the concerns around the Judicial 

Council. 

 

Now what I would like to do, Mr. Speaker, in my remarks on 

Bill No. 153 is speak to some of the aspects that aren’t perhaps 

quite as controversial or have implications quite as great as 

some of the others. I’ll address those first and then move into 

some of the more, as I see it, significant changes that are 

proposed in Bill No. 153. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as is the case with any piece of legislation 

dealing with a number of changes, there are some that are 

minor, perhaps more of a housekeeping or routine business 

nature. And there are others that are more significant and 

require a bit more scrutiny and careful consideration as to 

whether or not it is the appropriate course of action to pursue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see in Bill No. 153 one change that changes 

the nature of the Law Society representation on the Judicial 

Council. As has been the current practice, the president of the 

Law Society serves on the council. And certainly that 

individual as president of the Law Society, he or she is a very 

highly skilled lawyer who has the respect of his or her 

colleagues and has been chosen or selected as the president. So 

certainly that would be an appropriate person to fulfill that role 

on the Judicial Council. 

 

The catch is, Mr. Speaker, as the position of president changes 

for the Law Society, there’s also a change for who would be a 

representative on the Judicial Council. And as I understand it, 

based on the comments from the minister and the suggestions in 

the legislation, that this Bill proposes that an individual be able 

to serve for a longer period of time and prevent some of the 

frequent turnover. As is the case when someone is involved in 

serving on a council or a board or committee, there’s expertise 

that is gained and as someone serves in that position longer, 

they’re in a better position to provide helpful contributions to 

the process. 

 

For that reason, Mr. Speaker, if we think of other legislation 

that this House has considered that change the duration of the 

elected terms for city and town councils from three years to 

four years, sort of a similar argument, Mr. Speaker, that there is 

a level of expertise that is gained and allowing individuals to 

serve a longer period of time can be beneficial for the process. 

So as long as there is appropriate considerations for how the 

turnover rate should occur and that there is new individuals 

participating, Mr. Speaker, in my opinion that would seem like 

a reasonable change as proposed in this legislation. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Another change, Mr. Speaker, that in my opinion I would not 

object to, is changes in the disability benefits so that the same 

standard would apply as to that of other provincial employees. 

Anyone who is serving the public as a public servant, whether 

it’s in the civil service or whether it’s an elected office or 

whether it is as a judge, Mr. Speaker, you know, we wish the 



6752 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2011 

best for those people and everyone in those . . . The vast 

majority of people in those positions take great pride in the 

work that they do and want to serve to the best of their ability. 

When illness does strike or an accident of some type and there’s 

a change in one’s ability to provide that service, it’s only fair 

that there’s appropriate benefits available to those individuals. 

So in my opinion, that doesn’t seem like an overly controversial 

change to the legislation, in my opinion. 

 

Another aspect that is suggested as a change in Bill 153, An Act 

to amend the Provincial Court Act, is the issue of allowing 

temporary judges from other jurisdictions to come into 

Saskatchewan to practise. And the rationale for this change, Mr. 

Speaker, is that if a situation arises where the judge in 

Saskatchewan has a conflict of interest with a particular matter, 

this would allow someone from outside of our provincial 

jurisdiction to come and provide judicial services in order that a 

case or a matter can be dealt with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that too in my opinion, so long as there’s not more 

to this story that I’m not aware of or that the minister has failed 

to share, if that is the basis for the request, it would seem 

reasonable to me. While Saskatchewan is a very diverse place 

with many different types of people, sometimes the degrees of 

separation in this province aren’t always as high as it could be. 

So if there is an instance where there is a conflict of interest and 

an outside judge is more suitable, more appropriate to handle a 

particular matter, this proposed change in Bill No. 153 would 

allow that out-of-province judge to come in and provide 

services. So again, so long as that is the intent and the reason 

for this proposed change, Mr. Speaker, to me that makes 

reasonable sense. 

 

The next component, Mr. Speaker, that I would like to address 

in Bill No. 153 is what I see as perhaps a more significant 

change that is proposed in this amendment. And, Mr. Speaker, 

this has to do with the structure of the court system and some 

changes that have some implications for who provides services 

and how individuals in society may be able to access services. 

And I think when we’re looking at these types of changes, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s important to do so with close scrutiny and with 

thoughtful consideration in order to ensure that the decisions 

being made are not short-sighted, but that the decisions being 

made serve the long-term best interests of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

The change being suggested, Mr. Speaker, in Bill No. 153 is to 

repeal the civil division of the Provincial Court, Mr. Speaker, to 

collapse that category within the current court structure. In so 

doing, Mr. Speaker, that would free up the classification of the 

judges currently serving in that role to provide judicial services 

in another aspect, in criminal cases for example. What this 

does, Mr. Speaker, is takes the judges who have been providing 

services in the civil division, dealing with certain matters that 

are more defined in their nature, and this would end that 

particular classification and allow those judges to handle 

matters of another nature, such as matters of a criminal nature. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, what is proposed is that the change in 

the civil division, with judges no longer providing services in 

that area, justices of the peace would then provide many of the 

services and fulfill the role that judges had currently been 

serving or judges are currently serving in the civil division. 

As I understand it, Mr. Speaker, and if I’m guessing as to what 

is the motivation for this change, though not explicitly said in 

the minister’s second reading remarks as I recall, it would be, 

Mr. Speaker, to free up capacity, having judges who practised 

in one area being able to take cases of a wider variety 

addressing wait times for handling criminal matters through the 

court system. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you can see that that is a fairly significant 

change when we’re dealing with the structure of the courts and 

when we’re making a decision with respect to which judges can 

handle matters in which area. And then if we’re removing 

judges from handling one type of case in the civil division, the 

use of justices of the peace to fulfill that role is certainly a fairly 

significant change which could have some implications. 

 

If we think of, Mr. Speaker, the expertise that the judges would 

have who are currently operating within the civil division, the 

experience that they have with those types of cases, and the role 

that they’ve been serving for some time, that’s something that is 

not acquired immediately, and it’s something that is built up 

over time. Those individuals who have been serving in that 

position have the background knowledge and the experience to 

handle those matters well. 

 

So if we’re no longer having judges do that, but having a 

different type of person fulfill that role, it does raise questions 

about whether or not the best person is perhaps doing the job. 

And I’m not making negative comments about justices of the 

peace — certainly not. But it’s a question about whether or not 

the system is designed in such a way that the best and most 

qualified individuals and the individuals with the most 

experience are handling the matters that need to be dealt with. 

 

So as I’m aware, Mr. Speaker, this also ties into pressures 

through a case in the Supreme Court that requires criminal 

cases to be dealt with within a certain period of time. So this, 

Mr. Speaker, allows the Justice minister, instead of hiring new 

judges to address the increased need for judges in the criminal 

system, it allows him to reallocate resources, I suppose, from 

the civil division into the criminal. So that is a significant 

change. And I think, Mr. Speaker, it also has to be done within 

an understanding of workloads, what is an appropriate level for 

judges, and whether or not we’re matching one type of person 

with a particular type of work that he or she is best suited to 

carry out. 

 

It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, while some people might not see 

how this piece of legislation ties into larger changes that are 

occurring within the judicial system and the laws that exist 

within Canada, there is a connection, Mr. Speaker, with much 

of the crime legislation that we’ve seen introduced by the 

federal Conservative Party. I believe there is about 18 crime 

Bills. And for members, or individuals at home and members in 

the Chamber who are listening, I think in the news today there 

is a discussion about the point of privilege that the federal 

Conservative Party is involved in, where the Speaker has made 

a ruling about the federal Conservative government not being 

upfront or fully disclosing the costs associated with the 18 

crime Bills and that there’s a point of privilege that the federal 

Conservative Party has not been upfront with the people of 

Canada about the true costs associated with those crime Bills. 

 



March 16, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6753 

Mr. Speaker, within those 18 crime Bills, Mr. Speaker, if that is 

increasing the demands placed on criminal courts and the need 

for judges to be serving those courts, that is a cost, Mr. Speaker, 

from a change occurring at the federal level, that the province is 

picking up. And I think that’s not immediately apparent in the 

minister’s second reading remarks and it’s not something that’s 

immediately apparent to everyone in the province. But the 

changes that the federal Conservatives are bringing in with 

respect to the 18 crime Bills that they have not been upfront 

with the people of Canada in disclosing the true costs 

associated with those pieces of legislation, that’s having a 

bearing here in the province. And whether we look at the 

national jail policy and the huge expansion of jails within 

Canada and then what the implications are for a province with 

respect to picking up the tab for increased costs associated with 

those new crime Bills. 

 

And it was yesterday actually, I think, the member from 

Saskatoon Centre made a comment that the federal 

Conservatives have a national jail strategy, but they don’t have 

a national housing strategy. And Bill No. 153 actually provides 

an interesting glimpse into how changes suggested at the 

federal level through the crime legislation have a negative 

effect on the financial position of the province here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So I think that’s an important thing to consider, Mr. Speaker. If 

the changes of the federal level with the new crime legislation 

are placing increased demands on the criminal court system, if 

more judges are needed, Mr. Speaker, to deal with the changed 

legislation on a federal level, if that’s having an effect on 

judges here in Saskatchewan who handle criminal matters, 

instead of collapsing the civil division perhaps it’s more 

appropriate, Mr. Speaker, to have discussions with the federal 

government about who actually should be picking up the tab for 

the changes that they are bringing in. 

 

And so I mean that can apply to the corrections system, but it 

also applies to the court system. So I didn’t hear comments by 

the minister about that relationship. We know the relationship 

between the province and the federal government, we know on 

a personal level it’s very intimate, with many of the individuals 

on the opposite side in the federal Conservative Party. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to Saskatchewan people being 

treated well and properly and fairly by the federal government, 

that’s a completely different story. And despite the very 

intimate relationship between members on the government side 

and the federal Conservative Party, despite the very close 

relationship that exists and the close discussions on a variety of 

topics, we’ve seen the 13 or so federal MPs [Member of 

Parliament] here in Saskatchewan really fail to deliver to 

Saskatchewan people time and time again. 

 

And I’m worried that in Bill No. 153, The Provincial Court 

Amendment Act, this is yet another example where we have 

pieces of legislation being brought in at the federal level, the 18 

crime Bills that the Speaker has ruled that the federal 

Conservative Party has not been upfront with the people of 

Canada with respect to the true costs associated with those 

Bills. And that’s going through the House of Commons now 

and is a matter of debate in the public realm on the TV stations 

just this afternoon. 

Well this is another example where, despite the very cosy 

relationship between the government and the federal 

Conservative Party, there really is a failure for the federal 

Conservative Party to deliver the benefits to Saskatchewan 

people, instead making decisions that have an effect on our 

provincial situation financially but not backing up those 

decisions or being upfront with the true facts of how much 

changes cost at the federal level. 

 

So I think that’s a very important point to make, Mr. Speaker. If 

the changes that are being proposed in 153 are a result of 

actions by the federal government and changes that they’ve 

made in their crime Bills, if there is an increased demand for 

judges in the criminal system here in the province, it’s only 

appropriate that the proper resources would be made available 

in order to provide enough judges to handle the caseload that is 

involved with that. 

 

And the approach that the Sask Party government is taking at 

this time is to collapse the civil division within the court 

system, allowing those judges to handle matters on the criminal 

side. And then the next step, which I’ll be speaking to in the 

next Bill, Mr. Speaker, which is tied to this one, allows the 

backfilling of the judges in the civil division by justices of the 

peace. 

 

So it’s a question, Mr. Speaker, that really drives home the 

message that there needs to be a proper relationship of 

communication between the federal government and the 

provincial government and that when decisions are made at the 

federal government, the province ought to be treated fairly and 

properly to respond to the decisions that are made there. 

 

[16:15] 

 

And when the province is reacting to a need, for example the 

need for more judges to handle matters on the criminal side, we 

have to ask whether or not the approach that they’ve taken is 

the wisest one, whether it is smart, and whether it’s long-term 

thinking to collapse the civil division, freeing up those judges 

to work on the criminal side and then using other individuals to 

fill, to fulfill the role that the judges in the civil division once 

served in. 

 

So based on the minister’s remarks on this item, I’m not 

convinced that all that information has been shared with the 

people of Saskatchewan in connecting how the decisions from 

the federal government are affecting us here on our provincial 

level. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it causes me to wonder. If that 

improper relationship, that asymmetrical relationship exists on 

this particular issue, what are the many other issues that are 

occurring where the province is being asked to pick up the tab 

for something, where the province has been asked to change 

what it is doing or the province has to react and adapt to a given 

reality here on the ground, but then we’re being hung out to 

dry, left out in the cold by the federal Conservatives? And I 

think this is one example. But since it’s such an example that 

not everyone in Saskatchewan may be talking about on any 

given day, you have to be somewhat involved either in the court 

system or talking about it in this Assembly to have it as a 

top-of-mind issue. 



6754 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2011 

But it worries me that that approach of covering up for the 

failure of the federal Conservatives and that approach of a 

failure to deliver on this supposedly intimate relationship that 

members opposite have with the federal Conservative party 

with respect to the imagined benefits that were supposed to be 

realized by this reality of having federal Conservatives in 

Ottawa and having a small “c” conservative government here at 

the provincial level, Saskatchewan people, the stars are 

supposed to be aligned and that everything would be great for 

us. 

 

But what we’ve seen on issue after issue here in the province — 

whether it’s the failure for the federal government to chip in for 

the dome dreams or whether it’s carbon capture and 

sequestration, whatever the project may be — they’ll have the 

odd smaller project where they’ll trot out the horse-and-pony 

show and have a news release and some event of where there is 

co-operation. But on the huge, the huge, big plans where 

co-operation was supposed to occur between the federal 

government and the provincial government, we simply are not 

seeing that. 

 

Well members opposite are remarking on my use of the 

horse-and-pony show. Perhaps is it the dog-and-pony show? Is 

that the correct expression? 

 

But I’m very happy, Mr. Speaker, that members opposite are 

listening to these remarks because so often they’re zoned out 

and not paying attention. And I’m happy, Mr. Speaker, that 

they’re hanging on every word that I am speaking to you with 

respect to Bill 153 because the remarks that I have been making 

speak to the failed relationship that this government has with 

the federal Conservatives and, Mr. Speaker, it speaks to what 

we’ve seen in some instances as very short-sighted decisions by 

this provincial government in dealing with the concerns of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks on Bill 

No. 153. As I stated at the beginning, there is a number of 

aspects to this Bill. In some instances the changes seem to make 

quite good sense and are of a more modernization approach or 

an approach of, a commonsense approach, I will say. 

 

In other changes suggested in Bill No. 153, I think the story 

goes deeper. I think there is more to the story than what the 

minister is sharing with Saskatchewan people. And I think there 

are significant implications for Saskatchewan people on a 

financial side with respect to how much it costs to deliver 

judicial services here in the province, but also from a 

perspective of efficiency and effectiveness, whether or not the 

most appropriate people are delivering the services in the most 

appropriate way and manner. 

 

So those are my concerns, Mr. Speaker, about 153. I’m not 

convinced that members opposite fully grasp some of the 

problems associated with this piece of legislation, but I look 

forward to continued debate on Bill No. 153. I look forward to 

continued comments from opposition members. And with that, 

Mr. Speaker, I will move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 153. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey Place 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 153. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 154 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 154 — The 

Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, 2010/Loi de 

2010 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to join 

in on the discussion on Bill No. 154, the provincial court 

amendment, consequential amendments. Mr. Speaker, this 

peace of legislation has to be viewed in the context of the piece 

of legislation that I just spoke to for some time, Bill No. 153, 

The Provincial Court Amendment Act. As I explained, Mr. 

Speaker, in Bill No. 153, I will restate it for the public record 

because it has a relevance for Bill No. 154. 

 

What we see is that the members opposite are proposing a 

change to the structure of the court system. They are proposing 

a change that would collapse the civil division of the Provincial 

Court. And so judges who are currently serving within that 

division, the civil division, would no longer be classified or 

restricted to working in that particular division, thereby freeing 

them up to work in other areas of the law in dealing with 

criminal matters and criminal cases in the court system. 

 

The idea, Mr. Speaker, as I expressed in Bill No. 153 remarks, 

is that with increased demand for judicial services on the 

criminal side, this is an attempt by the government to reallocate 

the services of judges from one area to another in order to 

address concerns around wait times for handling criminal cases, 

and as I would imagine, Mr. Speaker, a reluctance by the 

minister to bring on more judges to handle these cases. 

 

So what’s being proposed in Bill No. 153 and also in 154, 

which has the consequential amendments, is that the judges 

who served in the civil division would be freed up to be 

reallocated to a different area. And then the services that the 

judges once provided in the civil division would be served by 

justices of the peace in providing the enforcement and the 

decisions being made by what was provincial judges. So it’s a 

shift, Mr. Speaker. What’s occurring is a reclassification, 

allowing judges to work in another area, taking judges out of 

the one area and then making legislative provisions to allow 

justices of the peace to serve in the role that judges once served. 

 

So it’s an important change to note because certainly the 

services that are provided in the civil division are important 

ones, services that many people in Saskatchewan rely on from a 

justice prospective, services that people have been accustomed 

to having fulfilled here in the province. And they’re services 

that one group of individuals, the judges, have been providing 

for some period of time. 



March 16, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6755 

Obviously when one serves in a particular role expertise is 

gained. Knowledge is gained, experience is gained. And 

looking at all those aspects that are gained over a course of time 

allows one to fulfill their job in the best possible manner. Of 

course there are benefits and advantages that people have when 

they’re new to a job, as in any profession or any occupation, but 

there’s also something to be said for experience and having a 

strong track record of providing services. 

 

So I think that’s an important consideration when looking at 

these two pieces of legislation. It’s an important consideration 

to examine as to whether or not the most appropriate profession 

or most appropriate individuals are providing services in a 

particular area. And it’s my hope, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Minister of Justice has taken the time to carefully consider and 

ponder whether or not that is suggested to occur through these 

proposed amendments. 

 

My fear, Mr. Speaker, as I stated in Bill No. 153 that my fear is 

that the decision made by the minister to collapse the civil 

division and allow those judges to handle criminal matters, and 

then use justices of the peace to fulfill the role that the judges 

once served in, it’s my hope, Mr. Speaker, that the approach of 

the minister is not simply one of covering up for federal 

Conservative cousins for changes that they’ve introduced with 

the criminal Bills that are before the House of Commons. 

 

As we’ve seen in the news, there’s a point of privilege that the 

Speaker has ruled on in the House of Commons stating that the 

Conservative government has not been upfront and clear with 

the people of Canada with respect to the associated costs of its 

Bills that it has brought forward before the Canadian public in 

Parliament. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I hope that the approach that we’re seeing by 

the Justice minister in this instance is not one of a continuing 

track record, a continuing pattern of simply . . . of 

Saskatchewan people not receiving our due benefits from the 

federal government, of Saskatchewan people being taken for 

granted by the federal Conservative MPs, of Saskatchewan 

people not being treated with respect, or really dealt with in an 

appropriate manner by their elected representatives on the 

federal level in the Conservative Party. And it’s my fear that 

this legislation that the Justice minister is bringing forward is 

yet another example of the failed relationship between the 

federal Conservatives and the provincial government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so I’ve been quite clear in my remarks on Bill No. 

153 and Bill 154 that I have some concerns about these changes 

because I don’t think all of the information about the 

significance of these changes has been provided by the 

minister, and I don’t think that the minister is necessarily 

responding in a way to federal crime Bills that would serve the 

best interests of Saskatchewan people. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

not totally convinced that the minister has thoroughly thought 

out the approach of collapsing the civil division and allowing 

judges in one area, reassigning them to another, and then using 

other individuals to serve the role that the Provincial Court 

judges once served. 

 

So I certainly have some concerns about these two pieces of 

legislation. I have concerns because they speak volumes about 

the failed relationship that the federal Conservative MPs have 

with the province of Saskatchewan. And I think they also speak 

volumes about the tendency of the Sask Party government to 

make short-sighted decisions to respond to an immediate 

concern or need — or a predicted concern or need — but not 

taking in the long-term considerations of what the 

consequences may be for their actions. So with that, Mr. 

Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 154. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey Place 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 154. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 161 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 161 —The 

Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to weigh in on debate as it relates to Bill No. 161, The 

Election Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is of great concern to Saskatchewan 

people, Mr. Speaker, and not just the individuals whom it 

affects. It relates specifically to the right to vote, Mr. Speaker. 

And when we think about that, all the different decisions and 

policies that have an impact on the lives of Saskatchewan 

people, Mr. Speaker, depriving or taking away or reducing the 

ability to vote, Mr. Speaker, is certainly a step in the wrong 

direction, Mr. Speaker. The ability to exercise one’s franchise, 

Mr. Speaker, is fundamental to a healthy and well-functioning 

democracy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We put this in context. This Bill was introduced in the fall, Mr. 

Speaker, and if we put it in context of what we’ve watched 

from a global perspective over that past few months, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve witnessed this uprising from a global 

perspective in many nations, Mr. Speaker, where individuals 

are fighting for and, in many cases and sadly, losing their lives, 

Mr. Speaker, to fight for the right to vote and to be able to 

shape the society and the jurisdiction and the country for which 

they live in, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And at the same time as we watch and turn on our TV and 

watch these horrendous battles and the subsequent violence, 

Mr. Speaker — in places such as Libya or recently Egypt, Mr. 

Speaker, many of these North African nations, Mr. Speaker — 

we here in Saskatchewan have a government, the Sask Party 

government that’s taking us in the wrong direction here in our 

own jurisdiction, Mr. Speaker, that’s reducing the ability for 

many people to vote, Mr. Speaker, depriving many people of 

that right to exercise their franchise, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 

something that we’re going to stand strongly opposed to, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 



6756 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2011 

[16:30] 

 

And we see it from a very self-serving, as a real self-serving 

policy of this government, Mr. Speaker, that is there to 

disenfranchise many individuals, Mr. Speaker, who have been 

alienated and hurt and affected by this government. And the 

members opposite can laugh all they want, Mr. Speaker, but the 

fact remains that as we turn on the news here tonight I suspect 

we’ll see an update of people fighting in Libya for that ability 

to have an opinion, have their say, and have a democratic state, 

Mr. Speaker, where here in Saskatchewan we now have a 

debate on the floor where we’re going to be moving backwards 

on that front, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would suspect, Mr. Speaker, that many individuals, certainly 

myself included, on both sides of this Assembly would have 

individuals in their family who have served, Mr. Speaker, in the 

Armed Forces or in a capacity, Mr. Speaker, to go and fight for 

democratic freedoms around our world, Mr. Speaker, and that 

have put their lives on the line or have paid the ultimate 

sacrifice, Mr. Speaker, to uphold democratic freedoms — the 

right to vote, Mr. Speaker, and to ensure that that franchise is 

provided to individuals to have a say in their democracy, Mr. 

Speaker, in their state. 

 

And when we think of all those veterans, Mr. Speaker, and all 

those individuals currently serving in these sorts of capacities to 

bring these sorts of freedoms and uphold these sorts of 

freedoms from a global perspective, it’s unfortunate to realize 

that this Sask Party government is driving us backwards on our 

own home front here, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to our 

democratic rights, the ability to exercise one’s franchise, Mr. 

Speaker, and to simply vote in elections and to shape the 

province and jurisdiction for which they live in, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And to see this Bill come to the legislature one simply has to 

ask, what is it that this government is trying to fix, and what is 

the motivation, Mr. Speaker? And the answer is simple on the 

motivation side, Mr. Speaker. This is a government that has 

boasted and spun numbers and misled, Mr. Speaker, on so 

many occasions, Mr. Speaker, and they have failed 

Saskatchewan people on so many fronts, Mr. Speaker. And 

when we look specifically . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And 

the members can heckle from their seat all they want, Mr. 

Speaker. I say bring it on, Mr. Speaker, because I welcome that 

discussion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But when you look at the failure of this government in leaving 

so many people behind, Mr. Speaker, as it relates specifically to 

seniors, Mr. Speaker, in all of our constituencies and in many 

cases in the rural constituencies across Saskatchewan certainly 

many, many seniors, Mr. Speaker, that have been failed by the 

policies of this government — in Regina Rosemont as well, Mr. 

Speaker — that will be disenfranchised and deprived of their 

ability to vote in the next election by way of this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, and this anti-democratic government. Those 

individuals have done the heavy lifting within our economy and 

built our fine province, Mr. Speaker, and defined us as who we 

are and our respective communities are to the world, Mr. 

Speaker, and who certainly at this stage of their life should have 

the right and opportunity to continue to have a say, have a voice 

and shape the policies that build our new Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

So when we look specifically at seniors and the failures of this 

government, the list is long. And it’s understandable from a 

shrewd political perspective why this government is trying to 

eliminate that vote. But it’s utterly wrong, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 

the kind of behaviour that should be fought within this 

legislature and certainly raised with hot debate across this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see individuals in so many constituencies that have been 

failed, specifically seniors, as it relates to the health care that 

they are being provided by this government, Mr. Speaker, the 

inadequate access to vital services, Mr. Speaker, that in many 

cases they had played a vital role in laying out and building 

within their communities. We look to long-term care, Mr. 

Speaker, specifically and the challenges that exist: the cuts to so 

many beds, Mr. Speaker, by this government, and the lack of 

accountability shown by members opposite in their response to 

their own respective constituents and the constituents of all of 

us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s understandable from a very shrewd political aspect why 

this government would want to eliminate seniors from voting in 

the next election, Mr. Speaker. But I say the consequences of 

that are far too grave and should go beyond any sort of political 

cycle considerations, Mr. Speaker. It’s the kind of thing that 

many of those seniors or the spouses of those seniors either lost 

their lives for fighting and protecting democratic freedoms 

around the world, Mr. Speaker, and the many veterans that have 

served so proudly from Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we’re hearing from these seniors across Saskatchewan is 

not only that they recognize the failed actions of this 

government, Mr. Speaker, the wrong-headed direction of this 

government, but they feel betrayed. When they recognize that 

they will not have the ability to exercise their vote or that many 

of their friends, Mr. Speaker, many from their own 

demographic may not have the ability to exercise their vote, 

they see it as something that’s wrong, and we see it as 

something that’s wrong, Mr. Speaker. And we’re more than 

willing to support the thousands of seniors across this province 

that are feeling betrayed and that are angry at the Wall 

government for trying to eliminate their voice and remove their 

ability to vote in the next election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I can think just specifically of many seniors, Mr. Speaker, 

who are still participating fully, Mr. Speaker — and you would 

know this wholeheartedly — in the communities of their 

respective communities and the decisions that are impacting 

them right now. 

 

I think of the number of seniors, Mr. Speaker, that have gotten 

involved in a community such as Wawota, Mr. Speaker, who 

are so outraged by the actions of this government and their local 

MLA, Mr. Speaker, this Premier, this Sask Party Premier, to 

close down beds within a facility and to fail to provide the 

health services that they deserve, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And these seniors, Mr. Speaker, are coming out and they’re 

having their say, Mr. Speaker, and certainly individuals in this 

Assembly have seen them come to action. And this 

government, this Premier, Mr. Speaker, this Sask Party 

government thinks these very same people that are leading the 

debate in community halls, Mr. Speaker, community forums, 



March 16, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6757 

that are leading the activity within their newspapers, this 

government, this Premier, the MLA I suspect from Cannington 

and all of the rest of them, Mr. Speaker, would like to see these 

individuals not be able to exercise their vote come November 

7th, Mr. Speaker. We think this is wrong. We think it’s a shame 

and we think it’s something that we need to fight incredibly 

hard, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we look at the broken promises and the failures, Mr. 

Speaker, the list goes on. And we can think of individuals it 

affects, individuals from all walks of life, Mr. Speaker, all 

demographics. But I think specifically to students, Mr. Speaker. 

Students that are at, let’s say, our universities here right now or 

our post-secondary institutions, who are facing relentless 

increases to their tuitions, Mr. Speaker, under this government, 

a government that preaches on one side about its resource 

riches, its prosperities, its record revenues, but yet is burdening 

these students with higher tuitions and exorbitant rental 

increases, Mr. Speaker, that in the end has the end game of 

reducing accessibility to post-secondary education in this 

province in a significant way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is something that doesn’t . . . that not only is 

difficult for those students that are aspiring to move on and 

build their lives and their careers in this province, Mr. Speaker, 

but it’s something that hurts Saskatchewan when we don’t 

allow our individuals to be able to go out and build their 

education and build their lives in our province. It’s what builds 

us socially and economically, Mr. Speaker. And so students are 

certainly upset with this government, Mr. Speaker. And we see 

this measure as a way, as a very blunt instrument to be able to 

deprive many from their ability to vote, Mr. Speaker. And we 

won’t stand for that. 

 

And we see, Mr. Speaker, we see that across young people as 

an entire generation, Mr. Speaker, that are burdened by this 

legislation and that will be limited by their ability to exercise 

their franchise, Mr. Speaker, be able to cast their vote. And 

these young people, Mr. Speaker, are the very young people 

that we should be cranking up their involvement and interest in 

politics, Mr. Speaker, cranking up their involvement and their 

interest in casting a vote and determining the future of their 

province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I hear from individuals that youth are 

apathetic, and I’ve heard people say that they don’t care about 

politics or casting that vote, Mr. Speaker. Nothing could be 

further from the truth. Now while youth vote generally in a 

lower turnout than the general population, what I know about 

young people is that they’re more ready than any generation 

before them to cast their vote and have a say in building the 

policies that determine our shared future, Mr. Speaker. To see 

these kinds of actions, Mr. Speaker, that deprive them of that 

ability, deprive them of the ability to shape policies that build 

the future of their province, Mr. Speaker, our province as it 

relates to their own respective futures and their families and 

their planning, Mr. Speaker, is simply wrong. 

 

And we see this vote as something that’s targeted specifically to 

limit the ability of many First Nations and Métis people to vote, 

Mr. Speaker, individuals that have been concerned with this 

government on so many fronts, that have been let down on so 

many fronts, Mr. Speaker. I can highlight when the habitat 

lands were sold off without any consultation or just that entire 

concept of duty to consult, Mr. Speaker, and the breach of 

treaty rights that this government continues to conduct itself 

with, Mr. Speaker. It’s a disrespect to the treaty rights that are 

in place, a disrespect to our treaty people. And in fact we are all 

treaty people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we see specifically the failure on the job front, Mr. 

Speaker, as it relates to First Nations and Métis people, with a 

significant and a shameful reduction in employment over the 

last two years under this Sask Party government that has cut 

many of the vital policies and programs that were building that 

participation, Mr. Speaker, and putting us in better stead 

tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, and 10 years from now and 20 years 

from now than if we don’t have those sorts of measures. 

 

And the member from Cannington heckles from his seat. It’s 

noted that he barely says boo in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. Of 

course we know that he’s not a minister of the Crown. And in 

fact, Mr. Speaker, I know even in the very seniors that he’s 

cutting services in within his own constituency, Mr. Speaker, 

we know he has trouble providing the answers to those 

individuals. I would reference just a couple weeks ago in 

Wawota, Mr. Speaker, at a community hall, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the member from Cannington, I’m willing to take up this 

debate with him any day of the week. But it would be a 

pleasure — if he actually has something to say, Mr. Speaker, 

and if his caucus will let him — to rise in this Assembly and to 

make the statements that he feels he should make, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What did they say about him? 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — And, Mr. Speaker, I hear, what did they 

say about him at the community? They’re feeling betrayed, Mr. 

Speaker, feeling betrayed, Mr. Speaker, by the cuts to services 

that they helped build, Mr. Speaker, the dollars that they had 

put in place. And now they see not only the cuts to those 

services but taking away the ability to cast their vote and 

determine who’s going to be representing them, Mr. Speaker, 

and that’s fundamentally wrong. Individuals and seniors, Mr. 

Speaker, who in many cases either fought, themselves, to fight 

for democracy and promote those sorts of freedoms, Mr. 

Speaker, or spouses of those individuals that have done that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we see this as a major step backwards. So we see that with 

renters. We see it with young people. We see it with seniors. 

We see the concerns with First Nations and Métis people — a 

broad base of individuals who have been hurt by the deliberate 

actions of this Sask Party Premier and government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We see this government try to fool around with democratic 

processes on many other levels as well, Mr. Speaker. We see 

them meddle, this Premier and this government meddle in the 

hiring of a Chief Electoral Officer, Mr. Speaker, somebody who 

is fundamental in ensuring the health and well-being of our 

democracy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is the wrong-headed direction of this government, Mr. 

Speaker, and it isn’t in the best interests of all Saskatchewan 

people, not just the Saskatchewan people for whom it 



6758 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2011 

disenfranchises, Mr. Speaker. Because when we have a less 

participatory democracy, Mr. Speaker, we all lose from that, 

Mr. Speaker, because all of the individuals we just spoke of 

should have their democratic right to come forward and to cast 

their ballot and build the policies that will shape our tomorrow, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see this government eliminating the voice of individuals 

across this province, specifically as it relates to victims, Mr. 

Speaker, of human rights abuses or harassments, Mr. Speaker. 

We see a government, Mr. Speaker, that has been condemned 

by Amnesty International, Mr. Speaker, an organization that 

doesn’t weigh in on political matters, Mr. Speaker, an 

organization that has won a Nobel Peace Prize, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And we see a government that is moving forward with 

legislation to take away the voice of individuals who have been 

harassed, Mr. Speaker, that have been abused, Mr. Speaker, and 

that have had their human rights compromised. And those 

individuals will want to have a say in the next election, Mr. 

Speaker, and this government is taking away the right for many 

of those individuals to do so, Mr. Speaker. We see that as 

wrong. We believe those people should be fully participatory 

and making decisions as to the future of our Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And we see this on many other fronts. We see this hiding of 

important voices, Mr. Speaker, such as individuals that have 

been marginalized, Mr. Speaker, by way of poverty, Mr. 

Speaker, that can’t make ends meet. And we see specifically the 

cut, Mr. Speaker, to the Welfare Rights Centre, Mr. Speaker, 

with nothing to replace it to provide an independent and 

external voice for the many individuals, Mr. Speaker, who 

don’t have a voice otherwise, Mr. Speaker. We see a deliberate 

action of this government to take away that voice, to take away 

the stories that need to be heard, the injustices that need to drive 

and shape public policy, Mr. Speaker. This is a shameful time 

in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And a government that has a 

record of being anti-democratic, and it’s unfortunate. 

 

We see many individuals for whom it’s harder for them to vote 

than it would have been otherwise under this government and 

the legislation that’s been brought forward. But what we don’t 

hear from this government is anything to encourage 

participation in elections, Mr. Speaker, to encourage 

participation in democracy and to make it easier to vote, Mr. 

Speaker. And frankly I think this is the direction we need to go, 

Mr. Speaker, because I’m a believer that we’re best served, Mr. 

Speaker, when our young people who are incredibly prepared to 

have their say in shaping our future Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, have that ability. 

 

I think we’re better served . . . We have seniors, Mr. Speaker, 

who have built the communities across Saskatchewan and built 

this fine province and the institutions that we’re proud of, Mr. 

Speaker. I think we’re better served when they have the ability 

to exercise their franchise. 

 

And I think we’re better served, Mr. Speaker, when First 

Nations and Métis people, the first people of this province, Mr. 

Speaker, have the ability to exercise their franchise, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

To see this Sask Party government, this Sask Party Premier 

move in a direction that deprives many of that right, and not to 

try to dream and to look at policies that promote participation, 

that fight against potential apathy and bring more people out to 

the polls, is appalling. And I see many members on both sides 

of this Assembly that have constituents that have been deprived 

and that have been disenfranchised by way of this legislation, 

Mr. Speaker. We need to stand up and speak out, Mr. Speaker, 

when we have policies like these brought forward. 

 

And I reference again, Mr. Speaker, that we will likely go home 

from this debate here today and over the supper news, the 

dinner news, we’ll catch stories of the fight in many other 

nations — Libya, and there’s northern African nations — that 

are fighting for the right to shape their jurisdictions, their 

nations, Mr. Speaker. And then here in Saskatchewan, a place 

that’s been a proud democracy is taking steps backwards, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s not how it should be, Mr. Speaker. We should 

be taking steps forward and proving ourselves as a model to the 

rest of the world, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Individuals in these other nations that are putting their lives on 

the line and losing lives, Mr. Speaker, to fight for something 

that we have and something we should cherish, Mr. Speaker, 

not something that we should simply let slide by in the debates 

of spring of 2011 because we’ve got a right wing, 

anti-democratic, Sask Party Premier and government in power, 

Mr. Speaker. Wrong way to go, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now this government has put forward as justification that this 

brings us in line with other jurisdictions somehow is a 

harmonization, Mr. Speaker. What we would suggest, Mr. 

Speaker, is that they reference what’s going on in British 

Columbia right now with a Supreme Court challenge that’s in 

place of the federal legislation, Mr. Speaker, and recognize the 

legal challenge that’s in place there. And let’s observe what 

occurs there, Mr. Speaker, and let’s also recognize that we 

should never be afraid as a province to lead, Mr. Speaker, and 

at times to be able to hold ourselves up as a model to other 

jurisdictions. 

 

There’s a very real danger that the clear preference for photo ID 

[identification] could lead to some people and many people 

being disenfranchised, Mr. Speaker. We are worried about this. 

We’re going to fight against this, Mr. Speaker, and we see it as 

wrong-headed. We recognize that with the legislation that’s put 

forward, it’s going to be difficult for many to comply with the 

legislation. Thus it’s going to be difficult for them to cast that 

vote, Mr. Speaker, and that’s wrong, Mr. Speaker. It’s simply, 

simply wrong. 

 

I think of, Mr. Speaker, the institute that your office holds, Mr. 

Speaker, as it relates to parliamentary democracy and the 

purpose of that to promote learning of our parliamentary 

democracy both to educators, but then also to be instilled back 

into the classroom, Mr. Speaker. The purpose of that is to create 

a broader participation in the policy making and decision 

making of the day, Mr. Speaker. This runs completely counter 

to the purpose of that institute, Mr. Speaker, that I think we 

should be proud of the institute, Mr. Speaker, that you lead and 

that you run, Mr. Speaker, something that should be serving a 



March 16, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6759 

public good. This takes us in the wrong direction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Many renters specifically highlight the challenge, Mr. Speaker, 

of the ability to even comply with . . . just in a very practical 

nature, Mr. Speaker. And that many of them are moving from 

location to location by way of the fact that there’s such a tight 

supply and such a difficult opportunity for renters to find 

adequate space that’s also affordable, Mr. Speaker. Those 

individuals may not have the required documents to allow them 

to vote, Mr. Speaker. But these very individuals who have been 

hit, in many ways the hardest, by the policies of this right wing 

Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker, have the right and should 

demand the right to be able to cast their ballot, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ll do that for them here in this legislature in their absence, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So as we look at this, it disenfranchises renters. It 

disenfranchises seniors, disenfranchises First Nations and Métis 

people, disenfranchises young people and seniors, Mr. Speaker. 

All groups, Mr. Speaker, that have been deliberately attacked, 

Mr. Speaker, by this government on so many fronts, or that the 

policies of this government have failed the needs of those 

different groups, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We highlight specifically that we should be focused — and I’m 

a big believer we should be focused not on how to make it 

harder to vote; we shouldn’t be focused on how we reduce the 

number of people that vote, Mr. Speaker — we should be 

focused on how we get more people involved, Mr. Speaker. I 

don’t care who somebody votes for, which party they vote for. 

Somebody needs to have the right and privilege and ability to 

come out and cast their vote, Mr. Speaker. It’s their democratic 

right, Mr. Speaker, and moving away from that deprives them 

of democratic freedoms. 

 

It’s inappropriate for us to be moving in the direction that we’re 

moving. It’s disappointing, Mr. Speaker. It’s anti-democratic, 

and it’s something we’ve seen from this anti-democratic 

government on so many levels, whether that be the elimination 

of human rights cases being brought forward, Mr. Speaker, 

whether we see that as meddling in the hiring of a Chief 

Electoral Officer, Mr. Speaker, who upholds our democracy, 

Mr. Speaker. But we see it as something that is of significant 

concern and that should be certainly aggressively debated and 

fought by Saskatchewan people. 

 

We continue to hear concern across Saskatchewan as it relates 

to this Bill. And many individuals aren’t even aware of it, Mr. 

Speaker, and won’t be aware of it until they show up the night 

to vote on November 7th, and they realize that they’ve had their 

democratic right eliminated, that they’ve been disenfranchised, 

and that they aren’t going to be able to cast their ballot, Mr. 

Speaker, on that evening. 

 

We need to get this right now. We need to have this Bill 

repealed immediately, retracted immediately. And we need to 

look at ways to move forward, involving all Saskatchewan 

people in making the decisions and shaping our Saskatchewan. 

Anything less is unacceptable and anything less is something 

that we’ll certainly oppose, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At this point in time, Mr. Speaker, I’ve said enough on this Bill. 

Certainly we’re going to continue to hold meetings around 

Saskatchewan here and join the many rallies, Mr. Speaker, that 

individuals are wanting to hold with respect to this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, who are feeling as though their democratic rights have 

been impinged, that their ability to vote has been eliminated for 

many, Mr. Speaker, and that see this is the wrong way to go for 

a civil society and one that we should be proud of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At this point in time I would adjourn debate. And thank you for 

allowing me to speak to this very important Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 161. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 162 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hickie that Bill No. 162 — The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Being 

very mindful of the time, I want to certainly preface my 

comments on Bill 162 to point out that the short time I have to 

speak on this Bill, obviously we will be back. The short 

four-minute time frame that we have to discuss this Bill, we 

certainly will take full advantage of that. And prior to the time 

of 5 o’clock, I’ll move to adjourn this discussion. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what amazes me on this particular Bill 162, 

and it’s really amazing to me that why this party, this 

Saskatchewan Party would come along and under the guise of 

trying to have the municipalities of Saskatchewan go to a 

four-year term, all of a sudden slips under the radar a provision 

that you have to have a photo ID in order for you to vote, not 

just in local elections but also in provincial elections as well, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I’m trying to find out for the life of me where did that 

motion and where did that notion come from, that the fact that 

these guys had to have the provision under Bill 162 that 

requires people that want to come and vote that you’ve got to 

have photo ID. I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker, who specifically 

asked for that provision in this Bill, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 

trying to find the different groups that said, oh there’s a lot of 

problems with the election because people who are coming 

there, they don’t have no ID. And we want to make sure that we 

do it properly. And last time there was a whole bunch of 

problems with 10, 15 different elections that were massively 

confusing because nobody knew where these people came 

from. 

 

There’s no examples anywhere in any election that I’ve taken 

part of where there’s confusion over who was allowed to vote 

and who wasn’t allowed to vote. But the Sask Party comes 

along and they put a provision in this Bill, Bill 162 that says 

that you must have photo ID in order for you to vote. And, Mr. 



6760 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2011 

Speaker, that is absolutely shameful, Mr. Speaker, absolutely 

shameful. And the only thing I can see that this Bill, the 

provision in this Bill 162 would serve is the Sask Party interest, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

They’re there to promote democracy, to promote participation 

by the immigrant community, by the elderly people, by the 

Aboriginal community and, Mr. Speaker, this Bill does nothing 

to help foster that particular participation by those groups. All 

this is going to do is going to turn people away from the polling 

booths and turn people away from participating in a democracy. 

And that’s exactly what that minister and that party want to see 

happen. 

 

And the message we’re going to have is, we’re going to fight 

this Bill through and through, Mr. Speaker. And given the short 

time I have, we have a lot more to say on this particular Bill, 

Mr. Speaker. And we’re going to come here with guns ablazing, 

and we’re going to tell people exactly what they got to do to 

defeat that government that wants to take away their right to 

vote. That’s what they want to do, Mr. Speaker. They want to 

take their right away, the right to vote that people have fought 

many, many years for, Mr. Speaker. And that time is coming. 

 

And why they would that, Mr. Speaker? I could tell you right 

now. The reason they want to do that is they want to stop the 

immigrant community from voting. They want to stop the 

elderly from voting, they want to stop the Aboriginal 

community from voting because those people don’t vote for 

them. 

 

And what better way to get an election is we don’t let those 

people that don’t vote for you, let’s cancel their right to vote. 

And that’s exactly what this Bill does, Mr. Speaker. And we’re 

going to tell people far and wide — in the North, in the South, 

in the East, and the West — that this Bill was intended to not 

have you vote. And that’s exactly why this Bill is being 

presented today where you have to have photo ID to vote in any 

election in Saskatchewan. And that is shameful. That is very 

shameful. 

 

So right from the Meadow Lake Tribal Council to the P.A. 

[Prince Albert] Grand Council, we’re going to tell people in 

northern Saskatchewan, they’ve done this to circumvent your 

opportunity to elect the government and to vote. And you need 

to stand up and be counted and fight right back. 

 

So on that notion, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to make that one 

point today. There’s much more coming their way about this 

Bill, Mr. Speaker. So at this time, I’d like to take the 

opportunity to adjourn debate on this particular Bill, Bill 162. 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 162. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adjourn the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Being now 5 o’clock, the Assembly 

will adjourn until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6729 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6729 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6729 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6729 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6737 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6729 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6729 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6730 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6730 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6730 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6730 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatoon’s Citizen of the Year 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6730 

 Homelessness Awareness Campaign 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6731 

 Senior Girls’ Basketball Team Wins Playoffs 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6731 

 Crime Prevention in North Battleford 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6731 

 Farm Equipment Company Recognized 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6732 

 Radio Interview 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6732 

 Resource Royalties 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6732 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Negotiations with Health Care Workers 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6733 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6733 

 Environmental Issues 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6734 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6734 

 Minimum Wage 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6735 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6735 

 Situation of Low-Income People 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6736 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6736 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6738 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill. No. 164 — The Police Amendment Act, 2011 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6738 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6738 

 Bill No. 165 — The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6739 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6740 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 157 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6741 

  McMillan (referral to committee) .......................................................................................................................................... 6742 

 Bill No. 159 — The University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6742 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 6744 

 Bill No. 144 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6744 



 

 Bill No. 155 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6746 

 Bill No. 149 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6748 

 Bill No. 150 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2010 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6750 

 Bill No. 153 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6751 

 Bill No. 154 — The Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, 2010 

 Loi de 2010 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6754 

 Bill No. 161 —The Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6755 

 Bill No. 162 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6759 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


