




















































Hansard: April 06, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 44A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 6, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7111 

 April 6, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you, it’s a pleasure for me to be able to introduce 

to all members of this Assembly some very important guests 

who have joined us in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They were 

here in the province for a very important announcement that 

occurred earlier this day in a hangar at the Regina airport. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many, many years ago it was the dream of Dr. 

Greg Powell, now the president and CEO [chief executive 

officer] of the Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society, it was the 

dream of Dr. Powell to have helicopter rescue and emergency 

care for the people of Alberta. 

 

It was also a few years after that the dream of the current 

member for Melfort in this Legislative Assembly to bring that 

service to the province of Saskatchewan years ago. And today 

we signed an agreement, the Government of Saskatchewan and 

STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] did, to deliver this 

service to the province. We were there with a founding sponsor, 

partners of Mosaic and Crescent Point Energy, and also other 

sponsors that include Husky and Enbridge and Rawlco. 

 

So joining us in your gallery today, they were there for the 

announcement, and it helped us mark and celebrate this event: 

Dr. Greg Powell, president and CEO of STARS; Linda Powell, 

vice-president governance and external affairs; Jeff Quick, 

chief financial officer; Phil Levson, vice-president STARS 

foundation. 

 

And there are some of the STARS air medical crew that were 

also at the announcement today. I’d like to introduce them to 

you and through you, Mr. Speaker, if I can, including Ken 

King, Mike Lamacchia, Cam Bell, and Daniel Kolbylak, who, 

Mr. Speaker, Daniel’s from Sonningdale not far from Biggar, 

Saskatchewan. He has been working with STARS for some 

time. There’ll be about 90-plus STARS personnel in the 

province when it’s operational, and we’re hoping Daniel will be 

one of them. He’s had to cheer for the Riders from Calgary. It’s 

time we bring him home, and he’ll help us build STARS here 

and be able to be that much closer for games. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would hope that all members of the Assembly 

would welcome these special guests to the Legislative 

Assembly this afternoon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

opposition I’d like to welcome Dr. Powell and his executive 

and the medical staff from the STARS ambulance service to 

Saskatchewan and look forward to hearing more about this 

adventure and welcome them too to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs, the Minister Responsible for First Nations and 

Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Seated in your gallery today, I have the pleasure of 

introducing Ms. Twyla Meredith, the president and CEO of the 

Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation. Twyla joined Sask Gaming 

in 1995 and served as the senior vice-president of finance and 

administration prior to her appointment as president and CEO. 

Along with her responsibilities at Sask Gaming, Twyla’s a 

dedicated volunteer, serving as a board member for the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders and the Hospitals of Regina 

Foundation. 

 

Joining Twyla in the gallery today is Jan Carter. Jan has been 

with Sask Gaming for the past year and is the director of 

communications. I ask all members to join me in thanking Jan 

and Twyla for being here today as we will be tabling the 

Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 2010 annual report. 

 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, it also is a great pleasure to 

see a constituent of Saskatoon Silver Springs in your gallery, 

the Chair of the public school board and a good friend, Mr. Ray 

Morrison. Ray has been involved in various activities in the 

community. He also, during his day job, is employed by 

SaskTel who had a great announcement yesterday. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming Ray 

Morrison, public school board Chair, to his Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the member from Silver Springs in welcoming Mr. Morrison to 

the Assembly today. These are certainly interesting times for 

education in the province, and it’s good to see him here today. 

So on behalf of the opposition, welcome to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone, the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll just give a warning. 

I have two introductions, so we are aware of that before I get 

started. My first introduction, I would like to introduce to you 

and through you to the rest of the Assembly 17 grade 6, 7, and 

8 students from St. Augustine Elementary School in Wilcox, 

Saskatchewan. They’ve made the trek in and are going to watch 

the proceedings today. I will have an opportunity to meet with 

them for a little while after and chat with them. 

 

Accompanying the 17 students are Loretta Ryan and also Bill 

Sherven. Hi, Bill, good to see you again. And also chaperone 

and bus driver, Sandi Weisshaar. Sandi, good to see you again 

as well. So I’d like all members to welcome these grade 6, 7, 

and 8 students to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

This will be my second introduction, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to again introduce to you and all members of this 



7112 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2011 

Assembly someone seated in the west gallery. No stranger, I 

don’t think, to the political discourse in this province for sure. 

She has served this province extremely well. It’s Marg Moran 

McQuinn, who is seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Marg is just recently retired. She was the executive director of 

communications for the Ministry of Health for the past 10 

years. I can tell you that in three and a half of those years or 

about three of those years, I was the minister. And she did an 

absolutely amazing job for us as a government, a new 

government especially, Mr. Speaker. Having her experience 

guide us through probably one of the tougher portfolios, some 

would say — although I’m enjoying it — one of the tougher 

portfolios in the government, Mr. Speaker, Marg has done a 

marvellous job. 

 

And it was always interesting, each meeting, Mr. Speaker. She 

has a flair for fashion, and that always, you know, on a Monday 

morning briefing certainly got me aware and ready for the 

briefing. Thank you. And I’d ask all members to welcome Marg 

to her Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to thank 

Marg Moran McQuinn for very many years of service to the 

provincial government. The five years that I was Health 

minister, I worked very closely with her on many different 

events, but I think the one that stands out in the years that we 

worked together relates to the rollout of the action plan for 

Saskatchewan Health. And I know that the wise counsel that 

she gave through that whole process meant that it is something 

that is part of our history here in Saskatchewan and it’s of good 

use for the long-term. So thank you very much, Marg. And I 

also want to say thank you for many years worth of tomatoes 

too because Marg’s a great gardener, and she would always 

share the wealth. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone, the Minister Responsible for Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like 

to introduce Brenda Barootes who’s here on behalf of the 

University of Regina. She serves through hard work and 

diligence on behalf of the university on the university’s board 

of governors. And we’re very, very pleased to welcome her 

back to this building and back to the province for the work that 

she does on behalf of the students and scholars at that 

institution. I’ll ask all members to join me in welcoming 

Brenda to her Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 

the Minister of Advanced Education in welcoming Brenda 

Barootes to the legislature. 

 

Many, many, many, many, many years ago, let’s go back to 

1986 when I was a freshly minted member of the legislature, I 

got to know Ms. Barootes. And I think she was at that time 

working at the Crown Investments Corporation as the corporate 

secretary to a number of boards, I’m going from memory here. 

But Brenda was a young woman as well, and I think she did a 

terrific job on behalf of the people of the province. I’m pleased 

that she’s been appointed to the board of governors of the 

University of Regina. She’s an accomplished woman, and I 

want to recognize her today and welcome her to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, 27 wonderful students from W.F. Ready School in 

my riding in Regina, Mr. Speaker. And they are accompanied 

by one of my colleague’s favourite teachers, Mr. Speaker. This 

teacher has had a very difficult job trying to instruct this 

individual but has done a very good job, Mr. Speaker. That 

would be Stephanie Wotherspoon. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you have the responsibility of keeping him 

in line for a few hours a day. You will get the opportunity to 

meet the person who has to look after it the rest of the year, Mr. 

Speaker. So I would like to welcome the 27 students from W.F. 

Ready School here this afternoon and of course our good friend 

Stephanie Wotherspoon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in your 

gallery, to you and through you it’s my honour to introduce 

very special guests here today celebrating and recognizing 

Tartan Day. Mr. Speaker. And I recognize some of the 

members of Sons of Scotland, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to welcome 

to their Assembly Mr. Iain Mentiplay, Ms. Dorene Mentiplay, 

Mr. Len Spence, Ms. Jean Clive. And I’d also like to recognize 

somebody who couldn’t be here today but certainly is a leader, 

and that would be Chief Ms. Marg Willette. 

 

We had a special celebration before proceedings here today, 

and it’s an honour to have them in their Assembly. I ask all 

members to offer them a warm welcome. 

 

And while still on my feet, Mr. Speaker, and already referenced 

to, it’s a pleasure to welcome Stephanie and a wonderful class 

of grade 6 and 7’s to their Assembly. Good to see you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I rise today to present petitions calling for protection 

for renters from unreasonable rent increases. And we know that 

Saskatchewan renters are facing a combination of rising rents 

and low vacancy rates in many communities throughout our 

province. And we know that the majority of Canadians now live 

in provinces with rent control guidelines, including Manitoba, 

Prince Edward Island, British Columbia, Ontario, and Quebec, 

and that the argument that the private market would deliver 

sufficient affordable rental spaces in the absence of rent control 



April 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7113 

has been proven false many times. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to consider enacting some form of rent 

control with a view to protecting Saskatchewan renters 

from unreasonable rent increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I do so present. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of my constituents who live in the 

neighbourhood of Hampton Village, and it’s about the need for 

a new school for their children. 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes including education property taxes; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to neighbouring 

communities to attend schools that are typically already 

reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition live in the 

neighbourhood of Hampton Village. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 

again today to rise in support of a petition with respect to a 

potash royalty review. Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed 

because Saskatchewan people are the owners of a 1,000-year 

strategic resource that is our potash and that the owners of the 

potash deserve to receive the maximum benefit from that 

potash. Additionally the CEO of the Potash Corporation has 

said that there’s a new norm for the industry in the world. Mr. 

Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to begin a 

comprehensive, transparent, and public review of 

Saskatchewan’s potash royalty system with a view to 

maximizing the return on this strategic resource for its 

owners, the people of Saskatchewan, who wish to use 

these additional potash royalty revenues for needed 

investments in health care, child care, education, 

affordable housing, infrastructure, and other social 

programs, as well as public initiatives such as debt 

repayment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by good folks from 

Craven, Lumsden, and Regina. I so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise yet 

again to present a petition calling on the government to restore 

funding equity to Regina Catholic schools. Regina Catholic 

schools received $275 less per pupil than Regina public 

schools, amounting to a funding inequity of $2.7 million in 

total. That funding inequity places program delivery and 

staffing levels at risk. The Government of Saskatchewan has 

denied Catholic school boards in the province representation on 

the government-appointed committee mandated to develop a 

long-term funding formula for Saskatchewan school boards. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to address the funding inequity between 

Regina Catholic schools and Regina public schools that 

provides $275 less per pupil funding for Regina Catholic 

school students, totalling $2.7 million, and make known 

that the continuation for another school year of funding 

inequity places program delivery and staffing levels at risk 

in Regina Catholic schools; and in so doing, immediately 

restore funding equity to ensure that every student in 

Saskatchewan, whether enrolled in a Catholic or a public 

school, receives equitable resources to ensure every 

student in Saskatchewan has access to a quality education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the residents of 

Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today 

to present a petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan 

concerned about the detrimental effects on human rights law 

that Bill 160 will have if enacted. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

withdraw Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public 

consultations informed by a public policy paper before 

any amendments to the Human Rights Code, the law that 

supersedes all others in our province, are even considered. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Swift Current, 

Humboldt, Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, Milden, and Regina. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 



7114 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2011 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, once again it’s 

my pleasure to rise and present petitions on behalf of concerned 

residents from across Saskatchewan as it relates to the 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

specifically to a record that includes the running of deficits and 

the increasing of debt at a time of record highs in revenues, 

recognizing that this is both unacceptable and it comes at a 

consequence to future generations. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Redvers and La Ronge. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

National Tartan Day 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 

rise in this House today to announce that today marks National 

Tartan Day. The date of April 6th was chosen to celebrate the 

role of the independent Scots who helped to discover, conquer, 

explore, settle, and build the country now called Canada. 

 

The Scots had been travelling the world for hundreds of years. 

While the population of Scotland is around 5 million, there are 

many more millions of people with Scottish ancestry 

worldwide. Wherever they went, the Scots adapted to their new 

country but seldom forgot their heritage. This morning the 

lobby resonated with the familiar sounds of the pipes and 

drums. 

 

My grandfather emigrated from Scotland when he was a wee 

lad at 15 years of age. From there, he founded what is to this 

day operating as Chisholm Farms. 

 

Scottish people aim to be fiscally prudent. Mr. Speaker, this is a 

goal that is shared by my family and our government. We have 

introduced four consecutive balanced budgets, with this last 

budget reducing debt by some $325 million while posting a 

surplus of $115 million. Mr. Speaker, I know this is a budget 

and government my grandfather would be proud of. And I 

would ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

recognizing National Tartan Day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that member 

thought it was April Fool’s Day here today. But in fact today 

it’s Tartan Day, Mr. Speaker, a day that’s recognized in 

Saskatchewan and across our country. 

 

Earlier today I had the honour of bringing greetings to the 

Tartan Day ceremony, and it was my pleasure to observe a fine 

bit of piping and drumming. It was most appropriate that the 

Sons of Scotland took the lead in celebrating this day, 

providing pride through the Scottish diaspora and in our city 

and across our province. I want to take this day to thank the 

Regina Sons of Scotland, their leadership and membership for 

keeping alive the great traditions, literature, and music of 

Scotland. It is their leadership that preserves and shares proudly 

Scottish heritage and culture in Canada. 

 

Our modern history as a province is a story of immigration. 

Descendants of Scotland are a significant part of this modern 

history with large contributions socially, economically, and 

culturally. Scottish descendants have been an integral part of 

this modern history every step of the way, from the early days 

of the fur trade, to homesteading and farming, to serving in this 

very legislature, to waves of immigration that continue to this 

day. I proudly wear our tartan here today. 

 

Much like the tartan, our province is a weave of many different 

threads. Just like the tartan, that is what makes us both strong 

and beautiful. This is represented in our provincial motto that 

states “from many peoples, strength,” and represented here 

today through the ceremony. To the Sons of Scotland, I simply 

say, thank you. I ask all of us in this Assembly to enjoy and 

recognize Tartan Day in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

2011 SaskPower Legacy Award Recipient 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last evening I 

had the pleasure of attending the Samuel McLeod Business 

Awards in Prince Albert. The Samuel McLeod Business 

Awards identify success in businesses throughout the Prince 

Albert area. 

 

The SaskPower Legacy Award is a lifetime achievement award 

for outstanding performance in business. Last evening I had the 

honour to help present the SaskPower Legacy Award which 

recognizes a lifetime commitment to outstanding performance 

to Mr. Malcolm Jenkins, the owner of the local Canadian Tire 

store. 

 

Moving to Prince Albert 21 years ago, Mr. Jenkins built not just 

a business but helped rebuild our community. His generosity 

has extended past business. His visions have helped create the 

E.A. Rawlinson Centre, the Performing Arts Warehouse, the 

Kinsmen Skateboard Park, the Broadway North Theatre 

Company, and the Alfred Jenkins Field House. 

 

His strong leadership engages people to give back to the 

community and become involved. Malcolm will say that he 

isn’t reflecting on his achievements but the vision of growth 

and success for future accomplishments, continuing to help 



April 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7115 

Prince Albert grow and succeed. Mr. Speaker, this is what the 

Saskatchewan advantage is all about. It’s focusing on our future 

and our children’s future.  

 

Malcolm Jenkins is a true friend of mine, and I am honoured to 

know such a respectable, admirable man; a man who deserves 

to be recognized not only as the 2011 Legacy Award recipient 

but as a generous, noble, and highly regarded member of the 

Prince Albert community. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

2011 Provincial Debating Championships 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to join you 

recently in presenting awards at the 2011 E.C. Leslie Provincial 

Championships, the annual championships of the Saskatchewan 

Elocution and Debate Association, or SEDA, this year hosted 

by Campbell Collegiate in Regina. 102 students from around 

the province, ranging from grade 5 to grade 12 participated in 

the tournament.  

 

The motion the students debated read as follows: “This House 

would allocate seats in parliament for Aboriginal peoples.” This 

is a particularly relevant debate to have today here in 

Saskatchewan with a growing First Nations and Métis 

population and limited descriptive Aboriginal representation 

here in this legislature. The students brought well-researched 

and thoughtful points forward on both sides of the debate. 

 

The high school open final featured Nicholas Carver-Hill and 

Stefan Belev from Walter Murray Collegiate in Saskatoon and 

Julia Peng and Brandon Powell from Campbell Collegiate, with 

Carver-Hill and Belev prevailing. 

 

Carver-Hill, a grade 11 student, has been involved in 

parliamentary debate since 2006 — far longer, I might add, 

than I have, Mr. Speaker. He is a member of the national debate 

team and has debated in Germany, New Zealand, and 

Czechoslovakia this winter and will compete in the world 

debate championships in Scotland this summer. He is the most 

accomplished SEDA debater in this province’s history. 

 

Saskatchewan will be sending nine teams to the Senior National 

Debate Championships in Halifax next week, and we will be 

hosting the Junior National Debate Championships in Estevan 

in May. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in 

congratulating the participants in the recent provincial 

tournament and in wishing the best of luck to our 

representatives at nationals. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Opening of Child Care Centre 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Saturday our 

government announced the opening of a new 15-space child 

care centre at Lake Lenore School. I was joined by parents, 

community members, and representatives from the Horizon 

School Division to celebrate the opening of this new facility. 

Mr. Speaker, since becoming government we have made 

significant progress in increasing the number of licensed child 

care spaces in Saskatchewan. These 15 new spaces in Lake 

Lenore are an important part of our commitment to create more 

child care spaces for busy Saskatchewan families. 

 

Our government has provided more than $530,000 to support 

the development of the child care centre, which will become a 

long-term community and school division asset. This includes 

475,000 for capital renovations to the school; 50,000 in space 

development, grant funding; and more than 12,000 to assist the 

purchasing equipment, furnishing, and materials that enhance 

early learning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the past three and a half years, our 

Saskatchewan Party government has made a record investment 

in licensed child care, allocating funds for 3,435 new child care 

spaces to communities across this province. This represents a 

more than 30 per cent increase in child care spaces since 

November. Mr. Speaker, new child care spaces and centres are 

what the Saskatchewan advantage is all about. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Leasing of Office Space 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, maybe it’s because the 

Government House Leader wasn’t giving advice yesterday, but 

we had trouble getting straightforward answers from the 

Minister of Government Services. I don’t believe we brought 

that number with us, or we’ll get that was a common refrain, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Finally though we did get some interesting numbers on a 

premium real estate deal in downtown Regina. Get this. This 

government is committed to lease for 20 years some 50 to 

60,000 square feet in the Hill Tower no. III, or about 30 per 

cent of the entire building, and all without even knowing which 

ministries will be moving on over, Mr. Speaker. And they’re 

negotiating this deal at the same time they claimed to be in the 

middle of reducing the total amount of space government uses 

and reducing the number of public employees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, something doesn’t add up, or maybe it does. 

We’ve heard this number before. It’s an old tune from the 

Devine years: lock the taxpayers into decades of high-cost 

leases. And who’s humming along, Mr. Speaker? Well when 

we asked whether a condition for Tower III to proceed was that 

the government would be a tenant, we heard that developers 

always preferred to know they can count on a full building 

before they start construction. I’m sure they do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

After all, why should entrepreneurs, with the Sask Party in 

power, assume any risk when they’ve got a Sask Party 

government that’s given Grant Devine’s management style a 

new lease on life, getting ready to do a number on the taxpayers 

so developers can sing happy days are here again? And I say, 

same old tune, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 



7116 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2011 

Helicopter Emergency Medical Services Agreement 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise in this 

Assembly to announce that Saskatchewan is moving forward to 

introduce helicopter emergency medical services. Today our 

government signed a 10-year agreement with STARS, Shock 

Trauma Air Rescue Society. We’re very pleased to have the 

opportunity to partner with such a wonderful not-for-profit 

organization that has 25 years of helicopter medical service 

experience under their belt. 

 

Mr. Speaker this agreement will bring faster, more responsive 

emergency medical care to patients, particularly in rural and 

remote areas of the province. This initiative is all about putting 

the patient first, and an opportunity for patients to receive more 

timely medical care during the golden hours after a tragedy. 

The STARS program can truly make the difference between life 

and death for many people. 

 

These helicopters, essentially flying emergency rooms, will be 

based in Saskatoon and Regina. They’ll be coordinated with our 

current fixed wing air ambulance and ground ambulance 

services. This would not be possible without significant 

corporate sector support. We thank Saskatchewan’s business 

community for recognizing the value of this project and getting 

on board, in particular Crescent Point Energy and Mosaic. Their 

generous financial support will better equip our health system 

for the chain of survival to save lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank everyone involved in bringing 

helicopter air medical services to our province and for 

improving the quality of medical care in Saskatchewan. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Arrangements for Office Space 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, on one 

hand the Minister of Government Services is talking about a 

space change initiative and better utilization of office space. 

And on the other hand, she signed a 20-year deal to lease 50 to 

60,000 square feet or 30 per cent of a new office tower going 

up in downtown Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 2007 election platform of the Saskatchewan 

Party says, and I quote, they “will provide Saskatchewan people 

with more transparency and accountability than any previous 

government.” In the interest of fulfilling that promise, will the 

minister make the 20-year lease agreement public so that 

Saskatchewan taxpayers know what they are on the hook for? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As has 

been the practice in downtown Regina and in Saskatchewan, 

government is negotiating project space. I would remind the 

member, the last major downtown development in Regina was 

the rehabilitation of the former Hudson Bay building at 12th 

and Rose Street. The Government Services under the NDP 

[New Democratic Party] entered into an agreement to be part of 

that redevelopment without tendering for the additional space. 

Government Services occupies two-thirds of that space in the 

old building. This is approximately 50,000 square feet of space. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I happened to be the minister in 

charge of SPM [Saskatchewan Property Management] when 

that deal was made. So if she wants to debate the detail, we can. 

 

But right now, right now we’re talking about that minister’s 

accountability. People in this province have a right to know 

how much money this . . . or how their government is spending 

their money. They have committed to a 20-year deal to lease 50 

to 60,000 square feet of what’s arguably some of the most 

expensive property in downtown Regina at a time, Mr. Speaker, 

when they have also committed to reduce the civil service by 16 

per cent. 

 

So to the minister: which departments will be occupying the 

space, and how much will the government be paying per 

month? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It has 

been a long-standing practice of the provincial government that 

lease information is not made public, and the basis of this was 

set forward by the previous government. In fact they ensured 

that they entered into an agreement with a law firm that 

strengthened this clause. So for us to be able to reveal that . . . 

We do not negotiate in public. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister doesn’t know 

which departments will be occupying over 30 per cent of this 

new tower. She doesn’t know what the cost of the lease will be, 

but she’s sure it’s going to be a 20-year lease. To the minister: 

will she admit that she has done nothing but sign a blank 

cheque on behalf of taxpayers as a guarantee for this deal to go 

ahead? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much for the question. As 

the cost for employees, the new space development standard is 

quite competitive with the existing space. And government is 

committed to reducing the amount of space it occupies and it 

will do this in a number of ways, including a revised space 

standard and reorganizing existing space. 

 

The continued growth of existing and new businesses around 



April 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7117 

the province and in Regina has created a limited supply of 

available office space and that affects both government and 

private industry. And as a result, Mr. Speaker, downtown 

Regina and businesses remained stagnant under the NDP, 

causing an exodus of private sector from downtown core 

Regina. And, Mr. Speaker, under the new Saskatchewan 

government, we have a strong belief that more head offices will 

be attracted to Regina. And, Mr. Speaker, that means more head 

offices, more new jobs. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, this government is not willing to 

adequately staff the neonatal unit at Regina General; they’re not 

willing to properly fund teachers’ bargaining; and they’re not 

willing to adequately fund affordable housing. But they’re 

willing to enter into a 20-year lease for 60,000 square feet of 

some of the most expensive property in downtown Regina, 

price unknown, Mr. Speaker. So to the minister: why is she 

willing to write a blank cheque for a 20-year project with 

unknown costs instead of addressing some of the most 

important issues for Saskatchewan families? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

thank that member opposite for that question. When she says 

we have not addressed people’s issues in Saskatchewan, I think 

the budget that was just brought down in fact does address the 

needs. We have . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We are 

paying attention. We are addressing people’s needs. We are 

providing more low-income housing than ever before. And, Mr. 

Speaker, what have we done? We have made sure that our 

schools are adequate, that there’s adequate provisions for new 

schools. And, Mr. Speaker, this was all brought down under a 

balanced budget. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, could this minister please 

explain the rationale behind this? We’re reducing the civil 

service by 16 per cent, 16 per cent, but yet we are acquiring 

space under the minister’s new space initiative for 300 civil 

servants in some of the highest priced downtown Regina space, 

probably, Mr. Speaker, renting 30 per cent as a guaranteed 

income for that building so the project would actually go ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when is this minister going to be accountable to 

Saskatchewan taxpayers and release the information? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Mr. Speaker, we are accountable to the 

provincial taxpayers. That’s why they elected us. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We are 

accountable and we do intend to be very open and transparent 

because we are, Mr. Speaker. However, when the member 

opposite stands and says that she was the minister of SPMC 

[Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation] and then 

turns around and asks me to reveal information that she knows 

they put in place, that there is a privacy concern to it, for her to 

stand up and say that is a little bit — I don’t know; I have to 

question it — disingenuous. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Maternity Care 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday, after it was made public 

that the Sask Party has transferred 78 mothers and babies out of 

the city since August, the minister came forward and said that 

he would be working to staff up the neonatal intensive care 

unit. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: where has he been for the last 

eight months? Why did 78 mothers and babies have to be 

transferred out of the city before he would step up and increase 

staffing levels? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as I have mentioned over the last couple of days, that 

the mother, baby safety and their care is priority number one for 

our government, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and I can tell you 

that those mothers and babies have received excellent care, 

whether it’s here in Regina or in Saskatoon or for some of them 

that have had to go out of province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the census in the neonatal unit has been around 

18. The staffing complement through the Regina Qu’Appelle 

Health Region has been at full staffing level for that amount of 

beds, Mr. Speaker. Once the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region 

sees a trend that maybe there’ll be an increased usage, Mr. 

Speaker, of the neonatal intensive care unit, the health region 

and the ministry are working closely to increase the staffing 

levels once we know those staffing levels need to be increased. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is evident now with the census in the neonatal 

unit that the staffing level will be increased. In fact, the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region has just recently — as a matter of 

five or ten minutes ago — put out a news release saying that 

very same thing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — That’s quick response, Mr. Speaker. Five or 10 

minutes ago the minister got on something. Mr. Speaker, 

according to a CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] 



7118 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2011 

story, at least four women with high-risk pregnancies have 

recently been sent out of the province to have their babies: three 

to Alberta and one to North Dakota. 

 

We have spoken with Claire Kreuger who was sent to Medicine 

Hat, and she is frustrated because, I quote, “There is a new 

facility in Regina with space but no staff. How can they be 

saving money by sending women out of province and not 

staffing the NICU?” 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how much did it cost to send 78 

mothers and babies out of the city, some of them out of the 

province, and at least two of them out of the country? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, that member just . . . I 

mean stands there and says there is no staff in the neonatal 

intensive care unit. That could be no further from the truth. Mr. 

Speaker, it is totally staffed for the census that we had been 

anticipating for the last number of years. For the last six or 

seven months, we’ve seen an increase of usage of the neonatal 

unit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I can tell you that I understand that, you know, if you 

would ever go back to the NDP days, I’m sure 18 beds would 

do under the NDP, Mr. Speaker, because all we saw for 16 

years is population decline, Mr. Speaker. Under a Sask Party 

government, we’re seeing an increase in population, hence an 

increase and utilization of all of our health services. That’s why 

health regions have seen a significant increase, $250 million 

increase in this year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, to address the very 

pressures that member’s talking about. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — I’m sure Ms. Kreuger and her family were very 

reassured by that answer. Claire went on to tell us that she’s 

very frustrated because, “Nothing was clear as to what they [the 

government] would pay and what we have to pay. I know the 

air ambulance is paid to Medicine Hat, but I’m not sure how I 

get home.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: is Claire and her baby’s 

transportation home from Medicine Hat covered, or is he 

making them pay their own way home? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the policy that has been 

in place for many, many years . . . Because this is not a new 

phenomenon, Mr. Speaker. Under the NDP, people were sent 

out of the province, Mr. Speaker, when we were over capacity. 

She’s a former minister. I would hope she would still remember 

what the policy was, because the policy today is to pay both 

ways, the same as it was when they were in power, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, it’s also unclear to Claire and her 

husband, Dan, if the cost of the ambulance she took from the 

hospital in Regina to the airport and then from the airport to the 

hospital in Medicine Hat is covered, or if they’ll have to pay for 

that. 

 

They know they have to pay Dan’s travel expenses and his 

meals. Once the baby is born, they’ve been told that Dan can’t 

stay in the hospital and will have to stay in a motel. Little, if 

anything, has been explained to this family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: who is paying for Claire’s 

ambulance costs to get from the hospital to the airport and the 

airport to the hospital, and who pays for Dan’s hotel and meals? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to 

respond to the individual case. Mr. Speaker. I don’t have all the 

details of the individual case. But what I will say, Mr. Speaker, 

is that under the former government, people were sent out of 

the province, Mr. Speaker. The policy that cover expenses for 

to and fro, for example, of the mother, is the same under the 

NDP. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if they don’t like that policy, then they 

governed for a very long time with policies that they couldn’t 

stand, Mr. Speaker. Finally in 2007, there was a lot of people in 

Saskatchewan couldn’t stand those policies either, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the mother is covered both ways, Mr. Speaker, but 

it is a rarity that mothers . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the vast majority of 

cases are handled here in Saskatchewan. It is a rarity that 

people are sent out. We’ve seen an increase. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region will be increasing their 

staff to accommodate the increase in census in the neonatal 

intensive care unit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Support for Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people want their 

provincial government to deliver excellence in education. But 

we have seen a pattern of behaviour from the Sask Party 

government that does the exact opposite of that. 

 

One of the key ways in which they are undermining our 

education system is by disrespecting education professionals. 

They eliminated hundreds of educational assistants. They have 

botched negotiations with elementary and high school teachers 

so badly that those teachers are forced to take a strike vote. And 

they have left staff and instructors at SIAST [Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology] without a 

contract for almost two years. 

 



April 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7119 

To the minister: why is the government so intent on showing 

educational professionals, including those at SIAST, that they 

are simply not valued by the Sask Party? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much. Nothing 

could be further from the truth. We know that educators are 

profoundly important, Mr. Speaker, as are students. And, Mr. 

Speaker, when we look at the post-secondary educational 

system, we see that more than $2.8 billion has been invested. 

That’s a record investment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ll just use one example. When we think about student 

housing, we can look at communities like Meadow Lake, like 

La Ronge, like Prince Albert, and in Saskatoon for the first 

time, at the University of Saskatchewan, in 30 years. As well 

we know there are other discussions that are under way, Mr. 

Speaker. We know how important educators are and also our 

students, and that’s why we’re making these kind of 

investments in institutions and in the support systems like 

residence, so that our students can succeed — succeed and stay, 

Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, one of the fastest growing 

provinces in the country. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the academic and professional 

services staff at SIAST ensure that students receive a 

high-quality education. But the Sask Party government 

steadfastly refuses to ensure that those SIAST staff members 

receive a fair, reasonable, and competitive offer. After nearly 

two years without a contract, what message does that send to 

those education professionals, Mr. Speaker? It says, the work 

you do is not valued by the Sask Party government. And what 

does it say to SIAST students, Mr. Speaker? It says, your 

education is not a priority for the Sask Party government. My 

question to the minister: why is he sending that message? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, again nothing could be 

further from the truth. In fact what we’ve seen in SIAST, Mr. 

Speaker, is since the 2007 election, what we’ve seen is an 18.5 

per cent increase, an 18.5 per cent increase in operating funding 

for SIAST, Mr. Speaker. And as I made reference to, we also 

see that expanding services for SIAST is increasingly 

important. So in Prince Albert, what we did for the first time in 

history is actually allow SIAST to move forward with its own 

student housing initiative — more dollars for SIAST, more 

supports for students, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know how important SIAST is today and into the future, 

Mr. Speaker. And that’s why we’re ensuring that this 

investment and these investments continue, Mr. Speaker, to 

ensure that our students can succeed, that they stay in 

Saskatchewan and help to contribute to one of the fastest 

growing provinces in the country. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the facts of how this minister is 

treating SIAST tell a very different story. There is no doubt that 

we are seeing a pattern of behaviour in which the Sask Party 

government disrespects education professionals and undermines 

our education system. 

 

But we’re also seeing a pattern of behaviour with this particular 

minister when it comes to disrespecting SIAST, Mr. Speaker. 

This is the same minister who ensured that over $60,000 per 

student in federal and provincial infrastructure funding flowed 

directly to St. Peter’s College for his pet merger project. But 

what did he deliver to SIAST, Mr. Speaker? Just $1,300 per 

student. For this minister, SIAST students are worth just 2 per 

cent of what St. Peter’s students are worth. My question to the 

minister: what does he have against SIAST? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a very interesting kind 

of turn of phrase that the member opposite . . . He just 

attributed federal funding, that is $6 million in KIP [knowledge 

infrastructure program], what he said, Mr. Speaker, he made 

specific reference to KIP, Mr. Speaker. Let me make specific 

and very, very certain, Mr. Speaker, that he understands. 

Regarding KIP and SIAST, $12.9 million for the health 

technologies project at the Kelsey Campus, $4.6 million for the 

nursing project here at the Wascana Campus, 2.3 million for the 

electrical expansion project at Woodland Campus and, Mr. 

Speaker, an additional $500,000 to ensure that the plumbing 

program was able to expand here in Regina. 

 

We made sure, Mr. Speaker, that through the KIP initiative, 

which was a federal initiative where there needed to be 

provincial matching funding, we ensured that SIAST fully 

participated, that the students were able to benefit from this 

and, Mr. Speaker, as a result the people of Saskatchewan were 

able to benefit from this program. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what Saskatchewan people 

need to know about the minister’s spending decisions: $60,000 

per student at St. Peter’s College; $1,300 per student at SIAST 

institutions. His story does not add up. 

 

Perhaps the minister needs to be reminded that it’s because of 

his neglect of SIAST that the SIAST board went rogue and 

illegally purchased property without the minister’s approval last 

year. That’s how badly they needed space, Mr. Speaker, and 

that’s how badly the Sask Party government has neglected 

SIAST. And the staff and students at SIAST are well aware of 

the fact of how little this government places value on them. 

 

To the minister: now that his pet merger project has been 

shelved, will he finally turn his attention to the needs at SIAST 

and will he finally ensure that the academic and professional 

staff at SIAST are valued and respected? 

 



7120 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2011 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very, very pleased to 

talk about the progress that SIAST is making, Mr. Speaker. 

What we see, enrolments increasing, Mr. Speaker. We also see 

increased investments under this government, Mr. Speaker. 

That includes KIP, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve just read, in Saskatoon 

and Regina and Prince Albert previously. We also made 

investments in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. There’s always more 

to do because, Mr. Speaker, we inherited a post-secondary 

system that had significant, significant and sustained 

inattention, especially on the capital side, Mr. Speaker. That’s a 

sad legacy of the members opposite. 

 

What we’re doing, Mr. Speaker, working with the federal 

government and others to ensure that we continue to invest not 

simply in infrastructure, but in the students themselves, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s why we’ve made sure that the apprenticeship 

program has expanded. We’ve put new dollars into SIAST, Mr. 

Speaker. We know how important it is not just for today, but 

into the future. And we’re going to continue to make those kind 

of investments to ensure that the growth of Saskatchewan is 

sustained and that students can stay and succeed here in the 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Minimum Wage 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the minimum wage report the government was 

supposed to have back in December is finally available. Now 

they’ve had time to read it, and the recommendation is they 

consider a 19-cent increase in the minimum wage. They further 

said they would but no firm date has been announced yet. 

 

To the minister: rents, food, utilities, gas, everything is on the 

rise. When will the minimum wage earners, who’ve already 

gone almost two years without a raise, see a response from this 

government to the recommendations in the report? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Justice and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you very much for the question, 

Mr. Speaker. We received the report from the minimum wage 

review panel. It was received very late February, and we’ve had 

a chance to briefly look at it. We are going to do some further 

consultation and review. We’d like to have some discussion and 

see what is taking place in other jurisdictions so that we don’t 

do something that would put our businesses at competitive 

disadvantages. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we feel very strongly that we want to protect 

low-income earners. As a government, we have seen to it that 

we’ve made changes to The Income Tax Act that have taken 

some 120,000 low-income earners off of the tax rolls in their 

entirety. We’ve made a variety of other changes to ensure that 

we’ve done everything that we can to make sure that people 

have a reasonable opportunity to stay and earn money and stay 

in the workforce, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — I know that renters would like to use that 

answer when they get their rent increased. But the 

recommendations from the review state that following a notice 

to businesses in April, the minimum wage increase, suggested 

at 19 cents for this year, should be indexed annually to the 

consumer price index. 

 

To the minister: with respect to the families in Saskatchewan in 

desperate need of this increase to the minimum wage, will he 

work with the opposition to legislate the minimum wage 

increase, complete with annual indexation, this session? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Justice and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in January of this year, the 

average weekly earnings were $862.86. This is up 3.6 per cent 

year over year from January 2010. We have the third highest 

earnings in Canada, behind Alberta and Ontario. Our minimum 

wage is something that needs to be looked at. The report that 

was provided, Mr. Speaker, is something that was requested by 

our government. So we’ve received the report. We want to go 

through the process. 

 

We do not like or do not appreciate the effect . . . [inaudible] 

. . . the ratcheting up and down that took place under the 

previous administration. We think it’s appropriate to consider 

something that provides better stability for both workers and for 

employers. And we have indicated, Mr. Speaker, that we have 

keen interest in looking at that type of system, Mr. Speaker, and 

that is one of the things that we will take under careful 

advisement. This is a major change, Mr. Speaker, and we will 

proceed with it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And you’ll have to 

pardon me if I wonder out loud about the government’s motives 

here. The board they appointed is telling them that they should 

raise the minimum wage this year, and yet they waffle at the 

very idea of doing it, promising or hinting at perhaps after the 

next election. 

 

Well to the minister: considering the history of broken promises 

for this government to working people, particularly around the 

essential services legislation, why should working people 

believe that this government will carry through with their 

promise to look at minimum wage and do an increase when it’s 

obvious that they don’t have the needs of hard-working people? 

It’s the furthest thing from this government’s mind. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, under the previous 

administration, we saw the steep ups and downs caused by an 

ad hoc policy. We’re the ones that asked for a review and a 

report so that we could consider something that was done on a 

more regular and a more carefully calibrated basis. 



April 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7121 

Mr. Speaker, under our administration, the minimum wage has 

increased some 16 per cent. It is now one of the highest in the 

country. In the last two years, it has increased 2 . . . We have 

doubled the low-income tax credit. We’ve reduced provincial 

income tax, removed 130,000 people from the tax rolls. We’ve 

increased funding for housing programs by 45 per cent. We’ve 

increased shelter rates. We’ve increased the number of 

affordable housing units. Mr. Speaker, we are the government 

that has taken substantial steps, Mr. Speaker, to try and do this. 

Mr. Speaker, under the previous administration, they did 

nothing. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’m not sure if the minister heard the 

Bill being . . . that was read. Could we do introduction of Bills 

again, please. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 169 — The Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill No. 169, The Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission Amendment Act, 2011 be now introduced and read 

a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved first 

reading of Bill 169, The Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered again? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 166 — The Renewable Diesel Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I rise today to give second reading to The Renewable 

Diesel Act. In this year’s budget, our government announced a 

new five-year, $26 million renewable diesel program. One of 

the steps related to the program is to establish legislation so that 

the industry can operate here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is stepping up to the mark in 

developing a renewable diesel industry in the province. 

Biodiesel industries are already up and running in the rest of 

Western Canada. The federal government has also introduced a 

national mandate. Saskatchewan will now be on par with other 

Western provinces, and we’ll be in concert with the federal 

requirement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, renewable diesel produced in the province will 

initially come from canola. As a canola-growing region, this 

initiative will provide Saskatchewan farmers opportunities to 

sell off-grade canola for use in renewable diesel-blended fuel. 

In the future, renewable diesel might include other products, 

including biomass from agriculture and forest waste. 

 

One of the most important aspects of this legislation is to 

formally set out a mandate. As of July 1, 2012, diesel fuel sold 

in Saskatchewan will be required to be blended with 2 per cent 

renewable diesel that is calculated by volume on an annual 

basis. You will also see that we have budgeted $2.6 million for 

this program for 2011-12, which is noted on page 56 of the 

budget estimates. 

 

This Bill establishes the renewable diesel program to move 

forward, and that is something that biodiesel producers in 

Saskatchewan have been waiting for as it puts them on an equal 

footing as producers with neighbouring provinces. When this 

legislation passes, the incentive program will be in place for 

Saskatchewan producers to gear up to meet our mandate so 

Saskatchewan fuel distributors can get their biodiesel 

domestically instead of importing it from neighbouring 

provinces and the United States. By passing this legislation this 

spring, Saskatchewan producers will have the lead time they 

require to be ready to meet the provincial mandate in 2012. 

 

Mr. Speaker, aside from the legislation, we will also need 

regulations. It’s our plan to continue consulting with industry 

and stakeholders in the coming months before the mandate 

comes into effect. Currently there’s only one commercial-scale 

renewable diesel producer in Saskatchewan, Milligan Bio-Tech 

in Foam Lake. There’s the potential for expansion at Milligan 

and the possibility for new plants and jobs down the line. 

 

The economic opportunities are real and so are the benefits for 

the environment. The addition of renewable diesel in the diesel 

pool will reduce greenhouse gas emissions and is the equivalent 

of taking 5,000 cars off the road. Mr. Speaker, alternative fuels 

are the way of the future. Global demand, coupled with 

consumer demand for cleaner fuels that are more 

environmentally friendly, have a great deal of potential. 

Developing renewable diesel in Saskatchewan is one step into 

that market and will create opportunities for businesses who 

want to participate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Renewable 

Diesel Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Enterprise has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 166, The Renewable Diesel Act. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 



7122 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2011 

Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to stand and make comments on the Bill No. 166, An 

Act respecting Renewable Diesel Fuel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after the mention in the budget of this, I took time 

to go through the legislation and really have a look at it. And I 

think the minister’s comments really pointed to the fact that this 

is enabling legislation that allows the establishment of the 

industry and will allow the government to move forward, and 

that a majority of the information or detail pertaining to an 

industry or the future of the industry as the government sees it 

will really be laid out in regulations. And it speaks to a fair bit 

of detail in the legislation that will all be referred to in 

regulations. 

 

And I know this government seems to be quite fond of 

regulation instead of having anything enshrined in legislation, 

that it’s much easier to make changes at cabinet instead of 

bringing issues and initiatives to the floor of this legislature. So 

while the minister said that there will be consultations that will 

go forward from this legislation, that’s good to hear. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know there are some consultations that my 

members and I need to do and to look at more closely when it 

comes to biodiesel. So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would 

adjourn debate on 166. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 166. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to . . . Should we call the question? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Question. The question before the Assembly 

is second reading of Bill No. 166, The Renewable Diesel Act. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — It’s agreed. When shall the Bill be considered 

in committee? To which committee shall the Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Minister Responsible for Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The Standing Committee on the 

Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 167 — The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise today to move second reading of Bill 167, The 

Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

This Bill will give the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation the 

legislative authority to undertake the short-line sustainability 

grant program, develop other initiatives in the future, and better 

position the corporation to respond to the needs of rural 

Saskatchewan. With these legislative amendments, we are 

proposing to broaden the authority of the Grain Car commission 

to allow it to become more active in assisting the short-line 

railway industry in the province. 

 

As a first step in this new direction, in this year’s budget the 

Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation will administer 

responsibility for the short-line railway sustainability grant 

program. Without this amendment, the Saskatchewan Grain Car 

Corporation will not have the legislative authority to administer 

this program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this can be seen on page 94 of the 2011-12 

Estimates book. This is a line item that shows an expense under 

vote 16 of Highways and Infrastructure and can be found under 

allocations, Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation, short-line 

railway sustainability program, $700,000. This is an additional 

$200,000 funding increase to the program of 40 per cent to 

$700,000 a year . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The minister’s trying to make a 

ministerial statement. I’d ask the members to allow the minister 

to respond. I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — The changes to The Saskatchewan Grain 

Car Corporation Act are clearly driven by responsibilities and 

funding changes introduced in the 2011 budget document. The 

Bill is without question a budget Bill, under the understanding 

of that term. This grant program assists short-lines in 

maintaining their infrastructure. 

 

I’ve directed the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation to use its 

resources and expertise to look at new and innovative ways of 

providing assistance to the Saskatchewan short-line rail 

industry. This Bill is yet another step in this direction. As part 

of this process, we’ve been very conscious of consulting with 

those stakeholders that play an important role in rural 

Saskatchewan, such as the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities, the Agricultural Producers Association of 

Saskatchewan, and the Saskatchewan Shortline Railroad 

Association. All those that responded have expressed 

overwhelming support for this initiative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would now like to read some parts of the letters 

of consultation for the House today. Mr. Speaker, the first letter 

is from the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, 

and it says in part: 

 

We expect that the legislative changes proposed will go a 

long way to assist the short-line railway industry in 

Saskatchewan. The short-line railways have always been a 

benefit to the success of rural Saskatchewan, and these 

changes will allow the Grain Car Corporation to better 

meet the needs of rural stakeholders. 

 

Please accept this letter as formal recognition of the value 

of the recommended legislative updates. We appreciate 

the opportunity to provide continued input into this matter 

and ask that we be kept apprised of any future 



April 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7123 

amendments. 

 

That’s signed by Dave Marit, the president of SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The next letter in part says: 

 

The Saskatchewan Shortline Railway Association would 

welcome changes to the existing legislation that controls 

the mandate with the Saskatchewan Grain Car 

Corporation. Changes to the legislation that would allow 

for guarantees, grants and loans would be a huge benefit 

for the short-line network. Possibilities for projects in 

shortlines are absolutely endless, but finding financing is 

always hard and time consuming. The network of 

shortlines is constantly expanding in our province. 

Changing the legislation of the Grain Car Corporation to 

facilitate this expansion and develop new and innovative 

projects within this expansion would be very beneficial to 

the province. 

 

And that’s signed by Conrad Johnson, the vice-chairman of the 

Saskatchewan Shortline Railway Association. 

 

And the last letter, Mr. Speaker, from the Agricultural 

Producers Association of Saskatchewan says in part: 

 

First we thank you for your efforts in consultation on this 

important matter. As you will recall, last fall the 

Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan 

board of directors passed a resolution supporting in 

principle the Grain Car Corporation plan to lease hopper 

cars to Saskatchewan shortline railways. We were very 

much in support of your efforts to support the shortline 

rail industry in Saskatchewan. We also support the 

legislative amendments which you are proposing to 

provide you with flexibility in responding to the needs of 

Saskatchewan stakeholders. Rural economic development 

is very important to agriculture and rural Saskatchewan. 

Support to shortlines and other rural economic 

development initiatives by Saskatchewan Grain Car 

Corporation benefits farmers and rural communities. We 

commend you for your proactive approach in support of 

short-lines in rural economic development. 

 

As I’ve just mentioned, Mr. Speaker, short-line railways play 

an important role in rural Saskatchewan. There are currently 11 

short-lines in Saskatchewan with more considering start-up. 

Since 2008, four new short-lines have started. This is an 

increase of 500 kilometres of short-line rail to bring the total 

kilometres to 1,900. 

 

In November of last year, we announced the Saskatchewan 

Grain Car Corporation would be leasing some of its hopper cars 

to short-line railways in Saskatchewan. By leasing directly to 

Saskatchewan short-lines, the corporation will focus the benefit 

directly to producers within the province. The short-lines will 

realize cost savings and efficiencies by having a dedicated fleet 

of hopper cars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with more product moving on rail, that means less 

wear and tear on provincial highways. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, 

I move that The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2011 be read a second time. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Highways has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 167, The Saskatchewan Grain Car 

Corporation Amendment Act, 2011. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a 

pleasure to rise and offer comments on The Saskatchewan 

Grain Car Corporation Act. Mr. Speaker, this is a very short 

Act, and it actually has quite a history behind it though when 

we look back at grain handling in Canada, in the Prairies, and 

more specifically here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was doing a bit of research. And I know this was 

a topic for the previous government on numerous occasions, 

looking at the grain cars — what should be done with them, if it 

was profitable, what had to be done. I know in early 2000s 

there had to be major repairs done to the cars to make sure that 

they were up to current Canadian standards for hauling the 

products that they do and also international standards for . . . 

You know, the rail lines in North America travel across 

boundaries quite often or across borders. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think when you go to the government 

website there is a little note on the side panel when we speak 

about the Grain Car Corporation, and it says, “SGCC has saved 

Saskatchewan producers in excess of $50 million in freight 

costs since the Corporation’s inception.” And, Mr. Speaker, 

through good times and bad times, $50 million is a lot of 

money when it comes to anyone. And for producers during 

some very difficult years, the Grain Car Corporation was most 

definitely an asset, and one that I think producers in the 

province of Saskatchewan jealously guarded, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I went back and did a bit of research on the 

history of the Grain Car Corporation. And it’s interesting to 

read comments about the Crow’s Nest Pass freight rate, how 

long it was in play in rail transportation for transportation rates 

of western grains. I think many of us of a certain age can 

remember many of the debates went on when the Crow was 

done away with. And we can debate the whys and what fors and 

what the effects have been, but the fact is, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

gone. 

 

And when we look at the history of grain transportation, in 

western grains especially, some of the history talks about: 

 

The system remained virtually unchanged until the 1960’s. 

In 1961, the MacPherson Royal Commission reported that 

railways were losing money in grain handling. The small 

return to the railways led to deferred maintenance of 

Prairie branchlines and reduced investment in rolling 

stock and infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would think that in many coffee shops across the 

province we could get into a debate about branch lines and the 

transportation of western grains. And I think as a result, this is 

what we have seen. We have seen the short-lines in 

communities and producers across the province in various 

regions pick up those abandoned branch lines and come 



7124 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2011 

forward with the short-line railways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but back into the ’60s, the rail lines in Western 

Canada became less and less able to support the increasing 

grain exports, and the railcar fleet largely composed of boxcars, 

was not being renewed by its owners with modern hopper cars 

that were quickly becoming the norm in the industry. So, Mr. 

Speaker, what we’ve seen in the 1970s was lost, that Canada 

lost major international grain sales because of the country’s 

grain car fleet was obsolete and didn’t have the capacity to get 

producers’ grain to export positions. So that causes huge 

problems, and I mean it’s surprising how isolated we can feel 

here in Saskatchewan when these problems used to arise on a 

continual basis. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, at that time the Government of Canada along 

with the Government of Saskatchewan, Alberta, and the 

Canadian Wheat Board began to purchase hopper cars for use 

in grain handling and transportation system in Western Canada. 

And, Mr. Speaker, thus was born the Saskatchewan Grain Car 

Corporation. And I’m hopping up here a little bit. But in 1980 

the Government of Saskatchewan made what was considered a 

strategic investment of approximately 55 million into Canada’s 

grain transportation system by purchasing 1,000 covered 

hopper cars for the movement of export grain grown by western 

producers. And, Mr. Speaker, the Grain Car Corporation has 

served producers well, right across this province. And while it 

comes up for debate now and again, it still continues to be an 

asset. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, now what we do, we look at the legislation 

and the changes that are being proposed. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

believe that the Grain Car Corporation has always been 

profitable also. Not huge dollars, but it has paid for 

maintenance such as metal fatigue that had to be addressed. 

Right around 2005, 2006 there was a fair bit of maintenance 

that was done. The cars were repainted, which is important to 

the maintenance and the long-term viability of these cars. And, 

Mr. Speaker, the Grain Car Corporation has been 

self-sustaining, which is important. 

 

So now, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the legislation that’s 

tabled here in the House, and the minister speaks about the 

short-line initiative providing the Grain Car Corporation 

broader authority, the allocation of resources, Mr. Speaker. I’ll 

have to look at that more. 

 

[14:45] 

 

It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, but there are a number of 

questions. I know when it looks at the powers of the 

corporation, I believe that’s been expanded. Because it says 

that: 

 

The corporation may: 

 

(a) acquire, by purchase, lease or otherwise, railway 

rolling stock suitable for the transportation of grain, 

commodities and other products.  

 

So, Mr. Speaker, obviously there is some issue with moving 

outside of agricultural products. I’m not sure. But, Mr. Speaker, 

that was one thing that came to mind for me when I read the 

new legislation. 

 

There was another of other changes that were announced in the 

legislation. Well it’s totally rewritten. I believe that the initial 

“The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Act is repealed 

and the following substituted . . .” So, Mr. Speaker, you need 

to go through and do a word-by-word comparison of what the 

changes are and how the wording has changed to get a better 

understanding of what the intent is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s also a process here, and it provides for: 

 

(ii) the provision of consulting, management or 

administrative services to persons who are involved 

with the railway industry; or 

 

(iii) any other purposes that the corporation considers 

advisable.  

 

So I don’t know if that was there before. It seems to be an 

expanded authority within the Grain Car Corporation. 

 

Then there are a number of areas that seem to be the same. But 

there also is under powers of the corporation, Mr. Speaker, the 

corporation may, and under (d): 

 

construct or acquire, by purchase, lease or otherwise, any 

plant, equipment or other assets that the corporation 

considers beneficial for the railway industry.  

 

So we have to look at how that applies, what areas that will 

apply in, and what is the best case and, Mr. Speaker, what the 

worst case scenario may be. 

 

And it also offers, the corporation may, under (e): 

 

transfer, sell or otherwise dispose of any railway rolling 

stock, plant, equipment or other assets acquired by the 

corporation.  

 

So “ . . . sell or otherwise dispose of any railway rolling stock 

. . . ” So, Mr. Speaker, I wonder, and that brings to mind, is 

there any need to sell stock? Are we looking at hopper cars? 

Are we looking at . . . What exactly are we looking at? And 

what circumstance are we looking to accommodate with the 

change in this piece of legislation? 

 

Mr. Speaker, again it goes on to: 

 

(f) provide the means by which grain, commodities or 

other products produced in Saskatchewan or elsewhere 

may be transported. 

 

So it looks like we’re expanding quite widely on what the 

opportunities are for the Grain Car Corporation. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the whole investment, the initial investment in the 

Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation was to be advantageous 

for Saskatchewan producers. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when the minister talks about short-lines 

around the province, it’s wonderful to see those branch lines in 

use. It’s great to see that traffic and those commodities taken 

off the highways because we know how difficult it is for 



April 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7125 

highways just to sustain . . . for the government to sustain 

highways that are hauling some of these commodities on a 

regular basis, lots of wear and tear on the highways. So 

short-lines remove that, Mr. Speaker. So for the short-lines to 

have access . . . And I mean that was done previously, where 

the short-lines have access to the Grain Car Corporation cars, 

hopper cars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is one area when we talk about changes that 

are being proposed under: 

 

Powers of corporation 

 

The corporation may [under]: 

 

(g) subject to any orders or directives of Treasury 

Board, provide financial assistance by way of grant, 

loan, guarantee or other similar means to persons for the 

purpose of allowing those persons to acquire railway 

rolling stock, plant, equipment or other assets that will 

benefit the railway industry. 

 

Not benefit Saskatchewan producers, not benefit the Grain Car 

Corporation, but benefit the railway industry. So, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s pretty broad. And there is a number of areas or a number 

of reasons that this raises concern. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, just today I was going through a report that 

was issued in November 10th, 1992. And it was the Financial 

Management Review Commission, and it was a progress report. 

And this had to do with the straightening out of the finances of 

the province of Saskatchewan. It was a report that was 

recommended by the Donald Gass report that my colleague had 

spoken of a few days ago. This was a report that was 

recommended that Saskatchewan Property Management or the 

new Government Services undertake and make sure that 

everything was addressed. The issues were addressed, and there 

was a fair bit of debt floating around the government in those 

days. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we can all talk about the horror stories. But I 

know for Saskatchewan residents right across the province, they 

all know the difficult time restoring the financial balance to the 

province of Saskatchewan. And every citizen in this province 

contributed to restoring the financial balance and well-being of 

the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because everyone 

contributed to that. 

 

But in this book, in this report there are a number of 

recommendations, Mr. Speaker. There are a number of 

recommendations that talk about the Crown corporations, 

accounting changes, public accountability, the Crown sector, 

studies and reviews, financial condition. And, Mr. Speaker, if 

you look in one of the appendix, page 3, it talks about a 

recommendation. And it says: 

 

The Commission recommends that transactions 

involving loans, which can only be repaid through 

future budgetary appropriations by the Government, 

should be treated as expenditures, rather than assets 

(i.e. loans receivable), in the Government’s financial 

statements. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, accounting practices change over the years. 

And while specifically that may not be applicable in today’s 

accounting rules that are followed by the Legislative Assembly 

and the Government of Saskatchewan, there is one loan that 

really stands out when we are talking about the Grain Car 

Corporation. And this is, the government will implement this 

change for 1992 to ’93 budgetary year. The loans that fell into 

this category at March 31st, 1992, were written off against the 

accumulated deficit, included the following: 713 million from 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, 182 million 

from Saskatchewan Water Corporation. And there was loans 

outstanding. Thirty-six million were written off for the 

Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, here we are, $36 million in 1991-92 was 

written off for the Grain Car Corporation. That was money that 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan had put out. So, Mr. Speaker, 

when I see this whole piece in 12(g) where it talks about the 

corporation may: 

 

subject to any orders or directives of Treasury Board, 

provide financial assistance by way of a grant, loan, 

guarantee or other similar means to persons for the 

purpose of allowing those persons to acquire railway 

rolling stock, plant, equipment or other assets that will 

benefit the railway industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would feel more comfortable if it said 

Saskatchewan producers, if it was talking about the Grain Car 

Corporation itself. But it’s pretty open-ended, Mr. Speaker. 

And with that, I know there is a number of my colleagues that 

would like to make comments on the Grain Car Corporation, 

and I’m sure maybe even the minister might not have thought 

that this would have raised any questions. 

 

But I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, from my days sitting on 

Treasury Board, we had a fair bit of discussion about the Grain 

Car Corporation because we knew it needed to have a number 

of improvements and updates to its rolling stock. And it had to 

do with stress fractures in the metal in the hopper cars. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we had fairly lengthy debates as to what should be 

done and how we needed to maintain the Grain Car Corporation 

and this benefit for Saskatchewan producers. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s the whole point of the Grain Car Corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now the member from Cypress, he figures it’s 

kind of funny, I guess. He’s chirping from his seat. But I’m 

sure there are others across Saskatchewan that have concerns 

and would like to be able to voice opinions on the changes or 

the Act as it’s being proposed. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at this point in time I would adjourn debate on 

Bill No. 167. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow that debate 

on Bill No. 167 now be adjourned. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 



7126 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2011 

Bill No. 168 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability 

Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

to move second reading of Bill No. 168, The Teachers 

Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits 

Amendment Act is a negotiable item under the provincial 

collective bargaining agreement. In October 2007, boards of 

education, the Government of Saskatchewan, and the Teachers’ 

Federation of Saskatchewan signed a collective agreement. This 

agreement expired August 31st 2010. And during recent 

collective bargaining for a new agreement, it was discovered 

that one of the required amendments to The Teachers 

Superannuation and Disability Benefits Act was overlooked. 

The changes that reflect the other superannuation provisions 

agreed to in the provincial collective bargaining agreement of 

2007 received Royal Assent on May 14th of 2008. 

 

I’m bringing forward this amendment now as a budget Bill 

because doing so will provide the correct statutory authority for 

the payment of the item contained in the estimates. This budget 

line can be found under vote 5 subvote (ED04) on page 49 of 

the Government of Saskatchewan’s 2011-12 Estimates. As this 

Bill relates to the budget line contained in the estimates for the 

government’s contributions towards the Saskatchewan teachers’ 

retirement plan and is necessary to ensure authority for the 

appropriation, it meets the requirements set out for a budget Bill 

in rule 33 of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Ministry of Education has been remitting the increased 

government contributions to the Saskatchewan teachers’ 

retirement plan as agreed to in the collective bargaining 

agreement since July of 2009. Discussions have taken place 

with the Teachers’ Federation, and they are aware government 

is moving promptly to make this amendment, and they are 

supportive. 

 

I am pleased to move that Bill No. 168, The Teachers 

Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 

be now read a second time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved second 

reading of Bill 168, The Teachers Superannuation and 

Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 Is the Assembly ready 

for the question? I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well I 

want to thank the minister for her explanation and for the 

comments that she made. Because I think most of us when we’d 

first seen this Bill we were wondering, why so late? This is 

normally done right after bargaining is completed that these 

changes are made to the Act. So, Mr. Speaker, the minister’s 

explanation was helpful. I have to tell you though when we 

were looking at it initially and wondered why are we so slow, 

we thought, we were hoping, that bargaining in this round 

wouldn’t be this slow to come to completion, that we wouldn’t 

be waiting until after the fact. But, Mr. Speaker, this actually, 

the minister did provide a good explanation, and I know we 

appreciate that. I know there are a couple of my colleagues that 

want to have a look at the legislation and be able to make 

comments on it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, often when we are in the House we can see these 

Bills, and we have a tendency to kind of shuffle them off as just 

the normal. And I guess the minister’s explanations about how 

one piece of the negotiated settlement from 2007 had been left 

out of, or maybe the adjustments had not been made, should 

make all of us in this Assembly aware that we need to be 

diligent in looking at these agreements and making sure that 

they are appropriate and proper and should be put in place. 

 

So Mr. Speaker, I know there are often times when people 

question what we do in the Assembly. Well I guess that’s a 

good way to put it; they do question it. And what’s 

accomplished? Well I think this piece of legislation, and it’s not 

the only one, Mr. Speaker, and I think every government has 

done it, and every ministry or department has done it, where we 

have missed a change or not put in the appropriate numbers and 

had to come back with some adjustments to the legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know there are other colleagues that are 

willing to or looking forward to making some comments on this 

piece of legislation at the time on The Teachers Superannuation 

and Disability Benefits Act. So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I 

would move adjournment on Bill No. 168. 

 

[15:00] 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of Bill No. 168, The Teachers 

Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2011. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 161 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 161 — The 

Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to rise and speak to Bill 161, which is primarily a Bill 

that’s attached to the whole notion of photo ID [identification] 

for the purposes of voting. And while it’s connected to the 

municipal file, Mr. Speaker, and it talks about four-year terms, 

it talks about a few other things. I want to pay particular 

attention to the whole notion of this photo ID scheme that the 

Sask Party government has come up with. This Bill certainly 

also adds that particular component to it, as the other Bill in 

voting in the provincial election. They put both those points in 

both of the Bills. And again the question that I have of the Sask 



April 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7127 

Party is: why are you putting those particular measures in? 

 

Now I look at some of the points that are raised, Mr. Speaker, 

and the comment of making the system more responsive, 

making the system more accountable, and also the whole notion 

of even the Premier saying, well there was some discrepancies. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we need to find out, beyond what the Sask 

Party interpreted as discrepancies, what other organization that 

may be non-political, say for example the Chief Electoral 

Officer, how did he feel about the voter or photo ID that was 

required to vote in provincial elections or in this case, in Bill 

161, in the municipal elections? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, again we can’t find anywhere in any 

organization from any newspaper or from any article or from 

any radio show where there’s been a huge outcry for the 

demand to have photo ID to vote. And, Mr. Speaker, we don’t 

see any of that particular evidence out there in the population, 

that people are saying yes, we need that to make the system 

more accountable. 

 

So this is purely and simply a Sask Party plot, Mr. Speaker. 

They have done this time and time again to deny people the 

right to vote. Everybody has the right to vote. Absolutely 

everybody has the right to vote, Mr. Speaker. And what 

happens, you start putting in barriers there, Mr. Speaker, you 

start putting rules to have photo ID, and what happens is people 

will become discouraged to vote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And who are some of the people that would be discouraged to 

vote in this particular . . . attached to this Bill and the other Bill 

for the provincial elections? I’ll tell you who it’s going to be, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s going to be the homeless people. It’s going to 

be the older people, Mr. Speaker. It’s going to be the immigrant 

community, Mr. Speaker, and it’s going to be the Aboriginal 

community. And it’s going to be those people that don’t have a 

licence, those people that may be moving from couch to couch 

and from home to home in terms of trying to find a place 

permanently to live. Those are the people that will be 

disempowered as a result of the Sask Party’s rule that you have 

to have photo ID. 

 

And I mentioned at the outset, Mr. Speaker, I still can’t figure 

where this is coming from. And, Mr. Speaker, we had no 

response from the Sask Party except to say, oh we want to make 

the system more accountable. We want to make it more 

reflective of what’s happening out there, to make sure there’s 

no discrepancies, as the Premier has put it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that in the northern 

communities absolutely everybody knows everybody that lives 

in a certain town. I’ll use my home community of 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, 1,700 people — 16, 1,700 people — and they 

pretty much know who’s who and who lives where and whether 

somebody moved out or somebody is gone for school and so on 

and so forth. So they have a fair idea of who is from the 

community and who is allowed to vote. 

 

Now if you have some problems, there’s always people that can 

vouch for you. And that’s one of the things I noticed in the Bill, 

that was no consideration attached to the Bill to have local 

leaders that might have the . . . might want to take the extra 

responsibility to recognize some of the people that should be 

and would be allowed to vote because they’re from that 

particular community. And, Mr. Speaker, some of the local 

leaders that could be doing some of this work — for example 

the chief, the local mayor, perhaps the local Métis Nation 

president — they have a fairly good idea as to who their 

members are in the community and whether they live in the 

community and have lived so for the three or six months that is 

identified in some of these Acts as to how long you have to live 

in that particular location to vote locally and provincially as 

well. 

 

So why aren’t they consulted? Where is the MNS [Métis Nation 

of Saskatchewan] and where is the FSIN [Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations]? Where is the mayors’ 

association, SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association]? Where do they sit in all this, Mr. Speaker? Very, 

very silent because they were never asked. They were never 

consulted. Because I’ll tell you what they would have said: this 

has got to be the most brain-dead amendment to any electoral 

process to try and get people come out and vote. 

 

And time and time again, we hear the Sask Party saying it’s 

important to get people out to vote. But, Mr. Speaker, they’re 

putting in so many rules, so many roadblocks, that at the end of 

the day a lot of people that typically don’t vote for them will 

not have the opportunity to vote, not only in provincial 

elections but municipal elections as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again, the consultations with the municipalities, with the 

MNS, with the FSIN, with many of these groups and 

organizations that represent the immigrant community or the 

elders community, none of them were consulted. Now along 

comes this rule, you’ve got to have photo ID to vote, and 

there’s going to be a lot of groups and organizations that are not 

going to be happy about that whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I also want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that in the process 

of elections, and particularly the provincial election, they have 

the enumeration process where people go from house to house 

and see who’s allowed, who lives there and who’s allowed to 

vote. And they usually hire local enumerators to do all that, so 

it’s pretty much a pretty good system. And a lot of the 

challenges of seeing who should vote and who can’t vote and 

who is not living in the community any more is met through the 

enumeration process. So these enumerators go out and they 

certainly identify who should vote and who lives in the 

community and again, as I pointed out, they know pretty much 

everyone else in the community and they’re a pretty good 

source of information. 

 

So again, you look at that process, the enumeration process, 

where they identify who’s able to vote, who’s able to 

participate, and that’s a good process. It certainly shows exactly 

the accountability that should be in these systems when you 

have local people identifying who is allowed to vote or not. 

That process has been there for a long time. Is that now saying, 

is this Bill now saying that process doesn’t work? No, Mr. 

Speaker, this Bill is putting another roadblock for people to 

vote. And that’s a shame. That’s a crying shame. 

 

And as identified to a number of organizations, and in particular 

when you look at the other parts of the Bill, whether it’s talking 

about the length of office in terms of your stay in the office, I 



7128 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2011 

think the vast majority of people seem to like that idea. Looking 

at the criminal records check, Mr. Speaker, that’s something 

that people have also said that they want to support. Some 

people think it’s a bit onerous, but they certainly want to 

continue looking at that particular standard. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the key point that I want to raise again is this 

whole notion of the silliness of requiring people to have a photo 

ID to be able to vote. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, members opposite may not know that as a 

First Nations people that may be in the process of getting their 

photo ID, it takes a fairly long time to get that done. Many 

Indian bands don’t have the capacity to arrange for photo ID. 

And I believe that on one occasion I was told that they 

sometimes only do four allocations in a given two- or 

three-week period, primarily because the process is onerous. It 

takes a long time to get things in place, and many bands only 

proceed to have four to six photo IDs issued at a time. Now 

does that prevent a lot of the Aboriginal people from voting? 

You bet it does, Mr. Speaker, you bet it does. And that’s what 

those guys are counting on, Mr. Speaker, it’s exactly what 

they’re counting on. 

 

Now the other point is that even with the Métis Nation of 

Saskatchewan, you look at how they have been going through 

to try and identify who the Métis people are. That is also an 

onerous process, Mr. Speaker. They put a lot of money into 

identifying the Métis community and there is tos-and-fros in 

terms of who should qualify, what’s the definition of Métis, and 

the list kind of goes on and on as to how difficult it is to 

identify who’s a Métis. So right there again they’re having that 

particular challenge. Now because they have that challenge, 

they can’t issue photo ID. Now is that going to prevent a lot of 

people from voting in the Métis community? The answer is, 

you bet it is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The immigrant community has a lot of work to try and get 

themselves established, to have a challenge with housing, to 

have a challenge with meeting some of the education needs of 

their children, if they have children. And now they want to 

participate in the democracy in Canada and once again, their 

process through Immigration Canada is fairly rigorous and they 

have certainly a lot of hoops that they have to jump through. 

They’re also impacted by the decision to have photo ID. 

 

The other fact of the matter as well, Mr. Speaker, the elderly 

people. Many of them, because of their age, they don’t get out 

much. Many of them because of their age may have lost their 

licence. Many of them because of their age may not have the 

necessary supports to go out and vote. And if you can see many 

of the older people coming out to vote and they’re told at the 

polling station, oh no, we need a photo ID; you can’t vote. 

Imagine the anger that these pioneers will have when they go to 

cast their vote and they’re denied the right to vote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I spoke a lot about some of the groups and the 

organizations that are going to be affected by that. And then I 

turn around and I ask the people, have you talked to SUMA? 

Have you talked to FSIN? Have you spoken to your elder 

support group? Have you spoken to your local MLA [Member 

of the Legislative Assembly] how bad this law is going to affect 

you? And many of them have said they did. 

And the point is, those same groups that I mentioned — FSIN, 

Métis Nation, SUMA, the northern mayors, and other 

organizations — they never brought up this concern at all. It 

wasn’t a concern by anybody. And if the Chief Electoral 

Officer wasn’t concerned about this in terms of the challenge it 

would create . . . He wasn’t happy with that challenge, but he 

looked at it to the point saying, well it was their problems. Well 

the Chief Electoral Officer didn’t think there was problems, but 

all of a sudden the Sask Party in their way to kill democracy 

said, no, no, we’ll put in this law. We’ll put in this rule. And all 

those groups and organizations that I’ve identified, whether it’s 

a municipal election that’s designed in Bill 161 or the 

provincial election, that’s all meant to deter people from voting. 

And that’s a shame, Mr. Speaker. That is an absolute shame. 

 

And I’ll point out that to people that are listening, that when we 

asked what is the Sask Party going to do to help mitigate that 

problem by helping people get the proper ID, to making sure 

the enumeration process is strengthened so that there isn’t that 

kind of abuse that they’ve made up, Mr. Speaker, there is no 

response. They have no desire to try and rectify the problem or 

mitigate the potential for people being turned away at the 

polling stations. They have no answer to that. 

 

So if they don’t have an answer to trying to strengthen the 

system as some of their members have alluded to in earlier 

comments, then why did they put the rule in to begin with? 

Generally you put a rule in to try and make sure that things are 

followed and that things are proper. And everybody has rules; I 

appreciate that. But the fact of the matter is, is that if you have 

rules, you know that there’s certain areas that are weak, you 

should also try and mitigate those areas that are weak with 

proper supports, a good system where you don’t disenfranchise 

voters. And the Sask Party didn’t do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So not only are they denying people the right to vote in the 

municipal elections, as it’s defined in 161, but also the 

provincial elections. And not only did they not allow them to 

vote, they’re not going to help them try and get the right 

identification to make sure that this is, this is not a problem for 

many people that may want to come out to cast their ballot. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, again I go back to my earlier comment: who 

asked for this rule for photo ID? Which organization, which 

civil liberties group, which accountability group, any group 

besides the Sask Party? You tell me anyone, any group that 

asked for this, Mr. Speaker. I challenge every single one of 

those members across the way, including the Premier, show me 

one group that asked for this photo ID. Show me one letter of 

support from any organization that I’ve spoken about earlier 

today, one letter saying it’s a good idea. And, Mr. Speaker, they 

will not provide it because nobody supported it. This is one of 

their little brain trust to try and deny many organizations and 

people throughout the land the right to vote. 

 

And the right to vote and the right to participate in a democracy 

was granted to us by the pioneers, was granted to us by our 

veterans, was granted to us by many people that worked years 

before to try and build up this country and afford us freedom. 

And yet you have this party saying, well we are now a 

government and we are now taking your right to vote. We’re 

going to put more rules and more regulation, make it more 

onerous for you to come along, despite your age or your 



April 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7129 

immigrant status or your Aboriginal status, that despite all that 

problem, we kind of like you guys. But you’re not allowed to 

vote yet unless you get photo ID. So the groups say, well can 

we get some help to get the proper ID in place? Oh no, that’s 

your responsibility. That’s your responsibility. 

 

[15:15] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the amazing, the most amazing thing is 

they’re ignoring that particular aspect as well. Now what I tell 

the people out in Saskatchewan land right now that are listening 

is, number one, don’t let them deny you that vote. Do the 

necessary work to get your ID in place. Work closely with the 

enumerators, Mr. Speaker. If you have trouble, get a hold of 

your MLA. And if it’s their MLA, voice your displeasure and 

say, I want your help to get me that photo ID, and I’m not 

paying you; I don’t have the money for it. 

 

If you’re a senior citizen living on fixed income, you don’t have 

that extra 20 or 30 bucks to get your photo ID. If you’re a Métis 

nation, a Métis person living in the North, and you don’t have 

the resources to get your photo ID, then you should get that 

support. If you’re a First Nations living in southwestern 

Saskatchewan, you don’t have the resources to get your photo 

ID in time, you should be able to phone somebody and say, I 

need help getting that photo ID. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they will not do that because they don’t want 

some of these organizations and people to vote anyway. That’s 

the whole objective here. This photo ID, this whole scenario, 

like I said, this brain-dead plan that the Sask Party has to deny 

people the right to vote, is absolutely ludicrous. And it’s an 

affront to democracy, and the people of Saskatchewan can see 

right through this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what’s kind of worrisome, Mr. Speaker, is that the last 

election when I looked at some of the people that were speaking 

about this election in general and all throughout the process, I 

never heard once on the radio or on TV that there’s 

irregularities, Mr. Speaker. And only that party across the way 

that won the election, won more seats than the NDP, after they 

won the election, they said, well there’s some irregularities. 

Now I’m sitting there saying, well you guys won and how is the 

irregularities that you’ve identified a problem for you? 

Shouldn’t you not say anything if there’s such a major 

problem? You know, you shouldn’t say anything because you 

won. But they said it anyway, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s the confusing part about the right wingers is they 

claim a lot of credit for things that they don’t do. But they’re 

confusing the people because they’re confusing to themselves. 

So if you won the election but there’s some irregularities, then 

you had no way to support people to fix it, nobody’s asking you 

to put in any rules or any process in place. You do it anyway. 

Again it confuses people saying, what’s all this about? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot to say about this particular Bill, 

a lot to say about it. And the biggest thing is that I’ve told a lot 

of folks wherever I go, and I mention the Sask Party and I 

mention their leader. I mention their Justice minister, and I tell 

people, let those names burn in your mind as the people that 

denied you the right to vote by putting in extra rules such as 

photo ID which they know many of you don’t have. They’re 

going to keep on doing that. They’re going to keep on putting 

the roadblocks in front of you. But it’s important to blow them 

roadblocks off your way and tell people, we’re going to be here 

to vote. 

 

Participate in the enumeration process. Work closely with your 

enumerator. Contact your MLA. Contact your MP [Member of 

Parliament]. Contact your mayor. Contact your reeve and say, 

look, I don’t have photo ID. Is there any way I can get some 

help to get photo ID? Because I want to go vote, because I’m 

being denied the right to vote by that Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to certainly commend the northern 

mayors and the northern leaders who have also said in many 

ways, shapes and forms, that they don’t like this notion of 

photo ID. And one of the examples I’ll give you is that . . . It’s 

kind of a really awkward, awkward situation. And I want to 

explain to the Assembly my own experience when I tried to 

vote in a Métis election a number of years ago. 

 

And I’ve always been a very proud Métis, Mr. Speaker. I have 

many First Nations family members. They’re also proud of 

their heritage. But I’m proud of my Métis heritage. And my 

wife is also Métis and my children are Métis. So five of us go 

to vote at the Métis election in Ile-a-la-Crosse, and we present 

our Métis cards. And they know who we are. They know we’re 

Métis. And we voted. And at the time the ballot box in 

Ile-a-la-Crosse was discounted in a Métis election saying, no 

we can’t have this ballot box. The votes in that ballot box can’t 

count. And the reason why they said the ballots couldn’t be 

counted is because there’s 10 people that should not have voted, 

that voted that day. And of those 10, Mr. Speaker, five of them 

were me and my wife and my three girls. 

 

And now who had the authority and who had the right to deny 

those particular, I’m not sure about the other five, but our 

family’s right to vote? Somewhere down the road some person 

said this is not right. The ballot box doesn’t count, so that the 

results are out. And what happened was the candidate that we 

were voting for ended up losing, and he lost because that ballot 

box was not counted. Now that’s exactly what I think is going 

to happen with these guys. That’s exactly what they want to do 

in many places. 

 

As you know, we look at the apartments that are in many of 

those communities, and in those apartments are Aboriginal 

people and immigrant communities and elders and many others 

live in those apartments. Well they move around a lot, Mr. 

Speaker. They move around a lot. And now if they want to 

come and vote and you go to their apartment block and say, 

well how long have you been here? I’ve been here three 

months. I want to vote and I want to do this. Do you have photo 

ID? No, we don’t. Well I’m sorry, you can’t vote. That is 

intended to discourage democracy. 

 

And I told a lot of my people, remember those names, in 

particular the minister that first introduced this thing, the 

member from Meadow Lake, and the Minister of Justice that 

supported that notion, Mr. Speaker. Those two names are going 

to live in infamy for many of the Aboriginal communities, Mr. 

Speaker. Because they done this deliberately, Mr. Speaker. 

They done this deliberately to deny many of those groups that 



7130 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2011 

right to vote. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, why? Why? Who asked for this and why 

would they do that? Well, Mr. Speaker, we have the answers 

why. Because they don’t want these people to vote. Because 

these people will not vote the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s exactly why they’re putting forward those 

kind of rules and regulations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now if you want to talk about irregularities, Mr. Speaker, you 

want to talk about irregularities, let me do this analogy. When 

the party that’s supposed to be promoting democracy, as they 

like to call themselves . . . We know how they formed their 

party, Mr. Speaker — in the dead of night. In the dead of night 

when there’s nobody around, four of the Liberals and four of 

the Conservatives got together and they formed this new 

Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker — in the dead of night. 

Nobody was around. 

 

In the dead of night they sat there, said let’s get this process 

going. We will form this new party. We’re going to give up on 

our old parties. We’re going to let them die a slow death, and 

then we’ll form this new party. And we’ll take taxpayers’ 

money. We’ll take taxpayers’ money to get this new party 

going. And furthermore, we will make sure we deny the other 

party that we come from the right to organize and the right to 

put forward candidates by holding back the PC [Progressive 

Conservative] trust fund. We’ll put that baby in hibernation. 

That was the party right across the way, Mr. Speaker. They 

done that. 

 

And it’s one thing to leave a party and join another, Mr. 

Speaker, but it’s another thing to circumvent the electoral 

process by killing a party by putting their PC trust fund into 

hibernation, not letting anybody touch it. It’s one thing to lead; 

it’s another thing to sabotage. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that issue is going to be coming up and it’s 

going to be coming up time and time again. And I go back to 

my earlier point — if you want to promote democracy, you sure 

aren’t practising it, Mr. Speaker. And this whole notion of 

having photo ID is one stop, and the second thing is, certainly is 

in the dead of night creating your Saskatchewan Party caucus 

using taxpayers’ funds to operate your offices and denying the 

PC trust fund, the access to the PC trust fund by many of the 

Conservatives. 

 

So if you want to give up on your old party, go right ahead. But 

don’t try and stop them from accessing their money. And that’s 

what you guys did. So this whole notion of, oh this is good for 

the system . . . We know based on your experience that nothing 

in democracy’s good for you, and that’s why you keep putting 

up all these road blocks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now again I go back to my earlier point — if they’re serious 

about helping a lot of the people that we’re talking about, we’re 

talking to in relation to the photo ID, then, Mr. Speaker, they 

should put measures in place to help them out. And there’s 

nothing in this Bill that identifies that — nothing in this Bill. 

And as they hit the campaign trail, they will know from a lot of 

people this photo ID was somebody’s idea back there to stifle 

democracy. 

 

And when you stifle democracy, then guess what? That doesn’t 

hurt them. It hurts a lot of the groups that they’re trying to 

stifle. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to reach out to those 

groups. We’re going to reach out to the immigrant community. 

We’re going to reach out to the Aboriginal community. We’re 

going to reach out to the elder constituency. We’re going to 

reach out to many of the groups and organizations that may not 

have a photo ID and saying, come on board. Let’s send these 

guys a message. Let’s get up and fight and say, never again will 

we allow somebody to stop our right to vote. 

 

The photo idea, the whole photo ID concept in this Bill and the 

provincial Bill, to amend it to have that photo ID requirement to 

vote, is asinine. It is absolutely ludicrous and it hurts 

democracy, Mr. Speaker. It hurts democracy. And I’ll always 

say, Mr. Speaker, as we leave this Assembly in our due time, 

that the names of that leader, of that Justice minister, and the 

minister that introduced it, Mr. Speaker, are going to live in 

infamy with a lot of groups and organizations, Mr. Speaker. 

Their names will live in infamy. 

 

And as long as we have breath in this life, I’m going to tell the 

people from where I’m from, those are the ones that were the 

architects, were the architects of this whole concept of stopping 

people from voting if they don’t have photo ID, Mr. Speaker. 

They have an enumeration process. They have all kinds of 

options to make sure there’s no voter fraud. Nobody asked for 

it. The Chief Electoral Officer said it’s great. And, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s important to know that the system from the Chief Electoral 

Officer didn’t identify any major discrepancy. These guys made 

it up to stop people from voting, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why 

it’s important that, as an MLA from northern areas and many 

MLAs from my caucus, they’re hearing this time and time 

again. They’re hearing this time and time again — why did we 

trust these guys? Because it’s the same old same old, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I want to say in my closing comments that I’m telling the 

people of the North, the people of the South or the cities or 

rural Saskatchewan to not, not stop the effort to go and vote. Go 

to the polling stations. All you guys that may not have photo 

ID, go to the polling stations and say, I want to vote. I want to 

vote. And see how many of you are denied. See how many of 

you are denied. Don’t stop. Go there and say, I want to vote. I 

have a right to vote. I live here. I want to vote. You go there 

and you say, I want to vote, and you say that as loud as you can. 

 

Well I’m sorry, you don’t have photo ID. Stand there and say 

you want to vote. Don’t give up. Stand there and say you want 

to vote. And when you vote and when you argue and when you 

stand there and say you want to vote, the last, last people that 

you want to vote for is the Saskatchewan Party. That’s the last 

group that you want to vote for, Mr. Speaker. Because they’re 

the ones that are trying to stop you to begin with. 

 

So all you people out there that are homeless, all you people 

that may not have a fixed address, all the Aboriginal 

communities that may not have photo ID, the immigrant 

communities, the elders — go to your polling stations and see if 

they can stop you from voting. See if they can stop you from 

voting. Test the system, Mr. Speaker. Because you have a right 

to vote, and no silly rule that’s made up to help them politically 

is going to stop the people’s right to vote and their demand to 



April 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7131 

vote. So on election day, go out and vote, and don’t vote for 

those guys, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Don’t vote for those guys. Because it’s exactly what they want 

to do. They want to manipulate the process. And those are the 

same guys, Mr. Speaker, same guys that in the dead of night set 

up the Saskatchewan Party, in the dead of night set up the 

Saskatchewan Party. And they talk about democracy and that, 

Mr. Speaker, is hypocritical. It’s absolutely. And I tell the 

people of the province, once again, if you don’t have photo ID, 

go and vote anyway. Go and vote. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the member from P.A. [Prince Albert] asked 

me if I was a Liberal once. And the answer is yes. But what I 

didn’t do after I left the Liberals, Mr. Speaker, I didn’t sabotage 

the party I left. I didn’t sabotage the party I left. I didn’t stop 

them from accessing any of their members, Mr. Speaker. Those 

guys done that, Mr. Speaker. That’s exactly what they’ve done. 

They stopped them from accessing the PC trust fund. That’s 

exactly what you did. So, Mr. Speaker, if you want to call a 

spade a spade, I’m ready to rock and roll. I’m ready to rock and 

roll, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the point I’ve made to all the voters who look at the 

Saskatchewan Party and their hypocritical stance on trying to 

stop people from voting, go to the polling stations and vote. If 

you don’t have photo ID, it don’t matter. Show up and vote, 

and see them deny you the right to vote, Mr. Speaker. Test the 

system. See if they deny you the right to vote because they have 

no right, Mr. Speaker. They have no right to deny anybody the 

right to vote. 

 

[15:30] 

 

The only people that have the . . . that can deny the people the 

right to vote, Mr. Speaker, is probably the veterans that served 

our country, and they won’t do that — too much sacrifice to 

promote democracy and freedom that we enjoy. But these guys 

come along, and they want to fix that system to their political 

advantage. And I say shame on you. I say shame on you. Shame 

on you, and I say shame on you again. 

 

That’s why, Mr. Speaker, we will always stand opposed to 

anything these guys are trying to do to fix the democratic 

system. The fix is in for them. It’s not on for accountability or 

transparency or fairness or freedom, Mr. Speaker. The fix is for 

them. 

 

So all those that don’t have photo ID, show up and vote and 

say, I’m not following your rules. I’ve got a right to vote. I’m 

going to vote. And the reason why I’m not going to follow your 

rules is because you guys didn’t follow the rules when you set 

up the Saskatchewan Party in the dead of night. Nobody held 

you to account on the democratic principles that you had that 

night. Nobody challenged you guys. And then four of you took 

taxpayers’ money instead of the Saskatchewan Party caucus. 

And all of a sudden, that’s it. It’s done. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if they’re not going to follow the rule and the 

democratic rules in any way, shape, or form, why should the 

people follow their silly notion of having photo ID at these 

polling booths in these polling stations? So today I tell them, go 

and vote. And I dare the Saskatchewan Party to stop them. 

Mr. Speaker, I adjourn debate on Bill 161. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 161. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 162 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hickie that Bill No. 162 — The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. One of 

the fundamental rights of citizenship in this country we call 

Canada is the right to exercise your vote. Mr. Speaker, if you 

look at what’s happening across the globe today, there are 

people — particularly in northern Africa, the Middle East — 

that are protesting in the streets of their country at great risk to 

themselves to ensure that they have a democratic government. 

They want the right to vote. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we just witnessed a few weeks ago millions 

of people in Egypt for the first time lining up to change their 

constitution to exercise their right to vote, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

fundamental tenet of a democratic society that we have the right 

to vote as citizens in our country, in our province, and at our 

municipal and school board level. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 162 is An Act to amend The Local 

Government Election Act. And when I listen carefully to what 

the Minister of Municipal Government had to say, he informed 

the House that after extensive consultations with the 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association that we were 

going to go to four-year terms for municipal councillors and 

mayors. Mr. Speaker, that request came from municipal 

councillors and mayors from across the province, and hence we 

see this contained in the legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not aware that there was a great surge of 

requests to change the way we as citizens vote in municipal 

elections, let alone provincial elections. I’m not aware of that. 

I’ve not heard people complaining. And I have to say I have 

been, sat as a scrutineer. I’ve sat as someone in the vote, you 

know, where people came in to vote, long before I ever became 

a member of the legislature. And people went and they voted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is quite different. What the government is 

proposing is that people will have to have a piece of photo 

identification or something else — it’s up to the municipalities 

— to vote. Mr. Speaker, day after day, I think most members of 

the legislature who represent urban areas meet constituents that 

do not have photo identification. They don’t have a driver’s 

licence. They don’t have their SIN card or their social insurance 

number. Day after day, we have people that come to our offices 

who don’t have a birth certificate. They have nothing really to 



7132 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2011 

inform the public who they are other than they might have a 

relative with them. 

 

I’m thinking of a guy that just came to my office last fall who 

came with his 83-year-old mother. He’s HIV [human 

immunodeficiency virus] positive. He was looking to get into 

some form of housing, of which there is nothing that he could 

get into. And he had nothing, Mr. Speaker. He had no 

identification. He did have his mother that could attest to the 

fact that he was her 52-year-old son. She could attest to the fact 

that she’d given birth to him, but he had no identification. And 

yet if he wanted to exercise his right as a citizen in this country, 

to go into a provincial polling booth or go into a municipal 

polling booth or to go to a school board polling booth, he could 

not have his mother attest to the fact, this is my son. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is simply wrong. This is simply wrong 

because there are many, many, many people that are not the 

comfortable, they are not the privileged, they are not the 

well-to-do. And yet what we’re saying to them is that you do 

not have the right to exercise your right as a citizen because you 

don’t have the necessary photo ID or whatever. And I think 

that’s wrong, Mr. Speaker. It’s not only wrong in terms of this 

Bill 162, but it’s wrong in terms of The Elections Act that this 

government opposite has foisted upon us. 

 

Now what are we coming to? What are we coming to? Are we 

coming to a society that you have to be well-heeled, the 

privileged, the comfortable, the upper crust in order to exercise 

what really is a fundamental right of citizenship, the right to 

vote? I don’t think so, Mr. Speaker. And so I would say to the 

members opposite that there are many, many citizens, many 

citizens, even young people. Young people lose their 

identification. They don’t necessarily have the money to go and 

get their birth certificate. Or I think now you have to send in 

money to get your social insurance number replaced, your 

driver’s licence replaced. I mean it is a costly thing if your 

identification is lost or stolen. It is costly. 

 

And when you’re trying to balance — you know, do I have 

money for rent, do I have money for food? — sort of the basic 

necessities of life, you don’t necessarily have the money to get 

your birth certificate or your driver’s licence or your social 

insurance number. And, Mr. Speaker, you know there have 

been times when I have gone online and put in my own credit 

card number to assist people to get some form of identification 

in order that they could try and rent a home because they 

simply didn’t have any identification. They might have their 

parent there or a relative there or a friend, but they didn’t have 

the money, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so I would say to the government opposite that really what 

this legislation does is that it impinges upon a person’s right of 

citizenship, the right to vote. And, Mr. Speaker, if we want to, I 

can understand that the government may want to assure that 

there is no voter corruption or whatever. But I think if you have 

someone along with you to identify you, to attest to your 

character — we do that at times when people are applying for a 

passport — I think that that should be good enough, Mr. 

Speaker, someone to say they know you. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is very problematic. We know that people 

come and go. They might move from one area of the province 

to another area of province. I’m thinking of students who move 

into urban centres in the fall to attend school. Both our 

municipal and provincial elections are in the fall. They may not 

have all of their . . . They may not have something to show that 

they’re actually residing at a particular address, and we’re 

saying to them that you don’t have the right to vote unless you 

can provide some sort of identification. 

 

We also know, Mr. Speaker, that there are literally thousands of 

people that are homeless in this province, yet they’re couch 

surfing or staying with relatives. We know that there are places 

in our cities and in our rural areas, on First Nations reserves, 

where there are, you know, 10, 15 people living in places. We 

know that there are newcomers in Saskatchewan who may . . . 

or who have citizenship, but they’re sort of bunking in together 

in order to reduce the costs of living. And so we have homes 

where traditionally we may have had five or six people living in 

those homes; we now have 10 to 15 to 20 people living in those 

homes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you look at the history of this government — 

and we need to look at the history since they were in elected in 

November of 2007 — this is a government that vetoed the 

selection of a bipartisan committee for the Chief Electoral 

Officer in the province, an independent member, an 

independent officer of the legislature. This is a government that 

has prevented another political party of accessing its own funds 

in order that that political party, the Conservative Party of 

Saskatchewan could compete on a level playing field. They’ve 

made it harder for people to exercise their democratic right to 

free speech and hold protests because of changes . . . What was 

it? Bill 43.  

 

This is a government that is trying to harmonize the rules with 

the federal government when it comes to voter identification. 

And we know that that legislation is being challenged in the 

Supreme Court of British Columbia by a coalition of 

organizations including seniors, renters, and people who are 

homeless. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government also claims that people will not be 

disenfranchised by pointing to measures included in the 

legislation to give people alternatives. But all of us in the 

Assembly have seen instances where a deputy returning officer 

can be overzealous in their interpretation of the rules. And you 

might have campaign managers running around, trying to 

contact Regina on voting day in order to clarify the rules with 

the Chief Electoral Officer and then have the Chief Electoral 

Officer respond to the returning officer. So, Mr. Speaker, this is 

problematic. 

 

We also know that many renters at the moment are having to 

change places because of escalating rent increases. They can’t 

afford the rents that are being charged by some landlords in the 

province of Saskatchewan. It’s difficult maybe to prove that I 

live in this place when I used to live here a month or two ago. 

And so we see a lot of recycling going through various rental 

facilities in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We also know that there’s lots of senior citizens that no longer 

drive, so they don’t have a photo ID, a driver’s licence. And of 

course as I said earlier, we know of people who are couch 

surfing or people who are otherwise homeless . . . [inaudible 



April 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7133 

interjection] . . . and it’s not likely they will have 

documentation that includes their current address. 

 

Now the member opposite says I’m defeating myself. I say to 

the member opposite that as a right of citizenship in this 

country, each of us has the right to vote. And it shouldn’t be 

dependent upon providing documentation that I am who I am 

because I may not have that documentation. I may not be able 

to afford to get that documentation. It could be dependent upon 

another citizen vouching for you, Mr. Speaker. And I think that 

would be a fairer approach to this issue of photo identification 

when it comes to voting. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are aspects of this legislation that I have 

no difficulty with. Four-year terms for mayors and councillors, 

I have no difficulty with. I do have difficulty, grave difficulty, 

with what I consider to be a fundamental democratic right of 

citizenship, and that is the right to vote. And in this case it’s my 

view, it’s my perspective that this particular piece of legislation, 

along with changes to The Election Act, take away certain 

individuals who are citizens in this country, it takes away their 

right to exercise a right of citizenship. And with that, Mr. 

Speaker, I would adjourn the debate. 

 

[15:45] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 162, The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 160 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 160 — The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

weigh in on debate here. I’m certainly not pleased with this Bill 

being before us, Mr. Speaker, but I weigh in on debate on Bill 

No. 160 with great importance and with great passion, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It is fair to say that the Bill we see before us is a massive step 

backwards in human rights within Saskatchewan and a 

shameful piece of legislation that should not be before us, that 

should be withdrawn, and a Bill that has brought a very 

negative spotlight to our province — a province that has a 

proud record as it relates to human rights, putting forward as a 

province a Bill of Rights in 1947, a proud feat for this province 

to hold up to the rest of our nation and to the world. Of course, 

that was brought forward by Tommy Douglas within their first 

term, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we see is that in many ways, Saskatchewan has been a 

leader as it relates to human rights, Mr. Speaker, for many 

years. And what we see under this Sask Party government is a 

continued attack on human rights. Bill 160, the Bill before us 

here today as a specific example, Mr. Speaker, a Bill that is all 

about driving voices and concerns and complaints to the 

backroom, Mr. Speaker, for backroom deals instead of dealing 

with those complaints in the way that they should, Mr. Speaker, 

and giving voice to victims, Mr. Speaker, giving voice to social 

ills within our society and bringing change, Mr. Speaker, for the 

betterment of all Saskatchewan people. 

 

And to see a step away from that and to see a Bill that in fact is 

taking us in the other direction on this front is disappointing. 

It’s fair to say that we’ve been concerned on many fronts with 

this Sask Party government, with the sort of similar attacks on 

either human rights or the voice of the marginalized, Mr. 

Speaker, and voices that often aren’t heard otherwise. 

 

And we see it here in Regina, Mr. Speaker, where this 

government has eliminated the Welfare Rights Centre, Mr. 

Speaker, and removed that voice for individuals who don’t have 

voice otherwise, Mr. Speaker. And what they’ve done is 

they’ve taken a mechanism that was external to government, 

independent from government, and they’ve brought it inside of 

government, Mr. Speaker, keeping those voices internal to 

government and not where they should be, voices that allow the 

public to understand the true circumstances of their province, 

the harsh reality sometimes, Mr. Speaker, that we face, the 

social ills that exist and allow us to commit ourselves to 

bettering our self and our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we see this sort of activity on many fronts. We’ve seen it in 

the legislation that’s before us right now by the Sask Party as 

well that puts restrictions on the ability to vote and will have a 

direct impact on the ability for many young people or seniors or 

otherwise, First Nations and Métis people to come out to the 

polls, Mr. Speaker. And this is moving in the wrong direction 

and shameful, Mr. Speaker, for a province that should be world 

leaders, should be leaders as a jurisdiction, and in fact have 

been leaders at different points and time in our history, Mr. 

Speaker, something we should be proud of. 

 

We witness nations around the world that aren’t free and 

democratic, Mr. Speaker. We witness the turmoil, the crisis that 

is occurring in many of those nations as we speak here today, 

Mr. Speaker, fighting for the sort of democratic rights, the sort 

of human rights that we sometimes take for granted here in 

Saskatchewan but certainly have fought for it and had 

leadership here in this province, Mr. Speaker. When we see that 

going on in other nations where individuals are in 

circumstances of violence and great turmoil, in many cases 

dying for the types of laws and protections that we have as a 

province and a nation, it’s a shame that where we are in our 

protected circumstance here in Saskatchewan, we’re moving 

the wrong direction, that we’re moving backwards on these 

fronts, removing the voice of marginalized, Mr. Speaker, 

reducing the number of the individuals that will come out to 

vote and participate in their democracy and have their say. 

 

And we see other pieces of legislation this government’s 

brought forward that have similar impacts, that are a step 

backwards — specifically Bill 43, Mr. Speaker, that was put 

forward that took away the ability for groups and for civil 



7134 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2011 

society to speak out, to rally, to organize, and to have their say. 

 

And it’s a sad day in this province, Mr. Minister, when we have 

all these concerted efforts of this right wing Sask Party 

government, Mr. Speaker, to eliminate these important voices. 

Whether they be the victims of harassment, as may be the case 

through human rights legislation, or through abuses, Mr. 

Speaker, the removal of those voices, Mr. Speaker, that should 

be heard by the public and that should allow us as 

policy-makers and the public to resolve ourselves to bettering 

our circumstance, Mr. Speaker. A silencing of those voices that 

are critical for us to be able to analyze our well-being, analyze 

our faults and strive to a better place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Removing those voices from a human rights perspective, Mr. 

Speaker, is something this government’s been deliberate with, 

something that’s disappointing, something that’s wrong, 

something that’s not fair, and something that we will fight, Mr. 

Speaker. Something that we should fight, Mr. Speaker. When I 

say we, certainly I speak of we, as in the opposition New 

Democrats. But I think I speak in a more global we on that as 

well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because the more individuals that I sit down with and speak 

about Bill 160 with, Mr. Speaker, and the elimination of human 

rights and the backwards movement on this front, and the fact 

that Amnesty International has a spotlight on our province as a 

jurisdiction that’s going in the wrong direction and has stated 

specifically that this Bill needs to be repealed, Mr. Speaker, 

before it’s passed, removed before it’s passed, Mr. Speaker, is a 

sad day for our province. A province that has had a lot of pride, 

Mr. Speaker, in being world leaders on many perspectives. 

 

Now we’re leading in a different direction, Mr. Speaker, and I 

guess the . . . I guess that’s how things work. You elect a right 

wing government, Mr. Speaker, and they grab that wheel and 

they certainly grab legislation such as this, and they’ve yanked 

us to a hard right, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s almost inconceivable to most individuals when we sit down 

and work through these pieces, why this government would 

choose to silence the voice of victims, Mr. Speaker. Why they 

would choose to drive underground matters and remove 

tribunals and mechanisms that should be availed to 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, and to reduce that sort of 

protection that Saskatchewan people should be afforded. 

 

So we see it with this piece of legislation. We see it with the 

reduction of . . . the restrictions on voting, Mr. Speaker, a 

deliberate attempt to keep many individuals away from the 

polls. A piece of legislation that will affect First Nations and 

Métis people in a significant way, many young people, Mr. 

Speaker, who we should be enabling to take lead roles in our 

participatory democracy, Mr. Speaker, and seniors, Mr. 

Speaker, who have served our province and have every right to 

cast their ballot. And a shame, Mr. Speaker, that we’re stepping 

in these directions when we look at the global conflict in other 

jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, in the circumstance of what 

individuals are up against and fighting for a better place, for 

good human rights laws, Mr. Speaker. And then here we are in 

Saskatchewan moving backwards in 2011. It’s disappointing. 

 

When we look at this Bill specifically, it’s worthy to note that 

individuals from around the globe are weighing in on this Bill, 

critiquing the fact that it’s been put forward, challenging this 

government to remove this Bill from consideration, Mr. 

Speaker. Yet this government forges ahead. We have Alex 

Neve with Amnesty International who is Secretary General, Mr. 

Speaker, who has weighed in both in speaking — he’s come 

into Saskatchewan and spoke for the purpose of challenging 

and fighting against this Bill, Mr. Speaker — but he’s also 

written, Mr. Speaker, submissions that have been published in 

our newspapers. 

 

Now what we need to understand is that Amnesty International 

is not a political organization in the sense that it weighs in to 

matters of jurisdiction in this way, in any sort of a focused way. 

This is a rare circumstance where we have Amnesty 

International, a Nobel Peace Prize winning international 

organization, putting a spotlight on Saskatchewan in a negative 

way and saying, get rid of this Bill; it’s wrong. It’s wrong for 

Saskatchewan and it’s wrong for the position that 

Saskatchewan’s held within North America and within the 

world as a place that’s led on areas of social justice and human 

rights, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the headlines that was in The StarPhoenix just a little 

while ago from an article that was put forward by a law 

professor from the University of Saskatchewan by the name of 

Mr. Ken Norman, the headline speaks for itself. This is from 

The StarPhoenix. It says, “Sask out of step on human rights 

process,” Mr. Speaker, stating that we’re out of step, that it’s 

the wrong direction. And if I move through the article which 

puts forward a very strong case against this legislation and the 

concerns that we should be aware of, it just finishes in closing 

here: “None of the last five full external reviews of human 

rights processes in Canada have seen any merit in abandoning 

human rights tribunal systems in favour of high courts.” 

 

So of the last five full external reviews of human rights 

processes, not a single one of those reviews, Mr. Speaker, has 

called for this sort of a process, to remove tribunals and drive 

these to the high courts, in this case the Court of Queen’s 

Bench, Mr. Speaker. Strong opposition to this Bill within the 

legal community, within human rights activism community, 

Mr. Speaker, as well, and for good reason. In fact we should be 

ashamed that this Bill’s been put forward by the Sask Party. 

 

Now part of the challenges with this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is how 

it’s been marketed. This Bill very much has been marketed to 

date as a Bill that has to do with what’s been described as four 

pillars of human rights, Mr. Speaker, approaches that are 

something that we can certainly support, and reflect best 

practice. But the fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker, is that this 

piece of legislation has nothing to do with those four pillars, 

Mr. Speaker. This government has marketed this piece of 

legislation in a very misleading fashion by focusing in on these 

four pillars, Mr. Speaker. And in fact these four pillars are in 

many ways in the current code as it exists, already included, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And just one example of that would be the education aspect, 

Mr. Speaker, that the government as proponent of this 

legislation, as mover of this legislation, has focused in on. But, 

Mr. Speaker, what we need to recognize on education is that 

education is already fully enabled and fully provided for within 



April 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7135 

the code as it exists. And what we should recognize further on 

that is that, as it relates to education, the word is not even 

utilized in the Act before us here today and the Bill before us 

here today, Mr. Speaker. So it’s a real red herring, Mr. Speaker, 

to pretend that this is about education. It’s not even included in 

there. To pretend it’s about the four pillars, well that’s already 

included in legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s a real classic misdirection, waving this four pillars 

document and approach in one hand while the other hand’s 

crafting a Bill, Mr. Speaker, that brings to an end or certainly 

controls, Mr. Speaker, what sort of cases can go to court. And 

it’s not in the best interests of Saskatchewan people, and it’s 

something that we should oppose strongly, when a right wing 

government like this Sask Party comes in and starts taking 

away human rights in this sort of a fashion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Getting rid of the tribunals to move them to the Court of 

Queen’s Bench is something that we oppose, and with a focus 

in on what is being called directed mediation, Mr. Speaker, and 

called by others coercive mediation. And that’s a course of 

mediation, I believe is the term, that Alex Neve of Amnesty 

International, Nobel Peace Prize winning organization, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s brought a lot of good to our world that at times 

can be troubled, Mr. Speaker . . . and now focusing in on this 

piece of legislation referring to it as coercive mediation. 

 

Well that goes against the very principles of mediation, Mr. 

Speaker. It goes against the very best interests of human rights 

legislation and victims in this province, Mr. Speaker, and 

certainly against the best interests of a province that should be 

resolving itself to dealing with its ills and bettering itself as a 

province. We have a circumstance where if human rights 

adjudication in this province . . . almost entirely eliminated by 

effect of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, and by impact and choice by 

this Premier, Mr. Speaker. And that’s not in our best interest. 

 

[16:00] 

 

The fact that this Bill moves in a direction to settle basically 

everything in a confidential manner, Mr. Speaker, behind 

closed doors is not in the best interest. When we’re dealing with 

individuals and circumstances where we’re talking about abuse 

and harassment not being made public, where are we as 

policy-makers to be resolving ourselves with decisions and 

resources, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And sometimes court decisions are simply required, Mr. 

Speaker, to improve a society, to change a society, Mr. Speaker. 

And the fact that this Bill removes the voice of victims, Mr. 

Speaker, victims of abuse, harassment, you name it, Mr. 

Speaker, egregious acts against human rights . . . and that the 

individual, the Chief Commissioner, has now the ability to 

simply dismiss those cases, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we’re very concerned about these aspects, this forcing of 

mediation with groups that, I think it’s fair to say, come in, 

when I say about the various parties that enter into mediation, 

the victim and otherwise, Mr. Speaker. These are parties 

coming in with very unequal positions, Mr. Speaker, 

inequitable positions, Mr. Speaker. And it’s simply not fair or 

appropriate to pretend that somehow mediation can work in 

such an unequal, unfair environment, Mr. Speaker. 

As I’ve spoken a little bit here today, I really want to highlight 

the fact that the impact of this Bill is to drive cases underground 

and matters underground, Mr. Speaker, to remove the 

discussion of injustices within our society and to prevent the 

discussion of social ills that may be occurring, Mr. Speaker. 

And I’m talking about abuses and harassments and disgraces, 

Mr. Speaker, that should not be tolerated and that we should be 

resolving ourself to reducing and eliminating across 

Saskatchewan, across our province, and being leaders on these 

fronts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So here we are in Saskatchewan with a right wing government 

that’s silencing the voices of those victims and fails to give 

voice to matters both of that victim but that are relevant to 

individuals across this province. 

 

What we need to recognize, Mr. Speaker, is that when we have 

an individual and a case that’s before tribunals or a complaint 

has been lodged, more than likely, Mr. Speaker, there’s many 

other cases unfortunately that are going on quietly across this 

province. And when one case gets heard and when it’s brought 

to light and it becomes part of public discourse, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s for the good of all Saskatchewan people to understand those 

circumstances, to understand contributing factors, to understand 

the role for laws, to understand the role for resources and 

planning, Mr. Speaker. And that’s removed. 

 

This gets to the fact that quite simply, Mr. Speaker, decisions 

are required sometimes from courts. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, 

those decisions drive change within a society. And they shape a 

society, Mr. Speaker, and shaping it for an improved 

circumstance, Mr. Speaker, for all Saskatchewan people and 

certainly in response to the circumstance that it’s making 

judgment on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we’re concerned, very much, about this silencing of voices 

that simply need to be heard. Mr. Speaker, I’ll be frank here. 

Those voices will sometimes be unpleasant, for the stories that 

will be told will sometimes be unpleasant. We as a province, 

when we hear some of the human rights abuses, we shouldn’t 

be proud. We wouldn’t be proud, but we should hear those 

voices. We should hear those concerns, so we can resolve 

ourselves to not let that happen again, to improve ourselves as a 

jurisdiction, and to see what we have the ability to do. 

 

And I believe that this comes down to informing and driving 

changes from a legislative perspective, but it also is well served 

within our communities, Mr. Speaker, to understand the 

egregious acts that occur, their hurt and abuse, so that we as 

communities and community leaders and individuals can take 

action and to move towards a better day, Mr. Speaker. Silencing 

these voices doesn’t assist that process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I spoke a little bit about the concerns of the granting broad 

powers of discharge to the commissioner. New powers to 

dismiss, Mr. Speaker, would be sort of the frame that I would 

share. And basically if the Chief Commissioner believes a case 

is not warranted, then that case can be discharged. And this 

goes against the very principle of mediation. And we’re dealing 

with two parties already that are in very unequal positions as 

they enter into this, Mr. Speaker. To remove this or to move in 

this direction and to give these broad, sweeping powers of 

dismissal are not appropriate. 



7136 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2011 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important for Saskatchewan 

people to understand that many cases, in fact I think it’s fair to 

say probably most cases, of human rights abuses never make it 

to tribunal. But the very fact, the very fact, that that mechanism 

is available and utilized is critical to a well-functioning 

democracy, Mr. Speaker. It’s critical to the advancement of 

human rights and critical to the advancement of well-being 

within a jurisdiction, in this case our province. 

 

By eliminating the tribunal and by way of this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s disconcerting to see that we are doing away with 

even some of the publications that are important to providing 

the kind of information that Saskatchewan people and decision 

makers need to have, Mr. Speaker, information that even if a 

case may not proceed is still very, very important to have. 

 

And I would talk about something such as the annual reports, 

Mr. Speaker, something that are being done away with in this 

province, annual reports from the tribunal. And this sort of 

annual report would give us information of the nature of the 

number of cases, Mr. Speaker, that have been heard. It would 

highlight the nature of those cases, Mr. Speaker, the nature of 

those alleged abuses, Mr. Speaker, the harassments that have 

gone on, and it would lay out information as it relates to 

resolution of those cases and the processes involved. 

 

Now that’s valuable and needed information to the public, to 

legislators, to individuals, to community leaders, and it’s 

something that it’s disappointing to see being removed. It 

provides in many ways, I guess you could say, an important 

window into human rights within our province and the state of 

play, Mr. Speaker. And removing that again simply removes 

that understanding of how we need to resolve ourselves, Mr. 

Speaker, and what we need to work towards as a jurisdiction. 

 

This government, as I’ve mentioned earlier, has pretended that 

this legislation has to do with legislation or has to do with 

education, Mr. Speaker. It’s important to note that this Bill has 

nothing to do with education. Education’s already addressed in 

the code, the Bill as it stood, the Act as it stood, Mr. Speaker, I 

should say, and that all those powers currently exist by way of 

the Act. And in fact, it is a statutory responsibility to be moving 

forward with education. And that’s the state of play before this 

legislation was brought forward — a Bill that’s been sold to the 

Saskatchewan public that it’s about education, but yet 

education’s not even mentioned in it, not named in this Bill 

once, Mr. Speaker. So Saskatchewan people have been misled 

on this matter. 

 

When it comes to the matter of proper consultation, something 

that’s vital to creating good public policy, Mr. Speaker, that 

hasn’t happened. 

 

And in fact, the shameful occurrence is that we have a minister 

and a Premier that have shrugged off all responsibility on this 

Bill. They’ve tabled it. They wrote it. They put it forward. And 

now they shrug all responsibility, Mr. Speaker. They won’t 

even provide the basic side-by-side comparison of legislations 

for the understanding for stakeholders and for Saskatchewan 

people to understand the impact and the analysis of the Bill, the 

intended consequences, and then of course for us, as legislators, 

and for the public and stakeholders, to understand all the 

unintended consequences, Mr. Speaker. In this case, both the 

intended consequences and the unintended consequences are 

unacceptable. And they’re wrong, Mr. Speaker, and they take 

us in the wrong direction. 

 

There is no way . . . There’s been contentions, Mr. Speaker, that 

the moving to courts may be cheaper. There’s no way that 

that’s possible, Mr. Speaker. Certainly they’re not cheaper. 

And, Mr. Speaker, certainly they’re not more hospitable, can be 

certain of that. 

 

And when we talk about hospitability, Mr. Speaker, of a 

process, we’re dealing with individuals that are in states of 

extreme stress. That have been victimized, trauma, sometimes 

in a circumstance where they are in sort of a hopeless and 

helpless sort of a feeling, Mr. Speaker. Certainly moving in this 

direction will bring more hopelessness, Mr. Speaker, to the plea 

of many victims. But what we need to understand is that a 

hospitable environment is in fact a consideration that should be 

not dismissed, and something that I can be certain is that 

moving to the high courts away from tribunals does not 

improve that circumstance. 

 

We see a reduction by way of this Bill for the filing of a 

complaint, Mr. Speaker, down, reduced now to one year. Why 

we would move in this direction, Mr. Speaker, is a good 

question for the government. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s the wrong 

direction to go. 

 

When we think of individuals and the circumstances they’ve 

faced as victims and the harassments and abuses and the harsh 

and ugly stories, Mr. Speaker, and the circumstances they’ve 

faced . . . The stress and trauma that they’ve dealt with, Mr. 

Speaker, are often, often impediments to them coming forward 

and telling a story that is important to be told, Mr. Speaker, 

something that’s vital to be told. Individuals that fear 

consequences or don’t understand those processes and in . . . 

often may delay sharing that story, Mr. Speaker. And what I 

fear most is that many victims never do share their stories, Mr. 

Speaker. And they need to understand the process that’s laid out 

to them is one that’s fair and just, something that isn’t the case 

with the legislation that’s put out here today. 

 

So there’s many reasons, Mr. Speaker, why I oppose this 

legislation, why the official opposition Saskatchewan New 

Democrats oppose this legislation, and why people across this 

province are speaking out and concerned by this legislation put 

forward by a right wing government, not in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people, a Bill that’s in fact has the international 

spotlight on us when I speak of Amnesty International 

weighing in on matters here in Saskatchewan. 

 

It wasn’t long ago, Mr. Speaker, that we were leaders in 

Canada, in North America, from a global perspective as it 

relates to matters of human rights, Mr. Speaker, and providing 

dignity to all. And it’s been by way of a few pieces of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, a very deliberate attack on those very 

human rights, Mr. Speaker. Bill 160 stands out very 

significantly on that. 

 

And we should be disappointed when we see Alex Neve, 

general secretary of Amnesty International, weighing in on 

matters. I’ll just share a few of the comments here. This is Alex 

Neve on March 2nd, delivered in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, 



April 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7137 

March 2nd, 2011. Alex Neve is general secretary of Amnesty 

International, Amnesty International of course an international 

human rights organization advocating for better societies, better 

conditions for people, Mr. Speaker. And very rare that Amnesty 

International would weigh in on a political matter, something 

that’s become a political matter, Mr. Speaker, a rare 

circumstance and a shameful spotlight for this province. And 

worthy to note that Amnesty International are Nobel Peace 

Prize winners, Mr. Speaker. And they’re focusing in on this 

right wing group here, Mr. Speaker, this right wing Sask Party 

Premier, and they’re taking them to task. But they’re also 

asking them to take this Bill off the table because it’s wrong for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

I’ll just quote from this presentation, comments delivered by 

Alex Neve: 

 

Human rights are the bedrock principles that guide the 

most important aspects of our existence, as individuals 

and as communities. They shape how we will live our own 

daily lives and also how we live together, in 

neighbourhoods, cities, provinces, as a nation and 

globally. They touch on so much. 

 

It goes on, Mr. Speaker. Of course this is a lengthy 

presentation. I’ll move through some of the other pieces here: 

 

They talk to me of two main concerns. First, I am told that 

the consultation was not an open-ended consultation 

seeking views about the state of human rights protection 

in the province and ideas for change to the system; out of 

which a reform proposal could have been developed. 

Rather, it was a consultation in which people were asked 

to react and respond to the proposal that had already been 

developed. Second, many have expressed concern to me 

the consultations focused mainly on the four pillars and 

gave much less attention to the more controversial 

proposal related to the future of the human rights tribunal. 

 

I’m not in a position to reach my own conclusion. I 

haven’t been involved in the consultations as I said. But I 

remain struck by the expressions of concern I have heard 

from many quarters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the words of Alex Neve, Amnesty 

International, casting great caution and concern with the 

direction of this government, Mr. Speaker, and specifically Bill 

160. 

 

[16:15] 

 

I can move on to an article authored by Alex Neve that was 

published in The StarPhoenix on March 21st, 2011. This was 

authored by Alex Neve and as well Ailsa Watkinson: 

“Saskatchewan has a proud history on human rights. Going 

back more than six decades, it led Canada on human rights 

protection.” Just think about that statement, Mr. Speaker, and 

the pride that Saskatchewan people, all Saskatchewan people, 

should feel when they hear that. I’m just going to repeat what 

was said here, “Saskatchewan has a proud history on human 

rights. Going back more than six decades, it led Canada on 

human rights protection.” 

 

This is a statement that’s being provided by an international 

organization, by Amnesty International. That’s quoting the six 

decades of leadership provided by the people of this province, 

Mr. Speaker, leadership that has served Saskatchewan well; 

leadership that has served the world well, Mr. Speaker. That 

was the context viewed of Saskatchewan. That’s changed 

significantly, Mr. Speaker, now that we have a spotlight on this 

legislation that’s been put forward, Mr. Speaker. That simply 

takes us in the wrong direction. 

 

The election of this right wing government was on some . . . 

They put forward some promises, Mr. Speaker, and on 

commitments to Saskatchewan people. I’ve gone back, Mr. 

Speaker, to look at those commitments. Not a mention in that 

platform to provide that mandate to this right wing government 

was a mention about reducing human rights legislation, to 

reduce human rights. I didn’t see that anywhere. Those were 

none of the . . . That wasn’t part of the mandate offered to this 

government. 

 

Nor was it, Mr. Speaker, to reduce the ability for people to vote 

in this province, specifically young people and First Nations 

and Métis people, seniors across this province, Mr. Speaker. 

That wasn’t part of the mandate offered by Saskatchewan 

people, wasn’t anywhere near their campaign promises, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Nowhere in those campaign promises did I see that they wanted 

to eliminate independent mechanisms that spoke on behalf of 

individuals facing poverty, Mr. Speaker, individuals who are 

marginalized and don’t have voices otherwise. Didn’t see that, 

Mr. Speaker. And nowhere in that legislation, Mr. Speaker, did 

I recognize that, as Bill 43 did, that was going to take away the 

rights of individuals to organize as a civil society, should be 

provided to speak out and have their say and to rally and to 

organize, Mr. Speaker. All acts committed by this government 

in a couple of short years by way of just a few decisions and 

pieces of legislation. None of those, Mr. Speaker, were part of 

the mandate offered to this government by the people of this 

province. They take us significantly in the wrong direction. 

 

And I put that back into context with the statement here, Mr. 

Speaker, that we should be embarrassed that this right wing 

government is taking us away from . . . This is a statement from 

Amnesty International, not a political organization, but Nobel 

Peace Prize winners, Mr. Speaker. And the statement by, 

authored by the author here Alex Neve and Ailsa Watkinson, 

specifically is that Saskatchewan has a proud history on human 

rights going back more than six decades. It led Canada on 

human rights protection. It’s disappointing, it’s wrong, it’s 

shameful. We’re moving in the opposite direction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Going to move down just a little further in that article, 

specifically: 

 

What is most worrying about Bill 160 is the intention to 

abolish the Saskatchewan Human Rights Tribunal. The 

tribunal is currently responsible for . . . [hearing] human 

rights complaints that cannot be resolved by the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission. [A model used 

by every other Canadian jurisdiction.] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we spoke just a few minutes ago here that the 



7138 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2011 

elimination of tribunals has not come as a single 

recommendation from the reviews that have occurred, full 

reviews, as pointed out by Professor Ken Norman from the 

University of Saskatchewan, a law professor, and I quote, 

“None of the last five full external reviews of human rights 

processes in Canada have seen any merit in abandoning human 

rights tribunals . . . in favour of high courts!” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, five reviews that have been conducted, none 

of them finding merit in the direction that this government has 

chosen to take. We are the only province to take this step, to 

silence those voices, Mr. Speaker. Voices that are required, as 

ugly as those stories sometimes are, Mr. Speaker — the social 

ills, the hurt, the challenge, the abuses that go on within our 

province at times, Mr. Speaker — these are circumstances that 

need to be heard and this government is silencing those voices. 

Not only should they be heard; they should bring change. We 

should be finding the ability of how do we bring that voice 

more often, Mr. Speaker. Because as I’ve shared here today, I 

believe adamantly that the number of individuals that are 

victims of egregious acts of human rights violations far exceeds 

the number of individuals that enter into a process of complaint. 

 

So when one of those complaints comes forward, it should be 

heard and dealt with in the most serious manner that it can be, 

Mr. Speaker. And sometimes courts are required to make 

decisions that shape society. And sometimes, Mr. Speaker, the 

public’s required to understand the nature of the abuses and 

hurt that’s going on within their province so that we can resolve 

ourselves to bettering ourselves as a province, to putting in laws 

of protection, to resourcing plans, and to be looking for 

leadership, Mr. Speaker, towards a circumstance where human 

rights violations are eliminated, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s a red herring, Mr. Speaker, that’s been put before us by this 

government to pretend that this is about this four pillars 

discussion and about education. Those are already in place by 

way of the current Act, Mr. Speaker. And in fact as it relates to 

those responsibilities, specifically education, as an example, it’s 

a statutory responsibility, Mr. Speaker, for a government to be 

leading towards the elimination of human rights violations, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The headline from the article in The StarPhoenix, March 21st, 

“Backward step in human rights.” This is the article that was 

authored by Alex Neve and Ailsa Watkinson, says it all. And 

why would we be taking that, Mr. Speaker, highlighting in that 

article the proud position we once had in this province, 

something that we should all be proud of, Mr. Speaker, going 

back to 1947 with the first Bill of Rights? Something that I’m 

hugely proud of as part of our provincial story, Mr. Speaker, as 

a province — part of our heritage, part of our modern history. 

And something that I’m proud of as a Saskatchewan New 

Democrat, Mr. Speaker, with the fact that it was Tommy 

Douglas in the first term of that CCF [Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation] government, Mr. Speaker, that 

brought forward that sort of change. 

 

So on many fronts, Mr. Speaker, I oppose this Bill and will 

fight this Bill, as do Saskatchewan people. Saskatchewan 

people are becoming more and more in tune with what’s going 

on. I’ve noticed that individuals are aware of a pamphlet that’s 

out here fighting for the protection of our human rights. And 

it’s highlighting, and the question on the front is “Are you 

aware of the proposed changes to The Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Code?” And no individuals that I’ve engaged in on this 

discussion, Mr. Speaker, many of them weren’t in tune with 

what was going as it relates to human rights in this province, 

and when they find out what’s being done, Mr. Speaker, they 

find it to be an egregious Act. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, and this is to be totally and entirely frank 

and honest with you, I haven’t come across a single individual 

that I’ve discussed and presented this to, Mr. Speaker, that has 

supported Bill 160 — not a single individual, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We look at basically, you know, what is proposed, where we 

are right now, and why we aren’t improving the circumstance 

that we are currently under, Mr. Speaker, in being leaders and 

continuing to be leaders as Saskatchewan, instead of proposing 

these regressive changes where tribunals are being abolished, 

where the Chief Commissioner can simply dismiss a complaint 

if he or she believes a hearing is not warranted or an individual 

no longer appeals it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we talked about already some of the 

coercive nature of the mediation that’s put forward, the unequal 

approach to that mediation, and the fact that that mediation is 

against the very principles of what mediation is all about, Mr. 

Speaker — the unequal positions that the various parties enter 

into that mediation and just showing how unfair, Mr. Speaker, 

it is to enter into that sort of a process and even attach the word 

mediation as if it’s providing some level of fairness. 

 

We fight against the fact that the filing of complaints has been 

reduced to one year, Mr. Speaker, recognizing that so many 

individuals with the heinous and egregious acts that have 

violated their human rights, the stress and trauma that may 

prohibit them from coming forward, Mr. Speaker, we challenge 

that change to reduce to one year, Mr. Speaker. When you hear 

these stories, Mr. Speaker, of some of the abuses and hurts that 

individuals have been subjected to, it’s understandable that 

many across this province are hugely concerned that reducing 

to one year will prevent many individuals from lodging that 

complaint. 

 

And then the fact that when that complaint is lodged or if it is 

lodged, that that voice simply has been silenced by this 

government, driven underground and into this coercive sort of a 

mediation environment to broker some sort of a backroom deal, 

Mr. Speaker, on very unequal grounds, as opposed to making 

that ill and that issue and that case public, having courts be 

able, tribunals to be able to render decisions and being able to 

allow Saskatchewan people to understand some of the 

circumstances that we face as a province, allowing ourselves to 

bring change and better our province, Mr. Speaker. This Bill 

moves us backwards. It’s a shameful direction of this Sask 

Party government and it’s a shame that Saskatchewan people 

don’t take lightly, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been proud of our 

position as leaders as it relates to human rights and social 

justice. This is a regressive move that we will fight as 

opposition New Democrats in every way that we can. And that 

I believe Saskatchewan people will weigh in and have their 

voice as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At this point in time, with other things to say on this Bill and 



April 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7139 

further consultation and looking forward to committee on this 

Bill, Mr. Speaker, I will adjourn debate on this Bill 160, Mr. 

Speaker. And it certainly hasn’t been my pleasure to weigh in 

on debate because this Bill shouldn’t be here, but certainly I do 

so with recognizing the importance of doing so. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 160. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Why is the member from 

Lloydminster on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — To ask for a leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Lloydminster has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank 

you to the member who was about to make his speech. I’d just 

like to take this opportunity to introduce a representative of the 

Insurance Bureau of Canada, Regina businessman, Tom 

Paradis. Thank you very much for joining us here in the gallery 

today. And I think we’ll be meeting a little later on this 

afternoon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to join 

with the member opposite and welcome Mr. Tom Paradis for 

joining us today from the Insurance Bureau of Canada. And we 

do look forward to the meetings that we will be holding later 

today. Thank you very much. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 149 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 149 — The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Moving on with Bill 149, Mr. Speaker, 

An Act to amend The Income Tax Act, 2010, Mr. Speaker, or 

The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010, this Bill relates 

specifically to mineral processing tax refunds, Mr. Speaker. It 

speaks of processing of minerals that have been extracted or 

mined in another jurisdiction, talks about refunds and 

qualifying corporations. There’s been many speeches made in 

the Assembly on this Bill, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had 

consultations with stakeholders on this Bill. What we look 

forward to at this point in time is referring this Bill to 

committee and seeking for the clarification on certain matters 

and aspects that we’ve had brought forward through 

consultation from the respective minister, the minister 

responsible, the minister that’s put forward the Bill. 

 

And so at this point in time with those questions, I think that is 

the most appropriate forum for those questions to be asked. We 

want to make sure we understand the intended consequences of 

this piece of legislation. We want to make sure we’re protecting 

ourself against unwanted, unintended consequences, Mr. 

Speaker. So at this point in time, I would refer this Bill, An Act 

to amend The Income Tax Act, to committee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:30] 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is that Bill 

No. 149, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Minister Responsible for Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — To the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to Crown and Central 

Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 150 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 150 — The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise this afternoon to talk about Bill 150, An Act to amend the 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act. Mr. Speaker, 

this Bill is only one page, but it has three items on it. Two of 

them are ones that I think make some sense, and I’ll explain 

why. The third one has some difficulties. 

 

And so basically this Bill deals with superannuation payments 

for people who are employed within the provincial civil service. 

And what one of the . . . The first item relates to a further 

definition of how pensions are divided between an old spouse 

and the new spouse, if we can put it that way, but basically 

divided in a situation where there’s a division of matrimonial 

property. 

 



7140 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2011 

And, Mr. Speaker, every time a Bill like this comes up in this 

House, I’m reminded of a court case that I argued many years 

ago now in the early ’80s called Tataryn. And in that particular 

case, the lawyer for the husband — I was the lawyer for the 

wife — but the lawyer for the husband said, oh no, pensions are 

not assets that should be divided. They don’t have any value. 

They’re just sort of a promise out there. But we argued — or I 

argued — on behalf of the wife. And the Court of Appeal of 

Saskatchewan said no, these are assets that should be divided. 

And ultimately legislation has been changed to define how that 

division takes place. 

 

And what we have here today, Mr. Speaker, is a further gloss 

on how to divide pensions and make sure that it’s fair. And the 

proposal that is here does make sense in that it will allow for 

the proper valuation of the pension between the new spouse and 

the divorced spouse. So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have a problem 

with that particular provision. 

 

The next area is section 4, and this basically relates to how the 

work is dealt with to make sure it complies with the Income Tax 

Act of Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, this is clearly something that 

has been identified as a problem and needs to be fixed, and this 

particular clause provides that fix. So I don’t think I have any 

problem; I don’t think the opposition has any problem with 

that. 

 

Section 5 though, is an area where I think we should have some 

discussion. Section 5 says that the present section 50, which 

reads as follows, and the title is, “Annual report need not 

disclose allowance paid to each individual.” It says, “The report 

transmitted by a board to the president of the Executive Council 

need not show the amount of superannuation or other allowance 

granted in each case to a named person.” 

 

And what the change that’s coming forward in this Bill is to 

totally repeal this particular provision and put in a further or a 

longer version. And the new version says: 

 

The report transmitted by a board to the president of the 

Executive Council must not show the names of individuals 

who retired or died during the period to which the report 

applies, the amounts of superannuation or other 

allowances or benefits granted in individual cases or any 

other personal information respecting any of those 

individuals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the problem here is that this allows for the hiding 

of payments to individuals who would receive large payments 

under this particular legislation, and it doesn’t provide full 

transparency to the public as it relates to some of these 

payments. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when you hear the words and you look at it, 

you kind of wonder, well who might this apply to. Well if 

anyone was looking at the newspapers, The Globe and Mail — 

I think it was today’s paper, might have been yesterday’s paper 

— but the story was about a senior official, the deputy minister 

of Health in the province of Ontario where approximately a 

year, year and a half later, the information comes out as to the 

size of a settlement that was made with him, which included 

pension and other amounts. And it’s a sufficient amount to raise 

concerns about what kind of arrangement was made on the 

termination of his employment. And as many people remember, 

that related to a number of issues with their information 

technology in the health care system in Ontario. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we could go and see situations here in 

Saskatchewan where it would be appropriate for the public to 

know exactly what amount of money was paid to individuals in 

a situation like that. And so, Mr. Speaker, we fundamentally 

have a problem with this. It would be possible for the minister 

responsible for this Bill, when we get to committee, to take 

another look at that particular provision because it would make 

sense to drop section 5 and just allow us to go ahead with the 

other two sections that accomplish some things that are 

appropriate for this Bill. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, a number of my colleagues have already 

spoken about a number of the problems, but I think all of our 

comments have focused on the lack of transparency, the ability 

of the government to hide information from the public, and the 

ability to hide crucial information from the public. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that we can ask further questions about how 

this provision would work, and we would make our further 

suggestions about how this Bill could be amended to make it 

more appropriate for the people of Saskatchewan in committee. 

So at this time, I would move that this Bill be sent to 

committee. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

. . . Is the Assembly ready for the question? Pardon me. The 

question before the Assembly is that the second reading of Bill 

No. 150, The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) 

Amendment Act, 2010 be now moved. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to move the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. To which committee shall this Bill be referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 155 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 155 — The 

Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 

afternoon to enter into debate on Bill No. 155, An Act to amend 

The Natural Resources Act. 



April 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7141 

Mr. Speaker, when considering changes to The Natural 

Resources Act, one thinks of the great landscape and resources 

that we have in this province and the natural environment that 

so many people enjoy, appreciate, and also base their 

livelihoods upon. I know for everyone in Saskatchewan, when 

we think of our natural environment, everyone can think of 

favourite holiday spots throughout the summer or the winter, or 

other seasons for that matter, where individuals go out into the 

great outdoors and experience all the things that our province 

has to offer. 

 

And key to that, Mr. Speaker, are the availability of access to 

clean lakes, to forest, to grassland, the various natural 

environments that we have in the province that enable people in 

Saskatchewan and outside our borders as well to enjoy 

everything that our province has to offer. And so I know 

whether it’s recreational pursuits or whether it’s tourism that is 

supported here in the province through the natural environment, 

the preservation and the protection of our environment is a very 

important thing. 

 

For many people it is about recreation and it is about tourism, 

but for many people also, Mr. Speaker, our environment is 

about making a livelihood and about earning a living. And 

whether that it, Mr. Speaker, individuals who are involved in 

the tourism industry in outfitting, or whether that is, Mr. 

Speaker, the hunters and trappers that we have in our province 

who live a traditional lifestyle off the land through hunting or 

fishing and trapping, that, Mr. Speaker, is an important 

consideration as well. Whenever we look at possible changes to 

the Act, to The Natural Resources Amendment Act, that is 

something to take into consideration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill 155 seeks to make some changes with 

respect to the funds that are generated through the sale of 

licences for hunting and angling. Currently 30 per cent of the 

revenue that is generated through the sale of these licences goes 

into the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund. And it’s 

estimated, based on the minister’s second reading speech, that 

$3.5 million annually is generated through this process. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think while not every Saskatchewan person 

may be aware of this fund and the benefits that are realized 

through its existence, certainly all Saskatchewan people benefit 

from this fund and the activities that are supported through the 

$3.5 million annually. And as I said in my opening remarks 

about the wide array of individuals in Saskatchewan who 

benefit from our environment through recreational or economic 

pursuits, clearly it’s in everyone’s interest to have a fund that is 

well resourced and doing the job that it needs to do. 

 

The funds that are used, Mr. Speaker — and this has to do with 

some of the changes that are proposed in Bill 155 — have to do 

with securing land, the purchase of land through partnering 

with other organizations in order to have land that is set aside or 

land that has restrictions on it so that sensitive areas can be 

protected and the habitat, the animals that live in that land are 

able to thrive. We know, Mr. Speaker, that the funding that is, 

that currently is present supports partnerships with a number of 

organizations with respect to the acquisition of land in order to 

ensure that land is preserved and secured going into the future. 

 

We know that the funding that is available, partnerships exist 

with Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, Nature Conservancy of 

Canada, Ducks Unlimited, and the Rocky Mountain Elk 

Foundation. And this occurs under cost-sharing agreements 

where dollars that are available through the fund can be 

leveraged with other dollars, and more land can be protected. 

And this, Mr. Speaker, is something that has been going on for 

some time. And when good partnerships like that can exist with 

reputable and trusted organizations, I think members would 

agree that that is a good thing to do if it’s increasing the amount 

of land that is protected here in the province. 

 

The changes suggested here, Mr. Speaker, have to do with the 

changing the scope and the ability of the group of individuals 

from organizations that give guidance and recommendations 

with respect to how that funding ought to be spent and how it 

ought to be allocated. 

 

[16:45] 

 

The changes in this proposed legislation, Mr. Speaker, also 

have to do with some of the programs that are offered, because 

in addition to the acquisition of land that is made possible 

through the $3.5 million fund, there are also a number of 

programs that are provided that encourage better awareness or 

preservation of lands. 

 

And for this, Mr. Speaker, there’s another group of 

organizations that receive funding and participate through this 

process. The committee that provides guidance is comprised of 

representatives from the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, the 

Saskatchewan Bowhunters Association, the Saskatchewan fly 

fishers association, Nature Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan 

Trappers Association, and the Saskatchewan Outfitters 

Association. 

 

So you can see, Mr. Speaker, by the list of organizations that 

are present, a good number of groups are represented and a 

good number of groups have a role, a stake, and an interest in 

how the $3.5 million that is acquired through the selling of 

licences for hunting and angling, how that money is spent. 

 

In looking at some of the changes that are proposed by the 

minister in these amendments, some of them, Mr. Speaker, I 

can see the merit in them and there can be a good case in 

building upon the relationships that are established with some 

of the groups that I listed. And these are groups, Mr. Speaker, 

that are well respected by the Saskatchewan population in 

general. When we think of the Wildlife Federation or Ducks 

Unlimited or the Nature Conservancy, these are groups that 

have done good work and certainly have the interest of their 

members in mind, but also have the broader good of the 

environment as a consideration. 

 

What the proposed amendments do, Mr. Speaker, is to expand 

the role of this board, this advisory group so that there is a 

larger role for them in determining where funding is allocated. 

And while I certainly respect and acknowledge the expertise 

that these groups have in providing that type of advice — and I 

think that is a good thing to have that type of consultation with 

groups — it’s also, Mr. Speaker, important to keep in mind the 

role of government when determining decisions about spending 

and where money is allocated. And it’s important to ensure that 

the necessary oversight and involvement of government is in 



7142 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2011 

place. Because at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, it is elected 

officials who are chosen by the people to make decisions about 

spending. So it’s important to ensure that, as the role for this 

board enhances, Mr. Speaker, that the proper controls and 

levels of accountability are also in place to ensure that 

everything is being done properly and that the common interest 

of all Saskatchewan people is being considered. And so that’s 

one question for me that is raised and I think is important to 

keep in mind as we consider these types of amendments. 

 

There’s also, Mr. Speaker, some suggestions here about an 

increased role in programming that some of these groups may 

undertake. And again, it’s important to acknowledge and 

respect the very good work that many of these groups do in 

society and for society and for the environment. But it’s 

important, Mr. Speaker, to also recognize the important role 

that the provincial government has and that the different 

ministries, respective ministries have with respect to delivering 

programming as well. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if this decision is tied into at all 

with other decisions the government has made with respect to 

reducing the number of civil servants, but that is another 

question that I have, Mr. Speaker. Certainly it’s important to 

engage these groups, and it’s important to use their expertise 

and their connections in communities. But it’s also important, 

Mr. Speaker, to support a strong civil service that works for all 

Saskatchewan people. And I think that is an important thing to 

consider. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so when thinking about these changes, it’s 

important to ensure that the government is considering the 

greater good, considering the natural environment that all 

Saskatchewan people have and are able to experience. And I 

think when looking at these types of changes, while these 

amendments, some people might say aren’t that great or may 

not have a huge influence on what may occur, we are looking, 

Mr. Speaker, at a fund of $3 million. And we’re looking at an 

industry that provides a great amount of wealth and a great 

amount of recreational pursuits to Saskatchewan people. And I 

think that’s important to consider. 

 

One thing, Mr. Speaker, I would think about when looking at 

the changes that are proposed here . . . The opening statements 

by the minister in the second reading speech talk about the 

natural environment and the importance of it. And I certainly 

agree with that. But I would look at other actions that the 

government has made in recent months and years of its 

mandate, of its current term in office with respect to the 

environment. 

 

And I think of the decision that the government made to remove 

protection of millions of acres of Crown land and to sell that 

off, land that was enjoyed and appreciated by all Saskatchewan 

people. And I think that the way that that was handled, Mr. 

Speaker, without appropriate consultation with many groups, 

leaving many to wonder in this Assembly and in the broader 

Saskatchewan community as to what were the motives in that 

decision in removing the protection on, removing the protection 

on millions of acres of Crown land and putting a for sale sign 

on it. I think that caused many individuals, Mr. Speaker, to 

wonder what the motives of the government were in making 

that decision. And it caused, Mr. Speaker, many groups to 

wonder about its true commitment to openness, transparency, 

and consultation. And we’ve seen some of the fallout of the 

decision that the government made when it decided to remove 

protection on millions of acres of Crown land. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to remember that 

mistake that government made on that decision. Because there’s 

a great similarity when we think of the goals that are stated in 

this Bill with these proposed amendments and the actions that 

were taken around the removal of protection of land, of millions 

of acres of Crown land. And I think that’s an important 

reminder for members in this Assembly and for all 

Saskatchewan people to think about. While the government in 

this Bill, Bill 155, may say that the amendments they are 

proposing aren’t that significant and that the changes are 

constructive and that consultation has occurred, according to 

them, we know in recent actions with very important legislation 

around the issue of Crown land, land that is owned by all 

Saskatchewan people, that their course of action and the 

decisions that they made would paint a different story and 

would teach all of us a different lesson when it comes to their 

true commitment to enhancing and preserving the natural 

environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think, you know, I stated at the beginning how 

the environment is so important to all Saskatchewan people. 

We think of the pursuits that everyone enjoys in the province, 

whether it is hunting and trapping or fishing, or whether it is the 

ability to go out and enjoy a park, enjoy land that has been set 

aside that has protection on it in order to preserve the flora and 

fauna of that area. And so, Mr. Speaker, when we’re making 

changes to the legislation that can determine the long-term 

viability and the long-term health and wellness of such lands, I 

think, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to look at the motives of the 

changes and it’s important to look at the changes in the broader 

context of what other government actions have occurred in this 

area. 

 

In my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I have talked about the incredibly 

good work that the organizations that are listed in the minister’s 

second reading speech, the incredibly good work that these 

organizations do. We can think of the Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation. We can think of the Saskatchewan Bowhunters 

Association. We can think of the Saskatchewan fly fishers 

association. We can think of Nature Saskatchewan, and we can 

think of the Saskatchewan Trappers Association, and the 

Saskatchewan Outfitters Association. 

 

We know that these are groups, Mr. Speaker, that do what they 

do out of love and commitment to the natural environment. And 

yes, in many instances, there is an economic aspect, and that is 

appropriate and that’s a good and fine thing, Mr. Speaker. But 

these individuals, these groups realize that the pursuits that they 

want to support, the pursuits that they want to grow, the 

pursuits that they want to have spread for other Saskatchewan 

people and for people outside of our borders, they realize that 

such changes really do depend on having a strong and healthy 

environment going into the future. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I in no way question the intentions and the 

mandate and the activities that these groups support and 

enhance. I think, Mr. Speaker, that those are very good things. 

My question, Mr. Speaker, and the questions that I have posed 



April 6, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7143 

with respect to some of the issues that are raised through this 

legislation that the government has put forward in Bill 155, it 

has to do with ensuring that there remains an appropriate level 

of oversight by the provincial government, that decisions about 

spending are in fact ultimately being made by elected officials 

who are elected and chosen by the people to make such 

decisions. 

 

And my concerns, Mr. Speaker, are also about how the system 

that is present through the provision of the work that civil 

servants do here in the province, Mr. Speaker, in the area of the 

environment, my questions are to suggest that it is important 

when making decisions, it is important to maintain a role for 

civil servants in the programs that they provide, the educational 

services that they provide, and many of the front line activities 

that they pursue in order for all Saskatchewan people to have a 

strong and healthy environment. 

 

I know that some of the decisions that the government has made 

with respect to civil servants cause some of us on this side, and 

I think people in the broader public, to wonder about its 

commitment to a strong civil service providing public services 

to all Saskatchewan people. 

 

A quick aside, Mr. Speaker. It was interesting today in question 

period. There was reference to the government’s commitment 

to a four-by-four reduction, 4 per cent over four years, for a 

total reduction of 16 per cent of the size of the civil service. But 

at the same time, Mr. Speaker, while they’re happy to reduce 

the number of individuals employed in the civil service, they’re 

also very, very happy to write blank cheques when it comes to 

expanding the office space and the financial commitment of all 

Saskatchewan people with respect to leased office space here in 

the city of Regina as a means to secure a building project over 

the course of a 20-year agreement. 

 

So when we see those types of examples where the government 

will say one thing and then they’ll turn around and take an 

action which does not support, in my opinion, the common 

good, does not support the provision of services for all 

Saskatchewan people, and really works against many of the 

things that some of the groups involved would support, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that’s a problem. And the example that I have 

provided is the decision by the government, over the past 

months of its term, to remove protection of Crown land. And 

this was land, Mr. Speaker, that all Saskatchewan people own, 

and it’s land that — all Saskatchewan people — is available to 

them to enjoy. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, when we have seen the actions of 

removing protection on Crown land, when we see legislation 

that follows that and addresses the protection of the 

environment, I think it’s important to look at those two pieces 

of legislation at the same time because we see the result of the 

one piece of legislation with respect to removing protection of 

Crown land. We also see now legislation that is suggesting that 

the amendments to Bill 155 would improve the environment 

and improve the protection of the environment. 

 

And I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker. When we see those conflicting 

messages from a government, it causes me to raise some 

questions, and it causes me to have some concerns about the 

true motives and intentions of the members opposite in bringing 

forward changes in legislation. And it’s certainly not only this 

area where this is a concern. So, Mr. Speaker, with those 

remarks on Bill 155, having taken some time to go through 

some concerns, I would move that we adjourn debate on Bill 

155. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 155, The 

Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House now will stand 

adjourned until 10 o’clock tomorrow morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7111 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7111 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7111 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7111 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7111 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7112 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7112 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7112 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7112 

  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 7112, 7139 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7139 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7112 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7113 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7113 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7113 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7113 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7114 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 National Tartan Day 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7114 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7114 

 2011 SaskPower Legacy Award Recipient 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7114 

 2011 Provincial Debating Championships 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7115 

 Opening of Child Care Centre 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7115 

 Leasing of Office Space 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7115 

 Helicopter Emergency Medical Services Agreement 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7116 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Arrangements for Office Space 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7116 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7116 

 Maternity Care 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7117 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7117 

 Support for Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7118 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7119 

 Minimum Wage 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7120 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7120 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 169 — The Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7121 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 166 — The Renewable Diesel Act 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7121 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7122 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 7122 

 Bill No. 167 — The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7122 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7123 

 Bill No. 168 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7126 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7126 



 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 161 — The Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7126 

 Bill No. 162 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7131 

 Bill No. 160 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7133 

 Bill No. 149 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7139 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 7139 

 Bill No. 150 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2010 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7139 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 7140 

 Bill No. 155 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7140 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


