




















































Hansard: March 07, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 26A  MONDAY, MARCH 7, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6497 

 March 7, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Why thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 

with leave to make an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 

Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thanks to all 

members for leave to make a very, very special introduction, 

one that we would want to have been made since about 1997. 

 

Joining us in the Speaker’s gallery, in your gallery today, is 

Team Saskatchewan, back now I guess a few days from the 

Scott in Atlantic Canada. And in between trips because of 

course, Mr. Speaker, we know they’re heading to Denmark to 

compete in the world champions because they are the national 

champions. The Scott Tournament of Hearts champions joined 

us in your gallery. 

 

I’m happy to introduce to you and through you to all members 

— and maybe they’ll just stand as I say their names — of 

course the skip, Amber Holland; the third, Kim Schneider; the 

lead, Heather Kalenchuk is here. And the fifth is also here, 

Jolene Campbell. And we welcome Coach Merv Fonger as 

well. Tammy was unable to join us. She’s sick, but she’s going 

to be just fine and available for the championship. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this team curls out of the Kronau rink very near 

Regina here. And we all know what happened at the 

tournament. We remember the victory over Ontario 7-5 in the 

semifinal. They beat Team Canada 8-7 in the final, stealing the 

winning point in the 10th. Amber was named the Sandra 

Schmirler MVP [most valuable player] of the tournament — 

quite fittingly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And also it’s worth noting the Shot of the Week Award was 

also presented to Amber. This award of course goes to the 

curler judged to have made the most outstanding shot during the 

entire championship, and that shot happened in the sixth end of 

the final game between Saskatchewan and Team Canada. 

Saskatchewan was trailing by a score of 6 to 3 with last rock. 

And with her last rock, Amber squeezed around a front guard 

and performed a tap-back of course with her rock to take 3 in 

that particular end and tie the game at 6. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know it’s Saskatchewan’s first championship 

since 1997 when Sandra Schmirler’s rink won. And they are 

going to do a marvellous job of representing our province but 

even more importantly replacing green and white with red and 

white and representing our nation very, very proudly in 

Denmark from the 18th of March to the 27th of March. We 

welcome them here. We thank you for this great achievement 

and for their example, and we wish them all the best at the 

Worlds. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to join with the Premier here today and welcome team 

Holland, Team Saskatchewan, now Team Canada, to our 

Assembly here today. A very special team, Mr. Speaker, that 

not only serves as inspiration to young people and curlers and 

communities across Saskatchewan but now across Canada and 

certainly a point of pride for our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re going to be riveted to the TVs, just as we were through 

the Scotties, as the Worlds begin next week. We wish this team 

well, Mr. Speaker, and I ask all members of this Assembly to 

join with me in welcoming team Holland, Team Saskatchewan, 

now Team Canada. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

you and through you to all members of the House I’d like to 

introduce Dr. Howard Wheater, the Canada Excellence 

Research Chair in Water Security at the University of 

Saskatchewan. Dr. Wheater received his Ph.D. [Doctor of 

Philosophy] in hydrology from Bristol University and after 

joining Imperial College served as the director of the school’s 

environment forum. He’s the past president of the British 

Hydrology Society, a fellow of the Royal Academy of 

Engineering, a fellow of the Institution of Civil Engineers, and 

a life member of the International Water Academy. 

 

Dr. Wheater represents the leading edge in water research 

across the globe. And our government and our people across 

this province are extremely pleased to bring his tremendous 

knowledge, experience, and leadership to Saskatchewan. This is 

especially important regarding his ongoing work that we’ll 

appreciate during World Water Week later this month. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to you and to all members of this legislature, I 

would ask all the MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 

to welcome Dr. Howard Wheater, not just to Saskatchewan but 

to his new Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, it is my honour as Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Public Accounts to introduce very special guests 

seated in your gallery. 

 

Just following question period today, I look forward to making 

a motion to introduce the recommended candidate for the 

position of Provincial Auditor of Saskatchewan from the 



6498 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2011 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts. A full introduction of 

this candidate will occur later today, but I would like to 

welcome that candidate, Ms. Bonnie Lysyk, to our Assembly 

and would invite her to stand and be recognized. 

 

It’s also my pleasure to welcome and recognize guests from the 

Provincial Auditor’s office: acting Provincial Auditor Mr. Brian 

Atkinson; Ms. Angèle Borys, principal; Mr. Mike Heffernan, 

deputy provincial auditor. And I would also welcome our 

Provincial Comptroller, Mr. Terry Paton, and also from the 

comptroller’s office, Mr. Chris Bayda. 

 

I recognize some other very special guests here with us here 

today, and those being our independent officers, Mr. Speaker: 

Mr. Bob Pringle, Mr. Fenwick, Mr. Barclay, and Mr. Wilkie. 

The one last guest that I see up there today that played a key 

role on our screening committee is Ms. Joyce Stubbins that 

joins us here today. 

 

These special guests have joined us today for the proceedings as 

we recommend a candidate for the important, invaluable role of 

Provincial Auditor of Saskatchewan. I ask all members of this 

Assembly to welcome our special guests and to thank them for 

their work and leadership in our fine province. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would certainly like to 

join with the member opposite, the Chair of the Public 

Accounts Committee, in my capacity as Deputy Chair of that 

committee in welcoming all those people that he mentioned, in 

the gallery. 

 

I’d like to certainly welcome, on behalf of all of us in this 

House, Ms. Lysyk who, as the member had said, a motion will 

be put forward later today, and all the other independent 

officers that are here today joining us for this occasion. And I 

would certainly like to acknowledge the presence of Acting 

Provincial Auditor Atkinson and along with the member 

opposite join with him in thanking Ms. Joyce Stubbins for all 

the great work she did in helping us through the process. 

 

And I’d ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in 

welcoming these guests in our gallery. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming Dr. Wheater to Saskatchewan. 

Certainly water is a highly important issue for all Saskatchewan 

people and something that’s very near and dear to our hearts. 

And I know Dr. Wheater’s accomplished record as a scholar 

will serve Saskatchewan people very well. So I’d like to join in 

welcoming him to the Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the west 

gallery is seated Neil Buechler, a prominent Saskatonian who’s 

been very active in numerous charitable activities, currently 

retired from Marsh Canada, and is sitting on the board of 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology]. And I would ask that members welcome Mr. 

Buechler to the Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 

pleasure to introduce to you, through you, and to all members of 

the Legislative Assembly someone seated in the east gallery by 

the name of Jen Britton. She is certainly no stranger to the 

opposition. She is a valuable resource to the opposition in terms 

of the expertise she provides in representing the SOS, which is 

the Save Our Saskatchewan Crowns campaign. And from what 

I understand, Mr. Speaker, she is no longer a stranger to any of 

the members of the government either. She was able to join 

them at their convention over the weekend. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to ask all members to welcome Jen Britton to her 

legislature, and I hope she enjoys the proceedings that happen 

today. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to 

welcome a very special woman in my life, a young woman — 

she just turned 14 a few days ago — and that is none other than 

my daughter Morgan Morin who is seated in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker. And I’m very glad that she is able to join us for the 

proceedings here today, and I welcome her to the legislature as 

well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 

pleasure today to introduce to you and through you to all 

members of this Assembly an individual seated in your gallery. 

 

I’m speaking of course . . . You’d recognized earlier the current 

member for Last Mountain-Touchwood. This is possibly the 

next member for Last Mountain-Touchwood. I’m speaking of 

course of Don Jeworski. Don is an individual that has had a 

tremendous career in terms of the credit union industry in this 

province and is doing his part for public service in Cupar, first 

as a councillor there but currently as mayor of Cupar. And I 

know he is quite happy to serve the people where he comes 

from, his roots. 

 

So it’s a pleasure to see Don, Your Worship, here today in the 

Assembly. And I wish him all the luck in the coming election. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d certainly like to join with the member opposite in 

welcoming Don Jeworski to his legislature. The member 

opposite was certainly correct. Don does a lot of work in the 

community of Cupar and currently is the mayor. And I must say 

he is doing an excellent job, and we’re going to work very hard 

to make sure he continues in that position, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, is that Saskatchewan 



March 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6499 

is known as the volunteer province of Canada, and in Cupar I 

think we’re the volunteer community of Saskatchewan. And in 

fact, you know, the members opposite, the New Democratic 

Party, was having such a difficult time finding a candidate for 

their constituency that a member from the Cupar community 

stepped forward and volunteered to fill that position. 

 

And so I would certainly like to ask all members to join with 

me in welcoming Don. And I know for a fact that someone 

from Cupar will hold this seat, and I have no intention of 

moving, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I know 

many of my colleagues and the Premier have offered 

congratulations to the Amber Holland rink, and I would like to 

join with my colleagues and offer Team Canada congratulations 

and good luck when you reach Denmark next week. 

 

But I really want to also highlight Merv Fonger being here as 

the coach of Team Canada. Merv has committed hours — hours 

and hours — to curling with young people ever since I can 

remember, and that’s been a few years, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it was so nice not only to see Team Saskatchewan 

walking down the ice to collect their trophy at the end of a very 

exciting tournament, but to see Merv there with them. 

Congratulations to you for a very long career dedicated to 

young people in curling and making sure that Saskatchewan 

remains at the top of their game. It is appreciated and it’s 

wonderful to see you there. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the House, I’d like to introduce two 

special guests sitting in the east gallery: my daughter Alison, 

Alison Forbes, and her friend Alex Folosea. 

 

They actually came home, it’s interesting talking about curling, 

they came home this weekend to take part in a family funspiel. 

So it’s all over. It’s in the air. So this is great, even from 

Toronto they’re coming back. But Ali practises law in Toronto 

at Stikeman Elliott, and Alex is a vet just starting out in 

Toronto. 

 

We wanted to show them the warm weather here. They were 

last here in fall for a Roughrider game. Of course the Labour 

Day Classic, right at the end of the day, people remembered the 

rainstorm at the end of the day. He experienced that and now 

he’s experiencing the cold weather and fun curling. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d ask all members to join us in welcoming them to 

their legislature. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like 

today to present a petition calling for protecting renters from 

unreasonable rent increases. And we know that Saskatchewan 

renters are facing a combination of rising rents and low vacancy 

rates in many communities. And we know that many renters 

across this province have seen rent increases of hundreds of 

dollars each, and some of these rents in even smaller 

communities like Yorkton and Estevan are more than $200, 

even approaching 20 per cent increases. And in Canada, we see 

80 per cent of people living with them. 

 

[13:45] 

 

I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

consider enacting some form of rent control with a view 

to protecting Saskatchewan renters from unreasonable 

increases in rent. 

 

And I do so present, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

stand today and present a petition on behalf of my constituents 

regarding the need for a new school in Hampton Village: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes including education property taxes; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to 

neighbouring communities to attend schools that are 

typically already reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the community of Hampton Village in Saskatoon Massey Place. 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of our 

finances by the Sask Party. They allude to the two consecutive 

deficit budgets. They reference the debt growth and debt 

loading and debt trajectory that we see under the Sask Party, 

and they recognize that this comes at a consequence to 

Saskatchewan people. And the prayer reads as follows: 



6500 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2011 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned citizens of 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Kinsmen Telemiracle 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past weekend, 

Telemiracle 35 took place in Saskatoon at TCU Place. Through 

Telemiracle, the Kinsmen Foundation raises funds to provide 

special needs equipment and access to medical assistance for 

Saskatchewan residents, groups, and health foundations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Telemiracle performs two very important 

functions for the people of Saskatchewan. First it provides those 

in need with the resources to improve quality of life and 

independence. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, it gives the people of this 

province the opportunity to demonstrate their charitable spirit. 

 

This year Telemiracle 35 raised an impressive $4.6 million. 

Telemiracle was made possible through the dedicated work of 

600 Kinsmen and Kinette volunteers, a production crew of 200, 

as well as 12 cast members and 50 Saskatchewan artists steeped 

in talent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, raising $4.6 million in 20 hours is a remarkable 

challenge to meet, yet the generosity and goodwill of the people 

of Saskatchewan met that challenge. As a result, the Kinsmen 

Foundation is able to do good work throughout the province. 

Last year they granted over 579 applications ranging from $125 

to $1.25 million. Mr. Speaker, that’s more than one grant for 

each and every day of the year, and every dollar comes directly 

from donations to Telemiracle. 

 

The people of this province are to be commended for their 

benevolence. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join the 

member opposite in congratulating the Kinsmen on 

Telemiracle. 

 

It was back in 1977 that members of the Kinsmen club in 

Saskatoon took the first step to holding a telethon to raise 

money for the Kinsmen Foundation. In the years since, 

Telemiracle has raised nearly $90 million to help families in 

this province with individual assistance and donations to 

organizations. 

 

Assisting an individual with mobility challenges by funding a 

ramp, for example, Mr. Speaker, does more than make it easier 

for that person to get around in a wheelchair. It puts that 

individual on a path to independence. And helping those living 

with special needs in special care homes by funding equipment 

like ceiling track systems or lifts or specialty beds does more 

than respond to the physical needs. It also allows that individual 

to live in dignity. 

 

This year alone, Mr. Speaker, Telemiracle raised $4.6 million to 

help people with special needs and those requiring assistance to 

access special medical treatment. This outpouring of generosity 

is a testament not only to the spirit of caring and families in this 

province but also the commitment of thousands of Telemiracle 

volunteers who make it all happen year after year. 

 

Just as the efforts of the Kinsmen Foundation open up the 

possibility for dignity and independence for Saskatchewan 

people with special needs, Mr. Speaker, so the efforts of 

Telemiracle crew and their thousands of volunteers make it 

possible that that outpouring of generosity come from everyone 

across the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And so I’d like to ask all members, the members of opposition 

and government, Mr. Speaker, to join me in congratulating 

Kinsmen Telemiracle team on moving everyone in 

Saskatchewan one step down that path of generosity, personal 

independence, and dignity. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone. 

 

Team Holland Wins 2011 Scotties Tournament of Hearts 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, there are few things that bring people together across 

our province as sporting events, whether it’s a small-town 

hockey game, to the Riders, to showing support for the 

Vancouver Olympics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on Sunday, February 27th, the Amber Holland 

rink brought this province together again. People across the 

province were glued to their television sets as Amber and her 

Kronau curling team took on the perennial favourites, Jennifer 

Jones. 

 

The game came down to the final two shots. The final two shots 

had us all on the edge of our seats. There was very little room 

for error, but Amber made a perfect draw to the button behind 

cover. Jones was left to make a double-raised takeout and it 

didn’t happen, making the final score with a steal from the 

Holland rink, Holland 8, Jones 7. 

 

Team Saskatchewan was able to bring a national championship 

back to Saskatchewan for the first time since Sandra Schmirler 

in 1997. This was truly a team effort with each member curling 

above 80 per cent. Heather Kalenchuk leading the way at 86 per 

cent, Tammy and Kim Schneider at 85 and 81 per cent 

respectively, and Holland curled an impressive 83 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government I would like to once 

again congratulate the Holland rink and wish them the very best 

in the world curling championships in Denmark which will run 



March 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6501 

from March 18th to 27th. Mr. Speaker, I know they’ll do the 

province proud. I know they’ll do the country proud. Thank you 

very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s truly my 

honour to recognize, celebrate, and wish well Team Holland, 

also known as Team Canada. It’s our privilege to be joined by 

the team today in our Legislative Assembly. I want to recognize 

each member of Team Holland: comprised of skip, Ms. Amber 

Holland; third, Ms. Kim Schneider; second, Ms. Tammy 

Schneider; lead, Ms. Heather Kalenchuk; and a great coach, Mr. 

Merv Fonger. 

 

This is a talented and dynamic team, an inspiration to the 

people in communities of our province where ties to curling run 

deep. These members are not only elite curlers, they are leaders 

in our community, not only through their sport but also through 

their daily work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a proud province watched and cheered for Team 

Holland, Team Saskatchewan at the Scotties, hanging on every 

game. With their victory, we proudly say congratulations. Now 

they have the exceptional honour of playing for their nation, our 

country, as Team Canada. This team needs to know that they 

have a country behind them, and our province couldn’t be more 

proud. I wish them the best in Denmark at the worlds. We are 

behind them entirely, cheering for them, and will be riveted to 

the championships just as we were the Scotties. 

 

I ask all members of this Assembly to join with me in 

welcoming these fantastic ambassadors of our province, these 

elite curlers, to our Assembly. We wish you the best, wish them 

the best. Go Saskatchewan. Go Canada. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Prince Albert Pulp Mill to Reopen 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today 

our government was pleased to announce that the Prince Albert 

pulp mill is set to reopen. This deal is exciting news for the 

people and families in Prince Albert and the surrounding area 

and is a win-win for all Saskatchewan people. The people of 

Prince Albert have and will continue to work closely with our 

government to maintain and grow economic activity in the 

region, starting with the reopening of the P.A. [Prince Albert] 

pulp mill. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, I along with the members from Carrot River 

Valley and Saskatchewan Rivers were pleased to be in Prince 

Albert this morning to celebrate this important event. Rather 

than the old-style solutions of throwing taxpayers’ money at 

every issue, Mr. Speaker, we are pleased to have been able to 

support a legitimate business proposal that attracts investment 

to our province rather than drive it away. Our government has 

been working hard to rebuild the forestry industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we see a bright future for our northern 

communities with a strong forestry sector built on sound 

principles, not desperate political gamesmanship. Mr. Speaker, 

an operating pulp mill in Prince Albert strengthens all forestry 

operations in the province. When combined with the biomass 

power operations, we will see full utilization of our forest 

resource as part of a real forestry strategy that will serve us for 

the long term. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, this is a great day for the people in Prince 

Albert and the province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

New Report for New Democratic Party Policy Convention 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In a few weeks 

Saskatchewan New Democrats will gather to discuss a report 

entitled A Rooted and Growing Vision, which is the culmination 

of an ambitious year-long listening process. In town hall 

meetings, around kitchen tables, and through the Internet, Mr. 

Speaker, we heard many ideas and dreams on how to build a 

stronger, fairer, and more sustainable Saskatchewan. These 

discussions included experts, stakeholders, and many citizens, 

all of whom shared their vision for this great province in open 

and respectful dialogue. 

 

That respectful exchange of ideas will continue later this month 

at our policy convention where delegates will discuss the ideas 

contained in A Rooted and Growing Vision and provide 

guidance on the policies we will put before the citizens of 

Saskatchewan in this election year. 

 

That’s what democracy is all about, Mr. Speaker, an open 

exchange of ideas and dreams that allows citizens to have their 

say before we come to a collective decision together about the 

direction our province should take in the years ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe that A Rooted and Growing Vision is a 

report that is rooted in the values and principles of 

Saskatchewan people, and it is a report which contains many 

ideas that represent an ever-growing vision of the future where 

the aspirations of all Saskatchewan citizens are more fully 

achieved. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Remembering Mel Watson 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

consider it a great honour today to be able to stand on the floor 

of the Legislative Assembly and recognize the life, and note the 

passing of Mr. Mel Watson of Weyburn. 

 

Mr. Watson was a very accomplished businessman in this 

province, a well-known name in the agricultural industry, 

perhaps best known for his John Deere dealerships. Like many 

men of his generation who achieved great success, you would 

never suspect this just by meeting him. He was humble, modest, 

and always generous with his time. 

 

His record of serving his community and his province are 

exemplary: the Weyburn Agricultural Society, board member 



6502 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2011 

and president of Canadian Western Agribition, Canada West 

Equipment Dealers Association, board member and president of 

the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, board member and 

chairman of the Weyburn oil show, board member of 

SaskPower and the Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation. 

Mr. Watson served on the Premier’s advisory committee, the U 

of R [University of Regina] tripartite committee, and an 

advisory committee for the Saskatchewan Roughriders, where 

he was a 50-year supporter of the club. He also served on the 

boards of numerous companies. 

 

In recognition of his contributions to the province, Mr. Watson 

was presented with the Centennial Medal in 2005 and was 

named as one of Saskatchewan’s Men of Influence in 2007 by 

Saskatchewan Business Magazine. 

 

For all of his business success, what gave Mr. Watson his 

greatest sense of pride and accomplishment was his family. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I join with the people of Weyburn and 

indeed the province in offering my deepest sympathies to Mel’s 

wife of 60 years, Doreen, his son Rick, his daughter Shelley, his 

son Drew, their families, and the entire extended Watson 

family. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Potash Royalties and Taxes 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, last week or a week ago, the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan announced that in the year 

2010 their profits amounted to $1.8 billion, and of that, the 

people of Saskatchewan, families of this province, received 77 

million in royalties. And the head of the Potash Corporation 

indicated that they expected the same kind of returns in 2011, 

the same formula. That is 95 cents out of every dollar of profit, 

gross profit, for shareholders in the Potash Corporation and a 

nickel for the people of Saskatchewan, for families, for projects 

that we need here in the province. 

 

Can the Premier explain why, at a time when many projects are 

left undone because of lack of money — in fact, we have no 

long-term fund for the people of Saskatchewan in saving from 

our many resources — why has he chosen not to have a review 

of the potash royalty? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 

member for the question. I’m happy to explain why the Potash 

Corporation paid that level of royalties on that much income. 

Because the NDP [New Democratic Party] government, under 

former Premier Calvert, negotiated a new royalty structure for 

the province of Saskatchewan that has, when it comes to 

royalties, remained unchanged by this government. 

 

Just before the election, Mr. Speaker, the NDP government did 

the right thing. They created a brand new royalty structure for 

the province that recognized the fact that our potash taxes are 

the highest in the world and that if we want the potash 

companies to expand here versus the three pages of projects that 

exist around the world, if we want those jobs here, 19,000 of 

them — hundreds of permanent jobs — and to keep the 

province moving forward, we’re going to have to provide a 

temporary incentive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what the NDP plan does. We support that 

plan. And what the member is not telling the province is that the 

Potash Corp and other companies pay hundreds of millions of 

dollars in income tax. It’s as if he’s unfamiliar with how 

companies report their finances, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the CEO [chief executive 

officer] of the Potash Corp, Bill Doyle, clearly indicated that 

the profits and the price of potash is a new norm in the world, 

very different than it was when the original deal was signed. 

 

The question to the Premier is this: at a time when we have 

record profits, windfall profits, that nobody was foreseeing 10 

years ago . . . In fact the profits are up by 600 per cent for the 

Potash Corporation over the last 10 years, and the people of 

Saskatchewan get exactly the same amount as they did 10 years 

ago. Can the Premier explain why he is not choosing now to do 

a review where the people of this province would get their fair 

share of royalty from the potash that the people of this province 

own? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — The reason, Mr. Speaker, is that, unlike the 

NDP, we are not going to pursue reckless policies that risk 

thousands of jobs in the expanding potash mines, Mr. Speaker. 

The potash producers of the province have sent a letter . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a letter that’s been sent 

from the potash producers of this province to the Leader of the 

Opposition when he announced the fact that he is going to 

pursue a brand new NDP job-killing potash tax. The potash 

producers of the province said what is at risk are thousands of 

jobs currently under way in terms of expansion of the mines, 

expansions that are happening because of the NDP royalty 

structure which remains in place. And what may also be at risk 

are hundreds of permanent jobs at those mines. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member chirped from his seat, what 

consulting have you done? Well as a matter of fact, it was their 

policy, their royalty policy we’re talking about. That’s point 

number one. 

 

Point number two, the potash producers have asked that 

member for a meeting to talk about his plan. They asked for . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, they’ve asked that member for 



March 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6503 

a meeting to talk about his plan and the potentiality that it will 

risk thousands of jobs in the province. They asked for it in 

January. He has yet to return their call or answer their letter. He 

has yet to have a meeting, Mr. Speaker. Why won’t he explain 

more about the NDP job-killing potash tax? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, if the Premier is not 

interested in my opinion on royalty . . . And I question why he 

wouldn’t listen to some other people from across Canada. And I 

want to quote several of them who have a different opinion than 

his when it comes to royalty. Sylvain Charlebois, the assistant 

dean of the Guelph university and former University of Regina 

business professor says, and I quote, “The world needs the 

mineral. The world needs potash. I think there is actually a 

public responsibility for the government to go for a review.” 

 

Jack Mintz from the University of Calgary said of the current 

royalty, “It is just wrong.” And other experts say even stronger 

words. In fact, Mintz goes on to say, and I quote, “My argument 

is that actually a poor rent controller and collector, and probably 

not collecting enough rents on it, referring to potash.” 

 

My question to the Premier is: how is that we can have a cap on 

royalty paid by the Potash Corp but can’t have a cap for renters 

in the province of Saskatchewan? How does that work? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, here’s the answer to the 

question. The reason we don’t have a cap on rent in the 

province is because they took it off of rent in 1991 when he sat 

in the cabinet of the province of Saskatchewan. The reason why 

we have the current cap on the current royalty structure is 

because the Calvert NDP government introduced it, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s the answer to his question. 

 

We have taken the advice of others when it comes to promoting 

royalty stability to promote the province moving forward with 

these expansions in the potash mines. We took the advice of the 

former premier, Mr. Calvert. 

 

And we took another individual’s advice who, on February 28, 

2011, said this: “Policy reversals and policy changes, surprises 

that adversely affect return on investment, dramatically 

discourage investment in our province.” That’s from the Greater 

Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce. The Saskatchewan Chamber 

of Commerce has said, “Let’s keep the momentum we’ve got 

going forward. Thousands of jobs are being created. We’re 

leading the country in economic growth.” 

 

The number one threat to that, Mr. Speaker, is not the current 

royalty structure. The number one threat to our ongoing 

prosperity is that member and his 1970s ideas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell the Premier this: that 

it’s an unusual position for the Premier or the governor or for 

the prime minister of any country to say look, the people should 

be welcoming and accepting just jobs; they don’t need any 

royalty. Where else in the world could you take your company 

and pay 5 cents on a dollar in royalty? Nowhere other than here 

under this Premier. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: in light of the fact that he’s 

not willing to take the advice of Charlebois or Jack Mintz, will 

he take the advice of farmers who want a payment of $100 for 

flooded acres or the people in Wawota who want their nursing 

home kept open or the university students who can’t get 

daycare? Would he take their advice that maybe we could 

squeeze a little more than a nickel on a dollar out of the potash 

corporation and do some of the things that people in this 

province want? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s as if the hon. member 

does not know what’s happening in terms of the worldwide 

potash industry. Today the taxes in Saskatchewan for potash, 

the royalty and production taxes, are the highest of any place in 

the world. Mr. Speaker, our tax rates are . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would ask the members 

to allow the Premier to be heard in his response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the current structure of taxes, 

the ones that the NDP . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The tax structure 

we have in the province brought in by the NDP makes this the 

fact, that Saskatchewan has the highest production and royalty 

potash taxes in the world. And so when you’re competing with 

three pages of other potential expansion projects in Jordan and 

Israel and Chile, you have to provide some temporary 

incentives to see that those expansions and those . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Regina Walsh 

Acres wants to enter into debate. I would ask the member to 

allow the Premier to respond. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, to ensure that those expansion 

jobs are happening in our communities and in our province, you 

need to provide some temporary incentives. That’s what we 

have in the province to ensure that we’re competing with the 

world, to ensure that we’re attracting investment from around 

the world, that we’re creating thousands of jobs. Mr. Speaker, 

the only outfit that doesn’t like that are the provincial NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Rent Controls 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We know 

that Saskatchewan has become much more expensive over the 

past three years and this has caused some real problems around 



6504 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2011 

keeping rents affordable, especially for students, young 

families, and seniors here in Saskatchewan. 

 

To the minister: will the minister do the right thing today, this 

session, and tell the people of Saskatchewan that he will enact 

rent controls? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the members opposite, 

no, our government is not considering rent controls. We know 

very well that evidence from other jurisdictions have shown 

when there is rent control, there is a decline in availability and 

in the quality of housing there is available. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government’s stance on rent control was 

echoed by a lot of people in the last week when the members 

opposite put out their stand on rent control. People like the 

mayor of Saskatoon who said rent controls have proven they 

never work. People like Jason Hall of the Regina landlord 

association who said losing the ability to adjust rent would lead 

to fewer rental units. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the vacancy rate has improved from 1.9 per cent to 

2.5 per cent. In 2007, the year of the election, at the time of the 

election, the vacancy rate was 1.2 per cent. Today it is 2.5 per 

cent. But you know what the members opposite chose to do? 

They chose to take $100 million to buy a pulp mill in Prince 

Albert instead of putting it into affordability. That’s where their 

issues were, Mr. Speaker. I think that members opposite should 

question their party’s priorities. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that is quite an interesting 

answer with all sorts of half facts here and there and all over the 

place. But we know the vast majority of Canadians are living 

with rent controls today, and it’s working. For example, when 

we compare Saskatoon and Regina in terms of the total number 

of combined rental units started in Regina and Saskatoon 

between 2007 and 2009, Winnipeg beat them every year, where 

there was rent control. 

 

Why do we have to wait and see if this pre-election spending of 

the government’s announced past few weeks . . . Do we have to 

wait and see if it suffers the same fate as Head Start? We need 

action today. Will the minister say she will enact rent controls? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, again to the member 

opposite, the answer is no. In fact if the members opposite want 

to look at Manitoba, last year in Saskatchewan we went from 

1.9 per cent to 2.5. And you know what Winnipeg did? They 

went from 1.1 per cent to 0.8 per cent. Their vacancy rate has 

actually declined. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite should be listening to 

people who really understand what’s going on, people like 

Bruce Johnstone from the Leader-Post who said rent controls 

are not the best way of increasing the stock of low-cost housing. 

In fact it can be argued that rent controls have exactly the 

opposite effect. And Nobel laureate, economist James 

Buchanan on rent controls said it’s one of the things where 

people simply don’t understand simple economics, and 

therefore they put in for political reasons what will damage the 

very people it was designed to help. Mr. Speaker, that’s not our 

goal, is to damage the people that we are helping. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 

cold comfort to the renters across this province. And we’ve 

heard from many, many people, hard-working people right 

across this province, who’ve told us something has to be done. 

Something has to be done about rents in this province. The 

marketplace has failed, and they’re being gouged. And we 

know right across Canada, many provinces, 80 per cent of 

Canadians are living with rent controls. They’re seeing positive, 

real solutions to issues that face them every day when it comes 

to paying rent. 

 

To the minister: when will she listen to the people, to the people 

who are struggling to get by because of high rents? Will she 

recognize today the marketplace has failed too many people, 

and we need rent controls today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, what we have to do is 

create a larger supply of rental units, not control the ones that 

we do have. And that’s what we’re trying to do as government, 

is make sure we increase the number of units. Mr. Speaker, 

since 2007 we have built 860 units of affordable housing in 

Saskatchewan, and there’s 1,100 more units under construction 

at this time. And at the same time . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, there was an opportunity 

earlier this year at the SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association] convention to talk to the mayors 

and ask them if they would be involved in a housing summit 

and a provincial housing strategy. On April 19th and 20th we 

will have a summit where we’ll be involving not just 

government. We’ll be involving SUMA and SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] and 

municipalities and financial institutions and developers to . . . 

[inaudible] . . . have their voice when it comes to building more 

units in this province. 

 

That’s what we need to do. We have to make sure that there are 

more units, not control the ones that we have in the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Investments in Health Care 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan people 



March 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6505 

can’t afford the Sask Party’s privatization agenda. The Sask 

Party is privatizing the health care system and Saskatchewan 

people are worried. They don’t want to sell out Saskatchewan 

health care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister cut funding for the public surgical 

centre in Regina and used it to buy more expensive surgeries 

from a private clinic. Why is the minister so intent on 

abandoning the public system and promoting private, for-profit 

health care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when we came to 

government in 2007, we conducted a Patient First Review that 

identified very clearly that the wait times, the access to health 

care, was far too long. Under 16 years of NDP government, Mr. 

Speaker, we ended up inheriting the longest wait-lists in Canada 

for surgery, Mr. Speaker — absolutely unacceptable. 

 

We put together a surgical care initiative that looked at all the 

delivery of surgery, Mr. Speaker. One of the options was to 

look at a third party deliverer, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we’ve 

done in Regina and Saskatoon, but that’s not all that we did, 

Mr. Speaker. Just two weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, this government 

put $40 million into dealing with the surgical wait times 

inherited by that government. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — It seems an odd way, Mr. Speaker, to promote 

public health care — by putting money in the private system. 

And, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan families want a strong, 

publicly funded health care system. They feel it’s the best way 

to move forward, and poll after poll says so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the minister decided to buy surgeries from 

the private sector rather than improve the public system, an 

arbitrator ruled that it is more cost-effective to perform these 

surgeries in the public system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when will the minister heed the evidence and 

invest taxpayers’ money in the public system to benefit the 

people of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, in the last three and a 

half years, this Sask Party government has put more into the 

health care system than any single year of the NDP government, 

Mr. Speaker. We’re putting more into the health care system. 

And they say, we want to put more into the public system. Well 

how about putting 850 more nurses into the public system, Mr. 

Speaker, something that they never did? They would never set a 

target because they would never accomplish it, Mr. Speaker, 

unlike the government of the day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Not only did we set a target for nurses. We’ve set a target that 

people should wait no longer than three months by the year 

2014, Mr. Speaker. We’re well on the way of matching that. In 

the first three and a half years, we’ve cut the number of people 

waiting 18 months or longer by 50 per cent, Mr. Speaker; 

people waiting longer than 12 months by 27 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s real progress. That’s real progress for 

Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. All the money in the 

world can’t hide the privatization agenda. Mr. Speaker, the 

money to the health regions was cut in the last budget. 

Long-term care beds are being closed across the province. 

Emergency room services in rural Saskatchewan are being 

closed. Communities are in bidding wars for doctors while 

doctors’ vacancies have gone up from 84 to 119. The kidney 

transplant program is non-existent. Chiropractic care services 

have been de-insured. And the money allotted for the public 

surgical care centre in Regina has been used to buy more 

expensive surgeries from a private clinic. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: when is he going to stop letting 

Saskatchewan Party’s privatization schemes get in the way of 

providing Saskatchewan families with quality, cost-efficient 

health care for their tax dollars? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing the 

wait-list drop, something that this province hasn’t seen for 

many, many years under the NDP government, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re making progress. 

 

In fact I think you could talk to about 6 to 700 patients that 

received service in Saskatoon at Omni surgical clinics — third 

party under the public system, no queue-jumping, no paying out 

of pocket — and ask them if they would rather go back on the 

wait-list, which is exactly what would happen under the NDP 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re making real progress. And she says all the 

money in the world won’t hide the fact that third party 

delivery’s in the system. We’re not trying to hide it, Mr. 

Speaker. In fact, we’re very proud of it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Support for Education 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, delivering excellence in education 

is crucial to our province’s future, yet this government is 

undermining the quality of our children’s education. One 

example of that is the forced reduction in the number of 

educational assistants which provide much-needed one-on-one 

support that is crucial to the success of many children. 

 

To the minister: what other short-sighted decisions are in store 

in the upcoming budget that will undermine our education 

system? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 



6506 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2011 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — It’s truly interesting that that member 

would ask that question when we have, year over year, 

increased the amount of money allocated to the school divisions 

around our province. We have increased the budgets by 14.7 

per cent in the last three years. That has far exceeded inflation 

increases during that time and it’s exceeded increases in 

enrolment. 

 

In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, we have invested an 

unprecedented $400 million to ensure that our students have 

safe, very, very well-equipped schools in which they are going 

to. Mr. Speaker, that is to pick up the neglect that was under the 

NDP. Nobody wants to go back to where schools are 

deteriorating and roofs are leaking, which is what was 

happening when the NDP were in government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we already know that the 

upcoming budget will fail Saskatchewan children. The minister 

revealed a few weeks ago that the sustainable education funding 

formula promised several years ago will not be delivered in this 

year’s budget. In response, the president of Saskatchewan 

School Boards Association asked, “How long can boards 

continue to operate in limbo?” Mr. Speaker, school boards need 

that formula in order to properly plan their budgets including 

hiring, if necessary, teachers and EAs [educational assistant] to 

deliver high-quality education. 

 

To the minister: why is the government undermining our 

children’s education and leaving school boards in limbo for yet 

another year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I’ll repeat that 

school boards are not in limbo. They have received increases 

year over year under this government, and they have the 

discretion and the authority to decide their staffing complement 

that they so choose. There are adjustments done within the 

school boards as their decisions. There’s adjustments for school 

enrolment increases. That is being addressed, Mr. Speaker, in 

the allocation of funding. I have a lot of confidence in the 

decisions made by our school boards, Mr. Speaker, and they 

decide who the staffing complement or what the staffing 

complement would be. 

 

So again we have increased funding to the school divisions, 

which has been greater than inflation during those years. It’s 

been greater than the increase in enrolment. The school 

divisions make decisions on staffing by request, by parents, 

quite frankly, by the special needs within the student body that 

they have, and it is decisions that’s made at the local level. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is not uncertainty. There’s increases year 

over year. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can brush off the 

concerns that have been voiced about uncertainty. That’s not 

consistent with what school boards are saying around the 

province. The Chair of the Saskatoon Public School Board has 

said the funding around the, the uncertainty around the funding 

over the past few years has made it difficult to plan for the 

future. The Chair said: 

 

University graduates are looking for jobs and we’re trying 

to make contract offers to the best and brightest. This kind 

of uncertainty is going to make us have some sober 

second thoughts about what we can commit to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when school boards can’t plan and hire needed 

teachers and educational assistants, it’s the quality of our 

children’s education that suffers. To the minister: why should 

children have to pay the price for the government’s decision to 

delay the funding formula? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, again I will repeat: year 

over year, we have increased the amount of money that has 

gone to school divisions. Those increases have exceeded 

inflation increases during that same period. In particular, the 

Saskatoon School Division that the member opposite referenced 

has received increases because they’ve had increases in 

enrolment. So every year they have received increases, so they 

do know the amount of money they will have. There will be 

factors that we brought in for increase in students. There will be 

consideration to the amount of immigrants of students that will 

be brought in to that school division. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is not a decrease in funding as the member 

opposite would like to mislead the public into believing. That is 

not the case. This is the increase, year over year. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this line of questioning is about 

the government’s refusal to provide a funding formula to allow 

school boards to plan over the long term. The issue here is 

about the ability to plan and have a predictable, sustainable 

funding formula. 

 

The government stripped school boards of the ability to set their 

own mill rates and promised a new funding formula. But it has 

failed to deliver, leaving school boards in limbo and students 

suffering the consequences of few resources, teachers, and 

educational assistants. 

 

To the minister: what is the real reason she has chosen to delay 

the funding formula until after the election? Is she putting our 

children’s quality of education at risk simply to help her party 

during the election? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, by the 

member opposite keep saying that we’re putting our students’ 

education at risk, what he’s doing is he is questioning the ability 

of a school division or school boards to make very wise 

decisions. They have money. They have more money than 



March 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6507 

they’ve had before, and they make the staffing decision. We 

have confidence that those school boards are making the wisest 

decisions for the student complement they have. 

 

So for the member opposite to say that they cannot decide what 

to do when they have more money than they had before is 

questioning the ability of those members who are duly elected 

at the local level to make wise decisions. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

insulting to the school board members to suggest that they don’t 

know how to staff with more money than they’ve had before. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve supported the school boards. We’ve 

supported them through operating and we have made 

unprecedented investments in capital, which that party never 

did when they were in government. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Prince Albert Pulp Mill to Reopen 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 

my pleasure to rise and advise the House that the Prince Albert 

pulp mill will be restarting. Paper Excellence has purchased the 

Prince Albert pulp mill from Domtar. Paper Excellence will 

invest more than $200 million to reopen this facility when it 

comes, along with it 200 direct jobs to our province. 

 

I would like to quote Dave Coles, the president of the 

Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union, from this 

morning, where he states this deal is “proof that if workers, 

governments and business work together on renewing Canada’s 

forest industry, great things can happen.” 

 

Paper Excellence, who have an excellent track record in 

Saskatchewan as operators of the Meadow Lake Mechanical 

Pulp mill . . . The government has worked with parties involved 

in offering the following provisions: the provision of an 

adequate wood fibre supply; an agreement that will see 

SaskPower purchasing surplus electricity from a biomass power 

facility to be incorporated into the mill. That agreement calls for 

the purchase of biomass power at prices consistent with rates 

charged for this type of project from across Canada. 

 

In addition to maintaining the existing environmental liability 

for a period of time when the mill operated as a Crown 

corporation prior to 1986, the government will also ensure that 

new pension plan agreements will be in place that respect the 

obligation of the previous employers. 

 

Finally, $500,000 per year will be allocated for the first two 

years to train new mill operators. Workers will be needed to be 

trained in the new processes before the start-up of the new mill. 

The announcement is great news for the city of Prince Albert. 

 

I would like to congratulate all the groups involved who have 

worked very hard for the success of this announcement 

including the Communications, Energy and Paperworkers 

Union; the city of Prince Albert; our First Nations partners from 

the Agency Chiefs Tribal Council and the Montreal Lake Cree 

Nation and industry partners. Without their involvement, this 

project could not have been brought together. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is indeed a great day and a good news story 

for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’d ask . . . Order. Order. 

Order. I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased today to rise on behalf of the official opposition to 

respond to the ministerial statement on the sale of the Prince 

Albert pulp mill today. And I want to thank the Minister of 

Energy and Resources for providing me with a copy of his 

remarks prior to reading them in the Chamber. 

 

Mr. Speaker, indeed the citizens of Prince Albert have been 

waiting for some time to know, understand, and be able to work 

with the future planning for the pulp mill there in the city of 

Prince Albert. Mr. Speaker, there have been a lot of challenges 

in the city of Prince Albert over the last three years, Mr. 

Speaker, challenges because of reduced revenues available to 

the city. Challenges, Mr. Speaker, that even resulted earlier this 

year in the mayor and council stating that they could not 

participate in the development of long-term care beds in the city 

of Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, because they didn’t have the 

capacity to raise the municipal share necessary to complete the 

project, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So these have been challenging times in Prince Albert. And I’m 

certain that the people in Prince Albert are pleased today to 

know that there’s some future in the building there at the Prince 

Albert mill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are still some questions in Prince Albert 

today. One of them I think is for the member of Prince Albert 

Carlton who, everyone knows, in 2007 said through the media, 

“A vote for Darryl is a vote for the mill open,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask members to refer to other 

members by their location unless they’re quoting from 

something. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I simply refer 

members opposite to the ads that the member wrote. I quoted 

directly from the ads the member put in. 

 

But my point is, Mr. Speaker, I do not think that the people who 

read those ads thought that it would take three years with no 

plan from this government and, Mr. Speaker, ultimately a loss 

in jobs. I don’t think that that’s what they thought the member 

from P.A. Carlton was saying when he put those ads in the 

paper. 

 

But that having been said, Mr. Speaker, there’s also this 

concern that the forest industry generally requires a plan, Mr. 



6508 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2011 

Speaker, an understanding of where the industry is going, and 

the assistance that the province is there to provide, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The government opposite, the members opposite prior to 

forming government in ’07, sent out the member from Batoche 

to do a broad plan about the forestry sector, Mr. Speaker. 

There’s still no release of that document, Mr. Speaker, and 

there’s still absolutely no evidence, Mr. Speaker, that his work 

led to the development of a government plan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one further thing: when the Domtar mill was 

a question in this Chamber in 2008, Mr. Speaker, the Minister 

of Energy at the time said, we have something in the works, just 

wait and see. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s a good thing the people of 

Prince Albert and the people of this Chamber didn’t hold their 

breath waiting to see what would happen. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the fact that the mill will reopen does indicate 

that there is confidence by industry and workers in the sector, 

Mr. Speaker. There is going to be some provincial contribution 

required here, whether it’s on the side of the pensions or 

whether it’s on the side of the environmental liability, Mr. 

Speaker. There is a provincial contribution that’s going to be 

required here. And, Mr. Speaker, we will ensure, as the people 

of Prince Albert will ensure, that in fact the province of 

Saskatchewan not only lives up to this deal but is accountable 

and transparent, Mr. Speaker, unlike their recent experience 

with the Saskatchewan-Montana carbon capture project, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I thank the minister for providing me with his remarks in 

advance, Mr. Speaker, and I wish the people of Prince Albert 

well as they proceed on their new path in forestry. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Public Accounts 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts to present its second 

report. I move: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 

Public Accounts be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 

Public Accounts be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Chair of the 

Public Accounts Committee. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave to 

move a motion before orders of the day regarding the 

appointment of the Provincial Auditor of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — The Chair of the Public Accounts Committee 

has requested leave to make some comments before moving a 

motion in regards to the appointment of the new Provincial 

Auditor. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Chair of the Public 

Accounts Committee. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Appointment of Provincial Auditor 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. The Standing Committee on Public Accounts has been 

active for the better part of a year with respect to the process of 

selecting a Provincial Auditor of Saskatchewan. I would like to 

thank all members, and specifically our Vice-Chair of that 

committee, for the work in that important process. 

 

As such we have shared with this legislature the process that 

was followed to determine our recommendation to this 

Assembly for Provincial Auditor of Saskatchewan. The 

standing committee has adopted and has presented a report 

titled the second report of the Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts to this Assembly. Please refer to that report for the 

detail of the specific activities, processes, and individuals that 

were engaged through the selection process. This report 

includes the dates of activities and meetings. 

 

I would like to provide sincere thanks and appreciation to all 

individuals that assisted our committee in carrying out its 

responsibility. Pursuant to 21(1) of The Provincial Auditor Act, 

your committee sought the assistance of two recognized, 

independent subject matter experts from the audit committee to 

assist in the Provincial Auditor selection process on an 

independent screening panel. 

 

Your committee wishes to extend its sincere appreciation to its 

appointed subject area experts: Dr. Nola Buhr, Chair of the 

audit committee, and Ms. Joyce Stubbins, member of the audit 

committee. I would also like to thank Ms. Kathy Burianyk, 

committee Clerk and Ms. Ginette Michaluk, assistant director 

of human services and payroll services for administrative and 

human resource assistance with that screening panel. 

 

Following the retirement of former auditor Mr. Fred Wendel, 

our committee began its process of determining the next 

Provincial Auditor of Saskatchewan. 

 

For his leadership through the better part of the past year, I 

would like to recognize our Acting Provincial Auditor, Mr. 

Brian Atkinson, and to thank him for his service to our fine 

province. Mr. Atkinson has devoted 35 years to the people of 

Saskatchewan through his work in the Provincial Auditor’s 

office, holding progressively senior positions. He has served as 

deputy or assistant provincial auditor from 1980 through 2010. 

Mr. Atkinson has served as Acting Provincial Auditor since 



March 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6509 

May 2010 and has been an active member as a chartered 

accountant of his institute. Not only do I want to thank Mr. 

Atkinson for his service and leadership; I want to wish Mr. 

Atkinson well into his next stage of life. It’s well-deserved. 

 

The independent Office of the Provincial Auditor is vital to 

Saskatchewan people, as it is critical to ensure good 

government, with its role of accountability and its focus on the 

efficiency and economy of government programs. The specific 

role of Provincial Auditor is one of great importance, and the 

individual that fulfills that role provides valued leadership and 

service to our province. As Chair of the Standing Committee on 

Public Accounts, it’s my honour to welcome and to introduce 

the recommended candidate for Provincial Auditor of 

Saskatchewan, Ms. Bonnie Lysyk. 

 

As background, born in Winnipeg, Manitoba, Ms. Lysyk is a 

graduate of the University of Manitoba. She has a master’s in 

business administration and is a chartered accountant and a 

certified internal auditor. Ms. Lysyk presents to us a candidate 

with diverse experience in senior leadership in the public, 

private, and Crown sectors. Ms. Lysyk has significant audit, 

finance, risk management, and governance experience gained 

from working over 25 years in these sectors. She has served as 

the deputy auditor general and chief operating officer for the 

Office of the Auditor General of Manitoba for nearly seven 

years. 

 

She has held senior management positions in private sector 

organizations, including OMERS, the Ontario Municipal 

Employees Retirement System, a large pension fund 

organization where she held the position of vice-president, 

internal audit. As well, Ms. Lysyk worked for over 10 years 

with Manitoba Hydro in various roles, including assistant to the 

president and chief executive officer of Manitoba Hydro. She 

has also served as the chief audit executive with the Manitoba 

Liquor Control Commission. She obtained her CA [chartered 

accountant] while working with Coopers & Lybrand, now 

PricewaterhouseCoopers. 

 

Over the years Ms. Lysyk has been involved with various 

professional and not-for-profit organizations including the 

Institute of Chartered Accountants of Manitoba, the Canadian 

Institute of Chartered Accountants, the Canadian 

Comprehensive Auditing Foundation, the YM/YWCA [Young 

Men’s/Young Women’s Christian Association], and the centre 

for protection of children in Manitoba. 

 

Further she has served on the board of a large Manitoba credit 

union for nine years and as board chair for two years and is 

presently on the board of the Canadian Council of Institute of 

Internal Auditors. 

 

It is my honour to welcome Ms. Lysyk as a recommended 

candidate for Provincial Auditor of Saskatchewan. And if this 

Assembly grants their support, I thank her in advance for the 

leadership and service that she will provide the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It was a result of a thorough process and careful deliberation 

that your Standing Committee on Public Accounts agreed on 

this candidate for recommendation. After carefully reviewing 

the qualifications of each candidate and the results of the 

interviews, your committee makes the following 

recommendation. 

 

I move, as seconded by the Vice-Chair of the Standing 

Committee on the Public Accounts, the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood: 

 

That pursuant to 3.1(1) of The Provincial Auditor Act 

your committee unanimously recommends to the 

Legislative Assembly the name of Ms. Bonnie Lysyk for 

appointment to the position of Provincial Auditor for the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I so move. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the Public 

Accounts Committee: 

 

That pursuant to section 3.1(1) of The Provincial Auditor 

Act this Assembly appoints Bonnie Lysyk to the position 

of Provincial Auditor for Saskatchewan. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Deputy 

Chair of the Public Accounts Committee. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is certainly 

a pleasure to speak to the motion, and I would certainly concur 

with the comments made by the member from Rosemont, the 

Chair of the Public Accounts Committee. 

 

I would join with him in thanking all members of the Public 

Accounts Committee, Mr. Speaker. The Chair and myself were 

part of the steering committee, and we worked along with the 

committee Clerk, Ms. Kathy Burianyk, to play a role in 

developing the process, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s a process that 

served the members of this House and the people of this 

province well. 

 

As the Chair mentioned, we elicited the help of two very 

qualified individuals from the audit committee, Dr. Nola Buhr 

and Ms. Joyce Stubbins, who were invaluable in guiding us 

through this process. And I would certainly like to join with the 

member opposite in thanking them for all their help, and of 

course Ms. Ginette Michaluk from legislative services here who 

was a valuable resource in the area of human services. 

 

This is my first time in serving on a committee that undertook a 

national search for a position of one of the independent officers 

of this legislature. And without the expertise of those 

individuals on the selection panel, Mr. Speaker, I think those of 

us that haven’t had experience would have certainly been lost, 

and we certainly acknowledge their help and their guidance, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The appointment of . . . The Provincial Auditor’s office is 

certainly a very high profile independent office that many 

people throughout this province recognize, not saying that the 

other offices aren’t. They certainly all provide invaluable 

service to the legislature and to the people of this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

As the member from Rosemont mentioned and listed the 

qualifications of Ms. Lysyk for the position, I think if 



6510 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2011 

individuals go to the appendix A in the report that was tabled, 

they will see the wide range of experience including a number 

of years as deputy auditor general of Manitoba. In Manitoba 

they refer to their provincial auditor as the Auditor General. I’m 

not sure; I think Saskatchewan may be the only province that 

doesn’t use that term and so on. But, Mr. Speaker, I would look 

forward to working with Ms. Lysyk if this House approves her 

appointment. As I said, she certainly has the qualifications. 

 

But I would be remiss, before taking my place, if I didn’t thank 

the current Acting Provincial Auditor, Mr. Brian Atkinson, for 

his work and his many years of service. And I know he is 

looking forward to doing some other things. But we certainly, 

on behalf of the people of this province, I would also like to 

extend my thank you to him for all the great years of service 

and good service that he has provided to the people of this 

province. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in conclusion I would just like to say 

that, and remind members of this House, that The Provincial 

Auditor Act, the Public Accounts Committee is required under 

the Act to make a unanimous recommendation to the House. 

And we have achieved that, Mr. Speaker. And therefore I would 

conclude by saying that we have a process in place that, I 

believe, it will serve the members of this legislature and the 

people of this province very well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:45] 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

presented by the member from Regina Rosemont: 

 

That pursuant to section 3.1(1) of The Provincial Auditor 

Act, this Assembly appoints Bonnie Lysyk to the position 

of Provincial Auditor of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to accept the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Before we move on to orders of the day, I would like to extend 

an invitation to the members, our guests who are with us in the 

Chamber today, to a tea hosted by the Speaker in the library. 

And that would allow members the opportunity of getting to 

meet our new Provincial Auditor as well as conversing with 

other independent officers of the Assembly. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney on a point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today, in 

response to a question, the Minister of Education clearly stated 

that the members of the opposition were misleading the public. 

Beauchesne’s, page 146, very clearly indicates that that 

language has been ruled unparliamentary, Mr. Speaker, and I 

wish you to rule on the language used by the minister. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’ve heard the member’s point of 

order. I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to 

withdraw the statement and apologize. 

 

The Speaker: — I thank the Minister of Education. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 161 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 161 — The 

Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure this 

afternoon to rise to speak on a Bill that was introduced in the 

fall, obviously, earlier in this session, which is called An Act to 

amend The Election Act, 1996. 

 

Now we know that over the last number of elections, the 

number of people who have participated in the elections has 

been steadily dropping, and it’s quite ironic that this 

government chooses to introduce legislation which will restrict 

the ability of people to vote rather than legislation which will 

make it easier for people to vote and to participate in the 

democratic process. 

 

And there are a number of concerns that I have about this 

legislation, but let me put it this way, Mr. Speaker. In 

Saskatchewan we have a special quality of neighbourliness and 

understanding and I think it’s summed up by the comments of 

Brent Butt in a number of his comedy shows. 

 

And I ask that maybe the Minister of Justice might want to 

listen to this particular quote because there’s a story that Brent 

Butt tells about a new RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] 

officer who is assigned to a small town in Saskatchewan. And it 

so happens that this RCMP officer has just finished his training 

here at the training academy in Regina but in fact he comes 

from Toronto, big city. And so he is a very able student in the 

academy and he shows up in the small town, and wouldn’t you 

know it? First day on the job there’s a robbery that takes place 

at the local credit union. 

 

And so this new RCMP recruit goes to talk to the witnesses, 

who happen to be the manager and the teller at the credit union, 

and starts saying to them, can you give me a description of the 

person who has robbed your bank? And they both said, it was 



March 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6511 

Brad. And the RCMP officer says, no give me a description — 

height, weight, and colour. And they both say, no, it was Brad. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that kind of perspective in Saskatchewan, 

which is that we know our neighbour, we know the people that 

are here, means that this kind of legislation that’s being 

introduced here has some other purpose. And one of the 

frustrations when you look at and try to understand what the 

minister is doing in this particular legislation is that it seems to 

go contrary to the understandings in many of our communities 

within the cities, within the smaller towns, within rural areas, 

that we kind of know the people who live in our area. Now one 

of the concerns that arises is that the actual officials in the 

polling booths are no longer given the opportunity of 

acknowledging who people are unless they have come forward 

with some ID [identification] as set out in this legislation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, why is this legislation being introduced? 

That’s I think a good question. Now for me there are some 

parallels with this legislation that relate to a number of different 

things. One of the things we know that this government does is 

that it does things in code. It does things which appeal to certain 

sectors of their supporters. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m not totally certain, but I have a strong 

suspicion that this particular legislation is code to many of their 

supporters that we will make sure that the participation rate in 

democracy, in the elections in Saskatchewan, for those people 

who are on the lower end of the financial scale, for those people 

who come from Métis communities, for those people who come 

from Aboriginal communities, we’ll make sure that those 

groups continue to have low participation rate in democracy 

because they’ve kind of been left out of the financial system 

and we don’t want their ability to vote to somehow mess up 

things such as we’ve got them right now. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s code to their supporters saying, well 

we’re going to do some things here that make it difficult. Now 

why do I say that this has got that kind of a perspective? Well, 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation comes from similar kinds of 

attempts south of the Canadian border in the United States that 

also relate to a different issue there, which is the issue of the 

great number of Hispanic voters, which also is, in a way, a way 

of restricting the people who can participate in our democracy. 

 

I do not think that this is the appropriate kind of legislation that 

should be introduced into our province on that ground alone. I 

know that it’s been 50 years now since the voters’ rights battles 

in the United States over restricting the ability of Black voters 

to register so that they could vote in the southern United States. 

And there were many, many battles that arose out of that 

situation which caused all kinds of difficulties, but if you go 

and look back at well what was the legislation that triggered 

those battles, it was similar to this legislation here about the 

way that you restrict poor people, disadvantaged people from 

exercising their ability to vote. So, Mr. Speaker, I think that we 

should be extremely careful as we move forward with this 

legislation because it has that aspect of restricting the ability of 

people to participate in democracy rather than encouraging 

them. 

 

This is an amendment to The Election Act. We don’t do this 

very often. I think it’s 15 years since the Act was passed, and 

I’m not sure when the last amendment was, but it’s been a little 

while. 

 

Why don’t we see in this proposal a proposal for assisting 

voting online or assisting voting for those people who are not as 

mobile as they once were? Many of our seniors have difficulty 

getting to the polls and there are some things that we could do 

which would make it much easier for them to vote. You know, 

where is that kind of a perspective which says hey, we don’t 

have enough people voting in our province? Let’s get more 

people voting. Instead we have this legislation which appears to 

be a restriction on the ability of people to vote. 

 

Now when you look at the legislation itself, it appears fairly 

innocuous but in actual fact it includes a whole number of 

places where a person’s ability to vote can be challenged. And 

some of the provisions are clearly meant to prevent large 

numbers of First Nations people from voting. Now we’ve 

already had difficulties over the years with First Nations people 

voting in that we haven’t very often set up appropriate polls 

right on First Nations or we haven’t provided assistance for 

voters in some of the areas where maybe people need more 

assistance in voting. So here we add another reason for people 

to stay away from participating in our democracy. 

 

Now when this legislation came forward the minister said, and I 

quote from his speech on December 1st, he says, “Voters are 

already required to show approved ID in order to vote in federal 

elections and provincial elections in British Columbia, Ontario, 

and Quebec.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we know that as a result of this legislation in 

some of these other provinces and the federal legislation, there 

have been a number of challenges to how the legislation is 

enforced. And a number of the challenges relate to some fairly 

practical issues. 

 

Now one of the things is that our constitution doesn’t have these 

conditions in it as to who can vote, so these are glosses. These 

are things that are added on that are not in the constitution. And 

there is no requirement in our constitution that a voter has to 

have documentary evidence of their identity and their 

residential address before they can vote. Basically, Canadian 

citizens can vote. And there also end up being a whole number 

of groups that will be specifically excluded as we look at this. 

 

Now in the legislation there’s discussion about the various 

documents that one might use to prove whether or not you’re 

able to vote. It’s curious though that one of the documents 

that’s not included is the Certificate of Indian Status or the 

status card. And the status card doesn’t have an address on it 

normally, and so therefore it doesn’t qualify as a particular one. 

Also your passport wouldn’t be good enough as identification 

either because it doesn’t have an address on that one. So you’d 

end up with a number of different challenges on those fairly 

basic, important ID situations. 

 

So the one kind of card that seems to be the ideal card that’s 

being referenced in this particular legislation is a driver’s 

licence. Now there are more and more citizens who, as they age, 

no longer drive. And practically we have some ways for people 

getting ID, and I think practically that would address some of 

these concerns. But once again it’s an area where there are 



6512 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2011 

issues around how and what kinds of documents would be 

available. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Now another issue as it relates to drivers’ licences is that there 

are many disabled who can’t operate a vehicle and so they’re 

not allowed to, you know, to get a driver’s licence, obviously, 

so they would need some other kind of licence. 

 

I think that if governments are wishing to go forward with these 

kinds of proposals, it’s incumbent upon the government to 

spend some time — maybe years in advance — to make sure 

that everyone has appropriate identification. And one way of 

assuring that people would have appropriate identification is 

that the government would issue for free, to every citizen, photo 

ID that would be of sufficient quality to make sure everybody 

would have a chance to vote. 

 

And there may be reasons to do that other than these particular 

election Act changes, but it does go to the heart of many of the 

issues for homeless people. Some of the challenges to the 

federal legislation and the British Columbia legislation relates 

to homeless people in the downtown east side of Vancouver. 

And a number of the points that were raised in that situation 

were the fact that people who live on the streets don’t actually 

have an address. But what they were able to do in previous 

elections was to have people who lived in that neighbourhood 

and who knew them, and had known them for quite a few years, 

vouch for them. 

 

I’m not sure that that particular kind of situation may not apply 

in some of our communities in Saskatchewan where there are 

people who are couch surfing or who are not able to afford a 

place to live. And we know on our side of the House that there 

are many people who are having significant difficulties in 

finding places to live in the communities where they have work 

or they have services that they require. And this Act doesn’t 

appear to deal with those kinds of people in a way that’s 

sufficient as well. 

 

Now one of the other concerns that arises in this particular 

legislation is that they’ve set up a system whereby somebody 

can vouch for another voter, but the system is designed so that 

one person who, like a community social worker or a teacher or 

a pastor in a church or some leader in the community, is only 

allowed to vouch for one person. They can’t vouch for a whole 

number of people that they would know in the community. How 

fair is that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

It doesn’t make sense that you would only be able to vouch for 

one person. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that type of a clause in 

this legislation does relate to this perspective of, let’s try to 

keep as many of these people on the edges of society away from 

the ballot box; we don’t want them voting against our 

government. And, Mr. Speaker, that seems to be an underlying 

theme of this very brief piece of legislation, is that somehow 

we’re going to restrict people who maybe disagree with some of 

the policies that we have. 

 

And so I think that there will be a number of substantial issues 

that relates to this particular piece of legislation that fit in with 

some of the broader issues that come across the country and 

other provinces where restrictions on voting have been set up. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s a sad day here in Saskatchewan 

that we have taken a perspective of trying to restrict access to 

democracy as the theme of the government rather than a broader 

theme of saying, we want everybody to participate in the 

discussion. 

 

Now is this a surprise that this government would bring forward 

this legislation? I don’t think it’s a surprise to anybody sitting 

on this side of the House. I don’t think it’s a surprise to many 

people in the province. It also fits in with a sort of a national 

perspective that we see from our present minority government 

Prime Minister and his sense of control on many different 

things. 

 

We’ve heard over the last couple of weeks some of the 

comments from the federal members of parliament who have 

been identified by Elections Canada as breaking the rules 

around how the 2006 election goes, and I think that includes 

people also that were elected in Saskatchewan. And their 

comments talk about, oh well this is just a little administrative 

problem or this is that kind of thing. I think it goes 

fundamentally to the perspective that is brought forward by 

members of the federal Conservative Party by the members of 

this present Saskatchewan Party government which is, we’ll 

create the rules; we’ll figure out what they’re doing, and we’re 

going to restrict the ability of others to participate in some of 

the democratic processes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is wrong-headed legislation. It’s inappropriate 

for Saskatchewan people who always have prided themselves in 

including everybody in making decisions and, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that it would be important for the Minister of Justice to 

seriously take a look at pulling this legislation from this House. 

Because it’s not going to serve the interests of his party, of this 

legislature, of the people of Saskatchewan. And with that, Mr. 

Speaker, I’ll adjourn the debate. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — The member from 

Regina Lakeview has moved adjourned debate on Bill No. 161. 

Is the House in agreement? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — Agreed. 

 

Bill No. 162 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hickie that Bill No. 162 — The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Bradshaw): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I rise today to 

speak on The Local Government Election Act amendment, the 

consequential amendments Act. It’s interesting to note, flipping 

through the Bill, looking at some of the changes being made, 

the biggest change of course that is obvious is that it’s changing 

the municipal elections, the timing of the municipal elections, 

which has been something that SUMA and SARM have asked 



March 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6513 

for. And of course we would definitely support that as well 

because it would allow people who serve in elected office at the 

municipal level more time to build up expertise and experience, 

rather than the current three-year cycle that everyone is on. And 

I think that all constituents would benefit by that. 

 

It’s interesting though that in the same legislation . . . My 

colleague from Lakeview was just discussing the requirement 

for photo ID. It’s also in this legislation and it’s kind of 

interesting that it just kind of slid in there. The same arguments 

that my colleague made are certainly pertinent to putting it in 

this legislation. Any vote at any level of government has to be 

free and democratic, and I think people who have seen that the 

request or the requirement for photo ID in the upcoming 

elections are really all very worried how this will affect them in 

their ability to vote this year. 

 

Particularly difficult are seniors who definitely don’t all have a 

driver’s licence, who don’t have photo ID, who don’t have the 

ability to go out. Many people don’t have power bills. They 

don’t pay for them themselves in some of the complexes that 

they live in. So if your second form of ID is a power bill or 

some other utility bill, many people don’t pay their utility bills; 

they’re included in their rent. So it is going to disenfranchise 

many citizens in Saskatchewan. 

 

I know my colleague from Lakeview called it wrong-headed. I 

think it’s actually quite interesting that a government who talks 

about accountability and transparency would make this overt 

move to disenfranchise so many of Saskatchewan’s citizens. 

And it’s interesting the groups that would be targeted or 

affected by this which are seniors, low-income families, renters, 

and also students aren’t very happy. So I think . . . And for sure, 

Aboriginal and First Nations, Métis people. 

 

I don’t understand the logic of putting it in for this election. 

There was some comment made by the Minister of Justice that 

this was to keep up with what’s happening across the country. I 

notice that BC [British Columbia] has got a challenge to this, so 

I’m not sure what would drive us to step into this right before 

an election, what benefit it would have. And I’m assuming 

legislative changes would be for the benefit of the public. I 

really don’t see the benefit to the public in these changes. 

 

And I don’t see any of the explanations either in second reading 

speeches or in news releases that would support this as being a 

change that would enhance the voting experience or increase 

the participation in the democratic process. Right now we have 

— and not just Saskatchewan but across Canada has — quite a 

low record of turnout for voters. 

 

And so we need to have a discussion with all voters. What 

would be more likely to get you to the polls? Is it online voting? 

Is it making it easier to come to the poll and not have to show 

all these pieces of ID? Many of those things haven’t been 

discussed with the stakeholders. I mean people who this will 

affect have not been asked, and I think they’re very concerned 

that this will change the ability that they will have to vote. 

 

And I know the minister in some . . . I think it was some press 

release or some press conference that he was doing said that this 

would be better for people, and I really can’t see how he would 

think that. It just doesn’t at all suggest that more people will 

come out. 

 

He actually suggested that people need to be prepared to vote, 

so they can’t just come out at the last minute: after supper you 

decide you’re going to go. You have to be prepared. You have 

to think ahead. What do I have to take with me? You haven’t 

got your enumeration card. You don’t have an ID. You know, 

what are you going to need to do? 

 

So we have to look at really quite a massive campaign of 

education on how do you get to the poll and how do you 

exercise your democratic right to vote. I think these things have 

made, these changes will make it more difficult, more onerous, 

rather than looking at ways to encourage people to come out 

and vote and to be part of the democratic process. I really, as I 

say, don’t understand why this would have to be something that 

is so imperative to have before this 2011 election in 

Saskatchewan in November. 

 

To me, it does smack of intent. And I think if we’re looking at 

the people who this will most negatively impact — First 

Nations, Métis, low-income people, renters, students, and 

seniors — those people actually usually don’t vote for the 

government. So to have them be the targeted group, it does beg 

the question, are you really trying to make their experience 

more difficult and make it seem that they’re not wanted at the 

voting booth? Nor does the government care about their vote 

because they don’t traditionally get their vote, so let’s make 

sure no one else gets it either. Now how is that fair? 

 

And I think, given the fact that the Chief Electoral Officer 

appointment was such a fiasco and still is, we now still have an 

Acting Chief Electoral Officer because the government 

couldn’t, the government members in the selection process 

couldn’t follow the process that’s been in place for many, 

many, many years. It’s an independent officer and yet they 

wanted to meddle, in particular the Premier because the 

members on the selection committee of his government had 

agreed. And now, then the Premier . . . somehow things 

changed and we still only have an Acting Chief Electoral 

Officer, which speaks quite negatively to how the government, 

the Sask Party government, participates in the democratic 

process. 

 

So these changes I think are another signal to the people of 

Saskatchewan. Thousands and thousands and thousands who 

fall into the categories that I mentioned, the message to them is 

we don’t care if you have the ability to vote because you’re not 

going to vote for us. And what type of arrogance does that 

display in a government, that you don’t think the whole 

province should be able to vote? Regardless of how they vote, 

they should be able to vote. And I think that you’re saying to 

them if you don’t vote for us, you’re not going to be able to 

vote. And we’re going to make sure that happens. We’re going 

to put as many obstacles in place in front of you so that you 

can’t get to the polls and vote. 

 

I mean, there’s no logical explanation to do this in this election 

unless those are the intentions. And that seems to be quite a 

negative comment and a negative aspect of this government 

which, Mr. Deputy Chair, there are quite a few negative aspects 

of this government, but this is just one of them that I think 

people are going, why now and why this? And this is going to 



6514 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2011 

affect me. So I think it’s a very telling commentary on the 

attitude of this government and the agenda frankly because I 

think they’ve definitely decided that because these groups of 

people don’t traditionally vote for them, that they don’t care 

whether they vote or not. And they want to actually just go a 

step further and make sure it’s really difficult for them to vote. 

 

[15:15] 

 

So to hide this in the local elections Act behind the good news 

of changing the electoral cycle for municipal governments, I 

think it shows a bit of a nefarious spirit as well. There’s an 

underhandedness to this and a sneakiness to it, you know, to 

think that people wouldn’t care or wouldn’t notice. Because this 

is on one hand you’re giving some good news, on the other 

hand you’re slipping in the bad news, and hopefully people 

won’t notice. 

 

Well I found in my travels, particularly in rural Saskatchewan, 

that people are noticing and that they are saying that there’s 

things going on that I think the government felt that rural 

Saskatchewan wouldn’t notice. But they are noticing. 

 

And people aren’t being fooled. They aren’t being fooled by the 

privatization agenda in the health sector. They’re not being 

fooled. And I know poll after poll talks about people’s 

commitment to publicly owned Crowns, publicly administered 

and funded health care. And I think people are very concerned 

about those two items that seem to be sliding away with the 

Sask Party in government. 

 

And the way that they have to change that is to come to the poll 

on November 7th and vote, or in the advanced polls and vote. 

And if you take away that right of those people, then you are 

interfering in a really direct way with the democratic process. 

You’re not just obstructing the appointment of an independent 

officer as the Chief Electoral Officer. You are actually 

impeding people’s right to vote. 

 

And I think people will understand this. They do understand 

already. If they don’t have photo ID, they can’t vote. This is 

what this means. And I think people who hear about this are 

definitely very unhappy, in fact angry. What does this mean to 

me? Why can’t I vote? Why do I need to jump through these 

hoops? Why is it necessary now? 

 

And I don’t think there’s been a good answer from the Sask 

Party and from the government. There hasn’t been a good 

answer about why now and why particularly it will affect these 

people. 

 

And what does it mean to those people who are traditionally not 

Sask Party supporters? It tells them that you’re interfering in 

my democratic right. I have a right not to vote for you, but 

you’re preventing me from coming to the polls. That says a lot 

about the government’s agenda and about frankly the arrogance 

of assuming that people won’t notice. Riding on a popularity 

high, thinking that there’s things that they can slide in that 

people won’t notice, they do so at their own peril. I mean, you 

can only sit on a high horse for so long before it bucks you off. 

And I think that people do understand what this means to them 

and to their rights, and they’ll watch more closely. 

 

We’ve seen the rights of people to be consulted on many ways 

in the last few sessions, that’s been eroded. The government’s 

totally ignored that process, ignored people’s input. 

 

We see poll after poll, people talking about how they’re very 

concerned about the privatization of the Crowns. And the 

government speaks a lot about, oh, their commitment to having 

publicly owned Crowns. And yet, piece by piece, SaskTel is 

being sold off. And everybody knows it. I mean, SaskTel 

people know it. People in the province know it. Why do we 

have Save Our Crowns, a big organization forming to fight back 

for this? The Sask Party convention heard it. People are getting 

the message out. 

 

So you can’t hide. You can’t hide these things. I don’t know if 

there’s that degree of arrogance in the Sask Party that you think 

that you’re the emperor that has no clothes, no one will mention 

it. Or the elephant in the room that no one’s going to notice that 

you’re thumping around on everybody’s rights, and that you’re 

sitting down on the desk and it’s breaking. 

 

I think people do notice. And I think that there is a level of 

arrogance that assumes people won’t notice in Saskatchewan. 

They do know and they are watching. And it is going to 

backfire because people really do prize, they prize their health 

care. They prize their Crown corporations. And they prize their 

democracy and they definitely prize their right to vote. And if 

you start jockeying around with that, meddling in that process, 

interfering with their rights, you will have a backlash. And 

people will, they will speak up and will be heard. 

 

And I think that the government . . . Like I said, I don’t 

understand the agenda unless it’s as stark as I’ve laid out 

because otherwise there just doesn’t seem a logical reason to be 

doing this. There’s no big fraud scandals happening at polls that 

this has to be brought in for. No evidence to suggest that. It just 

seems like an interesting move. 

 

And basically when confronted with some of these, it’s because 

of these three demographics that — like the seniors, the First 

Nations and Métis, and low-income or rental families and 

students — don’t vote for you. Nobody even denies it in the 

Sask Party. They think it’s funny. So I don’t think people that 

have their democratic rights taken away from them will think 

it’s funny, and I’m pretty sure that they’re going to be able to 

say so. 

 

And so I really don’t think that this is something that anybody’s 

going to support, certainly not on our side are going to be 

supporting, no matter where you hide it. If you put it in two 

different Acts, it’s still not going to matter. It’s still not going to 

be something that we will support, and we’ve certainly heard 

from the people of Saskatchewan that they don’t support it 

either. 

 

And we need to speak up for them, those that are certainly 

disenfranchised, like seniors. You don’t see them getting up and 

coming down to this legislature. You don’t see low-income 

people coming down because they just simply can’t. They can’t 

leave their jobs. They can’t leave their homes. There’s people 

that don’t get to come and speak out at this legislature who still 

need to have somebody to speak for them, and I think this is 

one way that people need to hear. They need to hear these sorts 



March 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6515 

of speeches. They need to hear these comments on these Bills, 

that there are people that know what’s happening and that there 

are people who support them and their democratic right to vote, 

and that there are people who will speak up against it and do 

everything that they possibly can to have this not happen. And I 

think this is . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Hear, hear! Shed some light on it. 

 

Ms. Junor: — And my colleague from Cumberland says we 

need to shed light on this. Well we absolutely do. I mean we 

can’t, we can’t . . . I think the Sask Party expects people to be in 

a dark hole and not come out and have a look. And I think that 

might work for a groundhog, but it doesn’t work for the people 

in Saskatchewan. They do want to have a look. And they do 

value those things I was talking about. They do value health 

care, publicly funded and administered. They do value the 

Crowns. And they do value their democratic rights. 

 

So the Sask Party’s tampering with all three, frankly. And I 

think those things are what people need the right to say no to. 

And the right to say no comes at the ballot box on election day. 

And so it does seem to be an odd coincidence that this 

government has put these changes in to make sure that fewer 

and fewer of those people can come to the ballot box on 

November 7th and say no. 

 

That I think bears some really, really glaring public scrutiny 

because I think that does speak to the agenda of this 

government. It speaks to the intent of this government. It speaks 

to the integrity of this government. For a government who talks 

about transparency and accountability, it’s a farce. It is a farce 

when you see something like this come in. This is what will 

happen to people at the ballot box in the democratic process. It 

does make it a farce. 

 

So I think that people will definitely want to hear the debate. 

They want to be heard themselves. We’re hearing from many of 

these people, talking about what this means to them, and they 

don’t like it. And just because they can’t come here and speak 

doesn’t mean that they don’t have very strong feelings about 

this. 

 

And I think it’s an extremely black mark on the Sask Party to 

put this forward as a government and to try and disenfranchise 

voters who they frankly don’t think are theirs. That is pretty low 

for a government to be doing. 

 

And with those comments, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Not very democratic. 

 

Ms. Junor: — That’s a totally undemocratic government. With 

those comments, I would definitely . . . As I said, we will not be 

supporting this. I would like to adjourn debate at this time 

because many of my colleagues have thoughts similar to this 

and certainly want to have them put on the record to show their 

constituents. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — The member from 

Saskatoon Eastview has moved adjournment on Bill No. 162. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — Agreed. 

 

Bill No. 159 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 159 — The 

University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

continue my comments on Bill No. 159, An Act to amend The 

University of Regina Act. I spoke for a brief period of time on 

this Bill during the fall sitting of this session, Mr. Speaker, after 

the Bill was introduced. And as I commented at that time, 

essentially the purpose of the Bill is to harmonize the election 

of chancellor with the current, recently changed rules governing 

the University of Saskatchewan so that that election and other 

election proceedings for the University of Regina are 

harmonized similar or identical to the procedures at the 

University of Saskatchewan. 

 

The sense that the two universities would have to be governed 

in exactly the same way is not necessarily one that I personally 

agree with. I have no objections to the proposed changes. And if 

they are, as the government says they are, done at the initiative 

of the University of Regina, perhaps looking at the example 

University of Saskatchewan, saying that’s an example we want 

to follow, well that certainly, Mr. Speaker, should carry the day. 

 

But there should not be an assumption that the universities are 

twins. They are not. And therefore there shouldn’t be an 

assumption on the part of any government that they necessarily 

need to be governed in exactly the same way, that the 

chancellor needs to be selected in the same way. The size of 

convocation for the two universities would be significantly 

different, for example, Mr. Speaker, and therefore the group of 

people being to a certain extent disenfranchised when it comes 

down to election of the chancellor are a different group of 

people. 

 

The history of elections for chancellor for the University of 

Regina may or may not have proportionally different turnout 

results than the University of Saskatchewan. But certainly 

there’s no requirement that Saskatchewan’s two universities be 

governed in exactly the same way. 

 

And there are of course other institutions bearing that name, 

Mr. Speaker, and they’re not governed in an identical way as 

the University of Saskatchewan, nor should they be. So that 

requirement, certainly if it was felt to be there by either the 

University of Regina or the Government of Saskatchewan, I 

don’t believe should actually be held to have been there, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

As I commented when I spoke to this Bill earlier in the session 

during the fall sitting, universities are rather unique institutions. 

They are unique educational institutions and, I would argue, 

unique post-secondary institutions. They are not special; they 



6516 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2011 

are not better than other post-secondary institutions. Some 

members of the Assembly know that my son is currently 

enrolled at SIAST, and I would suggest that his choice about an 

educational institution is as good as one can make in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And so that’s not my argument about universities. I’m not 

arguing that there is a hierarchy here in any sense but that 

universities to a certain extent serve a different educational 

need, and they serve other functions within our society quite 

separate and distinct from polytechnics, if I can use that term. 

Universities have a history of independence. And universities 

traditionally in their origins hundreds of years ago were not 

founded by governments, and they grew up alongside 

governments. And arguably in the modern age, governments, 

states, have negotiated terms of engagement with universities. 

And that’s quite a different history than the history of public 

education from which some post-secondary education and the 

SIAST model grows out of, the sort of history of K to 12 

[kindergarten to grade 12] education which was founded by 

governments and by the larger public. 

 

That said, of course, much of the funding of universities comes 

from the broader public. Arguably not enough. And certainly in 

the last 30 years, Mr. Speaker, since some of us first attended 

universities, the proportion that students pay of the freight, the 

cost of the freight that they pay for their education, for their 

degree has grown, Mr. Speaker. And I would suggest in the 

case of some liberal arts students, they pay a majority, if not 

almost all, the costs of their education whereas of course some 

students in heavily technical fields pay proportionally less. But 

I think overall there’s no dispute that students are paying much, 

much more of their education than they did 30 years ago, Mr. 

Speaker. And I guess people of my generation were the benefits 

of a transfer, perhaps an intergenerational transfer of wealth 

that’s benefited us but is not there to nearly the same extent for 

students today. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So universities are funded by those two main sources. They are 

also funded because they do research. Some of that is public 

money; some of that is not public money, Mr. Speaker, but they 

are not in that way identical to other public educational 

institutions or even other post-secondary educational 

institutions. Although other post-secondary institutions also 

charge tuition, Mr. Speaker, the cost to the student, particularly 

for the shorter diploma courses, is considerably less than it is 

for a university student. And then a university student, a 

graduate student who’s involved in a scholarship or research as 

well, Mr. Speaker, has additional costs and those aren’t 

necessarily treated the same way by this government as the 

costs of undergraduate students. 

 

And the opposition has spoken about that issue quite often, Mr. 

Speaker, and has been looking for redress on that issue for quite 

a while, Mr. Speaker. And it looks like it’s not likely to be 

forthcoming from this government. 

 

There is an educational role, of course, that universities play, 

and there is a research role that universities play that is certainly 

unique to them as educational institutions. There are other 

research institutions, but universities are significant research 

institutions, and I think, within the province of Saskatchewan, 

far and away the most significant sources of innovation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There is also a public role, a role that’s played in the social, 

cultural, and intellectual life of the community that the 

university serves that really there is no other institution to serve. 

And the founders of this province are to be commended on their 

ambitious goal that there be a university in this province 

because no other institution can easily pick up that important 

role of independent critique and criticism of policy that a 

university can play. 

 

And I note for example that, not tied to any interest whatsoever, 

with no partisan agenda, no party discipline being imposed 

upon them, that academics in political science and in law, 

familiar with human rights legislation and the advance and 

development of human rights legislation, are speaking out 

against the Bill that follows this one in number, Mr. Speaker, 

Bill 160, on the abolishment of human rights tribunals and 

really, really the end of, the end of or the near end of, if not the 

extinction, certainly the near extinction of human rights case 

law and adjudication of human rights complaints in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And these critics are out of reach of 

the government and they are even out of reach of anybody’s 

political party discipline. I have no control; nobody in the 

opposition has any control over what these people say and what 

they do because they have this independence that’s provided by 

being part of an institution which has autonomy, values debate, 

thought, free thought, free speech, and even the discussion of 

unpopular or new ideas, Mr. Speaker. And no other institution 

in our society really has that or can have that kind of role in a 

society, you know. 

 

Imagine the educational function of the university being 

replaced by a different institution and pull in more of what a 

university teaches into a polytechnic, technical school type of 

model. You can imagine a government — and this will 

probably be a mistake because you never know where research 

is going to go — but a government being very interested in a 

particular kind of research or a particular kind of result and 

creating research institutions to work on innovation and playing 

the role that universities play. 

 

But it would be an oxymoron to have a government create an 

institution where people are independent of government and 

independent of party and independent of other institutions and 

ask to, implicitly ask to examine public policy or development 

in society and to research them or comment upon them, Mr. 

Speaker. That of course is something that is unique to 

universities. And, Mr. Speaker, I guess these comments are 

directed at reminding all of us of the value of the universities 

that exist in the province of Saskatchewan, their importance. 

 

And although it is very important not to reduce that importance 

to statistics about graduates, about income levels of graduates, 

about even research dollars attracted to the province of 

Saskatchewan, as important as all those things are, the spirit of 

the university, of its free inquiry, of its independence from the 

government of the day or other powerful institutions in society 

— that is part of our democratic heritage, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And our democratic heritage is more complicated than just the 



March 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6517 

right to vote, which unfortunately is also up for debate in this 

Assembly, in this session, and in this sitting, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

much more complex than that, and the university plays a very 

fundamental and important role in that democratic heritage. 

 

And so how the university is governed is vitally important. And 

here in this legislation, we are dealing with at least two of the 

institutions that govern the University of Saskatchewan and the 

University of Regina, and how these are selected is going to be 

harmonized by this legislation. One is the senate, which 

provides for public input, and the chancellor who, I appreciate, 

has a role in the senate but also a role on the board of governors 

which very importantly, because of the number of government 

appointments to the board of governors, is limited to financial 

matters and financial governance of the universities. 

 

The issue of academic freedom and academic programs is left to 

the council of the universities and that preserves the academic 

freedom and independence of professors and others at the 

university of both Regina and the University of Saskatchewan. 

And it is that vital division of powers that this legislation 

addresses in a minor way, Mr. Speaker, but it still addresses that 

issue. 

 

And so the question is here again, is the change in the election 

of a chancellor, as has already been done by this government in 

the case of the University of Saskatchewan, does that change 

strengthen, weaken, or not affect that very important division of 

powers, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Again we would want to be confident that this has the support 

of the University of Regina, whatever that might mean, Mr. 

Speaker. And it may have the support of the administration but 

not necessarily of the senate. And I know that as some 

Saskatoon members and members from elsewhere in the 

province were concerned about the changes in The University of 

Saskatchewan Act, some Regina members who have not yet had 

an opportunity to speak and other members from elsewhere in 

Saskatchewan may be concerned about this change which, as I 

said at the beginning of my remarks this afternoon, is not 

required by the change that was made at The University of 

Saskatchewan Act by any stretch of the imagination, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So to allow this discussion to continue and to allow other 

members to participate in it, Mr. Speaker, and knowing that I 

spoke at some length earlier in the session on this Bill, I would 

move that we adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Meewasin has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 159, The University 

of Regina Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 160 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 160 — The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to join 

in on the discussion this afternoon for adjourned debates on Bill 

No. 160, An Act to amend the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Code and to make consequential amendments to The Labour 

Standards Act, Bill 160. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s been a few members of the Assembly who 

have had the opportunity to speak to this piece of legislation, 

with remarks being made by the minister and some members 

from the opposition. So it is my pleasure to add a few thoughts 

around the discussion that has been proposed by the minister, 

Mr. Speaker, on changes that in his view should occur in the 

area of human rights legislation here in the province. 

 

The changes that are being suggested by the minister, Mr. 

Speaker, is to essentially do away with the process that has been 

in place for individuals to air complaints of discrimination — a 

tribunal process that has been put in place, as in other places in 

Canada, that allows an individual to come forward with a 

complaint when they feel like they have been discriminated 

against in some manner. 

 

The current legislation allows for discrimination complaints 

based on a number of factors and these include race, colour, 

age, sex, sexual orientation, physical or mental disability, 

religion, marital status, family status, place of origin or ancestry 

as some examples of the basis for a discrimination complaint. 

And the context in which those complaints can come forward 

are also . . . There’s a number of different examples that are 

provided such as tenancy, employment, employment 

advertisements, publications, public services and facilities, a 

purchase of property, and discrimination by unions or 

associations. So we do know that from time to time there are 

instances in society where discrimination takes place based on 

the aspects and in the context that I listed just now. 

 

Our province’s motto, Mr. Speaker, is “from many peoples, 

strength.” So we know that Saskatchewan is a diverse place. 

That’s one of the sort of founding models or statements that has 

been used by elected officials and used by the provincial 

government for some time when it comes to looking at the 

Saskatchewan context. And that is a good one because we in 

this Assembly do come from many backgrounds. Some would 

suggest, and rightfully so, that perhaps we could have even 

more backgrounds represented here in the Assembly. 

 

[15:45] 

 

But we know that our Saskatchewan culture and our 

Saskatchewan sense of place is comprised of many different 

types of people from different backgrounds, holding different 

views and living life in different ways but within the legal 

context and framework that is available to everyone here in 

Saskatchewan, within the rights that are awarded to everyone 

that is living in Saskatchewan. 

 

And as it presently stands, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Commission has been one way in which 



6518 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2011 

individuals have been able to exercise their rights if they feel 

like they have been discriminated against for whatever reason. 

And we know, while we would like to think that everyone in 

society can get along nicely and have a general orientation 

based on mutual respect and tolerance, sadly we do know that 

from time to time that is not the case here in the province and 

that discrimination can in fact occur. And when it does occur, 

Mr. Speaker, it is a very hurtful thing, and I think all members 

would agree that when discrimination occurs, it is a step 

backwards for our society and for our province. 

 

So with that in mind, it’s important when looking at any type of 

human rights legislation and how complaints are handled and 

dealt with, it’s important to remember that it’s our role and duty 

as legislators to set up a framework that allows individuals’ 

rights to be respected and to allow individuals to live with a 

sense of confidence and peacefulness and happiness that all 

Saskatchewan people want as we carry out our daily activities 

of working and pursuing recreational pursuits and finding a 

place to live and going to an educational institution and raising 

children in our province. And thankfully that is the approach 

that most Saskatchewan people take when it comes to 

interacting with our fellow neighbours in this province. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, from time to time discrimination 

does occur, so it’s necessary to have a framework in place that 

allows people to voice complaints and to have an injustice dealt 

with properly and effectively. What Bill 60 is essentially 

proposing to change about the way human rights are handled in 

the province is to do away with the tribunal system that has 

been in place where individuals can voice their concerns. And 

in doing away with or eliminating the tribunal process, what 

would take place is a process of forced mediation. And if that 

did not, if that was not successful, Mr. Speaker, then the issue at 

hand could be referred to the judicial system for it to be handled 

through the court process. So that is essentially what this 

legislation is proposing. 

 

Now there has been a discussion in the Assembly as to whether 

or not that is a smart thing to do, what might be some of the 

pitfalls, and perhaps what could be some of the benefits about 

taking that approach. 

 

We know that . . . I guess as an opposition member and looking 

at the issue of human rights and the role that government should 

take, Mr. Speaker, I do think back in recent months some of the 

instances that we’ve had in the news and in the current events 

where the government has taken a position on human rights that 

to me would indicate a less than ambitious agenda when it 

comes to defending some of the rights of individuals in the 

province. 

 

And the issue I’m thinking of in particular, Mr. Speaker, is the 

issue of marriage commissioners and the legal appeal or court 

process that was under way and supported by the government to 

see if there was another way, to see if marriage commissioners, 

who do represent the province and are to operate and work 

within the laws that are put in place and respected in the 

province, ought to meet the requests that are placed to them 

from or by Saskatchewan people. And we saw the government 

support for a process, an appeal process seeking information as 

to whether or not there is a way around that legislation, of 

ensuring that individuals in the province have fair and open 

access to marriage commissioners and will not face 

discrimination on that particular aspect. 

 

And in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, instead of the government 

simply understanding and respecting the law that is in place on 

that particular issue, they chose to spend valuable resources of 

time and money in an appeal process that looked for a way out, 

a way around that — whether there was wiggle room, whether 

there was a different option — when it was clear I think to most 

Saskatchewan people that it is the role of a marriage 

commissioner to in fact complete the duties given to him or her 

by the province, and that the services they should provide 

should be done in a way that does not discriminate against those 

who are operating within the legal framework of the particular 

province, in this case Saskatchewan. So instead of simply 

understanding if that is the role, the government chose to take a 

different approach and spend valuable resources of time and 

money in a legal process. 

 

Now some might say, well that’s not the biggest deal in the 

world. But I think it speaks to an attitude around human rights, 

an attitude around legislation that guarantees the rights of 

individuals in the province to have equal access to services, that 

causes me and I know many other people in the province to 

pause and question or examine thoroughly what may in fact be 

the motives behind this piece of legislation, which is closely 

related to the issues that I just mentioned around the area of 

marriage commissioners. 

 

So I think it’s fair to ask questions about why the Minister of 

Justice would choose to bring forward this legislation and what 

in fact is the goal, whether stated or unstated, that is hoped to be 

accomplished by having this piece of legislation brought into 

being in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So I’d like to talk, Mr. Speaker, about a few of the components 

around the legislation, components that are in place under the 

tribunal system, and then components . . . and then how the 

proposed changes may indeed affect many Saskatchewan 

people in a way that is not in their best interest for advancing 

the issue of human rights legislation here in the province. 

 

The one issue about mediation and how this would be the 

process that individuals with a complaint would seek to solve 

the issue with the person that they deem has discriminated 

against them . . . The process of mediation, while in principle I 

certainly support the idea and I think mediation is an effective 

way to handle many types of cases or many types of disputes 

within society, I do not think however that it is a one-fits-all 

approach that will solve all issues. 

 

In certain types of disputes, if it’s a property matter or even if 

it’s a family dispute coming out of a family breakdown, 

mediation can indeed serve a role to handle that in an effective 

way that both sides of the equation can live with and be happy 

with the end result. When dealing with issues of discrimination, 

because of the very personal nature of complaints — and at the 

beginning I listed many of the examples of what can be the 

basis for a complaint, things such as race, age, sex, sexual 

orientation, physical or mental disability — the relationship, 

Mr. Speaker, between the complainant and the other individual, 

there can often be a very unequal power relationship there based 

on or as a result of the type of discrimination that took place. 



March 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6519 

And while in a situation in a marriage for example where there 

are two equals, I think when it’s an issue of discrimination 

based on race for example, Mr. Speaker, the power imbalance 

can exist which will not allow the mediation to achieve its end, 

will not allow the mediation to flow smoothly, and in some 

instances perhaps can reinforce the discrimination that took 

place between one individual and another. 

 

So while mediation in general, I do support the notion, I think 

it’s positive, it’s not without its problems when dealing with the 

issue of human rights legislation, dealing with the issue of an 

individual who has been discriminated against because of who 

they are essentially, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that is one area where I have some questions and some 

concerns about how this will in fact play out on the ground and 

whether it will further the goals of having better and stronger 

and fairer human rights legislation if that is in fact the goal of 

members opposite, which I am not necessarily convinced of, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another issue that comes to my attention, based on the 

proposed structure of these changes in doing away with the 

tribunals, is the increased role and power that is awarded to the 

commissioner in determining what cases can in fact, what cases 

do in fact warrant a hearing. And, Mr. Speaker, these comments 

are not directed at any one individual, whether that’s present or 

future. This is about designing a system for complaints about 

human rights that has the necessary checks in place in order to 

ensure that not one individual has too much control in 

determining what complaints are taken forward. 

 

In going through the legislation and taking a look at the 

explanatory notes that are provided with Bill No. 160, An Act to 

amend the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, it’s interesting to 

note, Mr. Speaker, that on page 10 of the explanatory notes, and 

I’m quoting from page 10 at the top, “Clause (g) is repealed and 

replaced with a new provision that allows the Chief 

Commissioner to dismiss complaints that do not warrant a 

hearing.” 

 

So while there may be some role for the commissioner to 

exercise that type of authority, by not having that decision 

checked by a tribunal, by other individuals, it’s not . . . I’m not 

reassured that in all instances, Mr. Speaker, that the correct 

decision can in fact stand, that in some instances, perhaps, the 

check that is provided by tribunals can be very effective in 

ensuring that all rights of individuals are upheld and are 

respected. So that’s another concern that I have around the 

proposed changes with doing away with the tribunal system. 

 

I think also, Mr. Speaker, I know when the legislation was 

introduced to the Assembly, there were a number of 

stakeholders in the gallery who came, stakeholders in the area 

of human rights legislation and concerned about advancing the 

rights of individuals here in the province. And the people in the 

gallery, Mr. Speaker, it’s my understanding that in pitching 

these changes that are proposed in eliminating the tribunals and 

enhancing the role of the commissioner in dealing with these 

issues and going the judicial route, it was my understanding that 

education was pitched as a key component of these changes. 

And I certainly think the role of education is highly, highly 

important in our school system and through other measures to 

ensure that a knowledge and awareness of human rights is 

increased and enhanced throughout the province, and that all 

individuals in society are aware of their rights and 

responsibilities when it comes to dealing with human rights. 

 

But the legislation, Mr. Speaker, is very quiet on the issue of 

education. So I think it’s important to realize that if there is a 

stated goal about what these changes will accomplish and bring, 

it’s necessary to have the details in the legislation as to how that 

goal will be accomplished, and by having details of the 

educational components absent, that does not reassure me that 

the educational component is in fact a central part of this 

proposed legislation. It very well . . . and I fully believe that it is 

a goal of many individuals involved with the Human Rights 

Commission, but if that is not explicitly detailed in the 

legislation and if funding is not tied to those efforts, it doesn’t 

do much good to simply talk about what sort of initiatives could 

be helpful or could be beneficial to Saskatchewan people. So I 

think that that is a concern. 

 

And it’s interesting when we talk about the promotion of 

educational initiatives to increase tolerance and increase respect 

for diversity here in the province, of course those initiatives do 

take funding and take resources. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the 

resources that the government devoted to the court process to 

deal with the marriage commissioners, I wonder if those 

resources could have been better spent in a way that actually 

promoted the goals of human rights legislation and increase the 

awareness in the province of what people’s rights and 

responsibilities are. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve highlighted a few of my concerns, having 

gone through the legislation and some of the earlier remarks by 

speakers. And I think that some of the concerns I’ve raised, Mr. 

Speaker, are also being raised by other individuals in civil 

society who have some concerns with this approach. And the 

concerns aren’t necessarily . . . the concerns aren’t with many of 

the stated goals of increasing, what is said to increase human 

rights, increase access, and those initiatives, but it 

fundamentally questions whether a change in the structure is 

indeed the appropriate and necessary way to go about achieving 

those stated goals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to read into the public record a letter 

to the minister, an open letter to the minister from Amnesty 

International who have voiced some of the concerns that they 

see around this proposed Bill. And I think it’s important, Mr. 

Speaker, to indicate to the public who may be listening and to 

organizations that have a concern about changes here that may 

be affecting the issue of human rights in our province in a 

negative manner, I think it’s important to read this letter in 

order to show that there are those in the province who are not 

supportive and at peace with the approach that the minister is 

taking in bringing in these changes. 

 

So the letter from Amnesty International is dated December 

10th, 2010, and it states: 

 

Dear Minister, 

 

Amnesty International is writing this open letter to urge 



6520 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2011 

you to reconsider the plans for reform of Saskatchewan’s 

laws and institutions for the protection of human rights in 

the province, as contained in Bill 160, which you recently 

introduced in the provincial legislature. 

 

Amnesty International is, in particular, deeply concerned 

about the proposal in the Bill to abolish the Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Tribunal and leave adjudication of human 

rights complaints in the hands of provincial Court of 

Queen’s Bench instead. We are concerned that this will 

impede access to human rights remedies for many 

individuals, as court proceedings are inevitably more 

complex, formal and time-consuming. 

 

We recognize that Bill 160 also proposes changes to the 

role of the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission, 

including an increased focus on dealing with systemic 

patterns of discrimination and on making use of 

alternative dispute resolution methods, such as mediation. 

Those are enhancements to the system that would very 

likely make positive contributions to greater human rights 

protection. But informality and accessibility of the 

adjudication process itself plays a crucial role in 

maximizing human rights protection, given the very 

nature of the complaints and the fact that they are often 

brought forward by individuals from marginalized groups 

and sectors in society. 

 

It is well recognized in Canada and globally, that human 

rights institutions other than the courts have an important 

role to play in adjudicating human rights complaints. 

Notably, the Paris Principles relating to the Status of 

National Institutions, adopted by the UN General 

Assembly in 1993, expressly set out that a national human 

rights body, “may be authorized to hear and consider 

complaints and petitions concerning individual 

situations.” 

 

Across Canada, that is precisely the model that has been 

adopted in all jurisdictions. Provincially and federally, 

human rights tribunals with informal procedures that aim 

to maximize accessibility are empowered to make the first 

level decision in human rights complaints which proceed 

to the stage of adjudication. The role of the courts is left 

to hearing appeals and supervising tribunals. Amnesty 

International considers that to be best practice. 

 

Such a significant change to the process available to the 

public of Saskatchewan for enforcing the protection of 

their rights should, at a minimum, be subject to extensive 

public consultation. In fact, given what is at stake there 

should be public consultation before any significant 

changes are made to human rights legislation, institutions 

or procedures. It is our understanding that did not take 

place before Bill 160 was introduced. 

 

Minister, systems for the protection of human rights can 

most certainly benefit from ongoing improvement. I am 

writing to you on International Human Rights Day, which 

marks the 62nd anniversary of the adoption by the United 

Nations of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It 

is an apt occasion to call on you and your government to 

commit to an approach to reform that would strengthen 

and not risk undermining provincial human rights 

protection. In that spirit, we urge that, rather than proceed 

with Bill 160 at this time, your government launch a 

public consultation process to consider possible reforms 

that would strengthen the province’s human rights laws 

and institutions. 

 

Sincerely, Alex Neve, Secretary General. 

 

So that public letter, Mr. Speaker, that has been provided by 

Amnesty International, is available on their website. And I think 

it clearly outlines some of the concerns that I spoke about, but 

nicely summarizes the significance of this proposed legislation 

with respect to human rights law in the province. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, that through the human rights tribunals, 

it has been an effective way in promoting and advancing the 

issue of human rights for people in Canada and specifically in 

Saskatchewan. We know it has served that productive role. My 

question, Mr. Speaker, is in consideration of the less than 

convincing approach members opposite have had when it 

comes to the issue of human rights and advancing human rights 

for all individuals in the province. My question, Mr. Speaker, is 

whether or not such changes could be accomplished through the 

back door what they may not be able to do through the front 

door, that by removing the tribunals in the province, Mr. 

Speaker, that it essentially ceases the advancement of human 

rights law here in the province and the advancement of rights 

for all individuals in Saskatchewan. And my hope, Mr. Speaker, 

is that that is not the case. 

 

So those are the remarks I have at this time, Mr. Speaker, on 

Bill 160. While some of the goals that have been stated, Mr. 

Speaker, in the legislation I would support in principle, but I 

have concerns, Mr. Speaker, that the overhaul and the approach 

that the minister is taking on this piece of legislation that it may 

in fact do more harm than good in addressing some of those 

goals. And, Mr. Speaker, I am left being less than convinced 

about the members’ opposite conviction as to the role and 

importance of such pieces of legislation that enshrine the rights 

of all people in Saskatchewan. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will thank members in the 

Assembly for their time and for the opportunity to contribute to 

this debate. And I would move to adjourn debate on this Bill at 

this time. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey Place 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 160. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 157 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 157 — The Oil and 

Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 



March 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6521 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 

pleasure to rise today to speak on Bill 157, An Act to Amend 

The Oil and Gas Conservation Act, henceforth known as The 

Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010. This 

legislation is being done in concert with the amendments to the 

companion legislation, The Freehold Oil and Gas Production 

Act, 2010. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to refer to the minister’s comments in 

the second reading of this Bill No. 157, and I want to quote 

from what the minister said. The minister said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan’s people 

have benefited from the province’s diversity and wealth 

of our natural resources. Indeed our current status as a 

have province in Canada is due in large part to the strong 

performance of our resource sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP opposition couldn’t agree more. We do 

believe that the resource sector in this province is an important 

and actual critical asset to this province, Mr. Speaker, having 

achieved that have status in 2005. That is due in large part that 

Saskatchewan is so rich in the natural resources that it has, and 

of course have been managed appropriately in terms of seeing 

the returns that have been provided to the people of 

Saskatchewan because of that. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

Investments made in our resource industries have created 

job opportunities for our growing population, strengthened 

the prosperity of our communities, and provided revenue 

for important social programs and infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again we agree that the returns from these 

resources that Saskatchewan is so rich in are critical to 

providing the necessary revenue that we require to build upon 

the infrastructure that is needed in Saskatchewan, and especially 

the social programs that are needed in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. And those social programs go beyond simply 

programs under the Ministry of Social Services, Mr. Speaker. 

I’m of course talking about health care and education and all of 

these very important things, Mr. Speaker, that are currently not 

being properly addressed by the Sask Party government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Sask Party government is underfunding, for instance, the 

Catholic school systems in this province compared to the public 

school systems in this province, Mr. Speaker. Now that 

underfunding, Mr. Speaker, has been going on for a year now. 

And what has been done to correct that, Mr. Speaker? 

Absolutely nothing. What assurances have the people in the 

Catholic school systems been given that that will be corrected 

in the upcoming budget, Mr. Speaker? Absolutely nothing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the minister will say in his 

remarks on Bill 157 that they feel important about funding the 

social programs in this province when in actuality it’s quite the 

opposite. They are not looking seriously at what needs to be 

properly addressed and properly funded in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

Now he goes on to say: 

 

Ensuring that resource industries continue to invest in our 

province requires our government to provide those 

industries with the best services possible. We need to 

continually seek new and innovative ways to make our 

processes more efficient and effective for the industry. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we see exactly why the Sask Party 

government under that minister and under that Premier have 

absolutely no interest in doing a royalty review in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. Because all they care about, Mr. Speaker, from 

what the minister says himself, is industry, Mr. Speaker. They 

don’t care about how much Saskatchewan people are getting 

from the resources that they own in this province. They don’t 

care about the fact that there is more money to be had for the 

social programs that need to be funded in this province. They 

don’t care as per the minister’s own words. And he doesn’t just 

speak on behalf of himself, Mr. Speaker, he speaks on behalf of 

the government. He speaks on behalf of the Premier. 

 

So now we know why they have absolutely no interest in doing 

a royalty review in this province, Mr. Speaker, because that’s 

not who they’re concerned about. They’re not concerned about 

the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They’re concerned 

about their friends in the industry, Mr. Speaker. That’s who 

they’re concerned about. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the NDP feels very strongly about the 

industry moving forward in this province, Mr. Speaker, very 

strongly. But the NDP also is deeply concerned about the fact 

that those natural resources are owned by the people of this 

province, and therefore the people of this province should also 

reap the benefits and reap the rewards of those resources, Mr. 

Speaker. There has to be a proper balance, and the Sask Party 

government is way off base. 

 

When we are seeing a 5 cent return on the dollar, Mr. Speaker, a 

5 cent return on the dollar in the potash industry, you can’t tell 

me with a straight face that you feel that that’s appropriate, Mr. 

Speaker. There is no way that they can do that unless the only 

people that they’re worried about is, as the minister has said, is 

the industry. All they’re worried about is their friends in the 

industry. They’re not worried about what the return is for the 

people of Saskatchewan. They’re not worried about what 

programs in Saskatchewan can be funded by the revenue that 

the people of Saskatchewan should be seeing from those 

resources, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the Sask Party government 

stands for. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as you’ve noticed I’m suffering from a bit 

of laryngitis due to a very bad cold and a busy weekend, but 

I’m going to continue on because apparently my friends 

opposite have a deep desire to hear what my thoughts are on 

Bill 157, Mr. Speaker. So I’m more than willing to share them 

with them despite the fact that I may have to soothe my 

laryngitis this evening with some hot lemon tea or something. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, Bill 157 is a complex Bill with implications in 

a number of levels for both the industry and for industry 

players. And it’s obviously going to take some time to review 

and consult with the various stakeholders across the province 

and the associations responsible to see whether or not they truly 



6522 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2011 

agree with the changes being made and whether or not they help 

the industry move forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we’ve seen a reduction in oil production from 2007. At the 

same time we saw a change in government, Mr. Speaker. 

Coincidence? Perhaps. I think not. Mr. Speaker, I think that 

there’s many reasons why we’re seeing that. And we also saw a 

reduction in gas production from 2007, at the time of change of 

government, as well. And we actually see a reduction in the 

amount of wells being drilled in our province from 2007. We 

also saw a general reduction or contraction of the economy last 

year in the range of 3.9 per cent after being adjusted when the 

final numbers came in, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:15] 

 

We also saw a situation where the Sask Trends said that 

Saskatchewan really has no economic growth since the change 

of government. The improvements in 2008 . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well they laugh, Mr. Speaker. They laugh, but 

these aren’t my words, Mr. Speaker. This is coming from Sask 

Trends. This is a third party official that is saying that there is 

no economic growth, no real economic growth since the Sask 

Party government came into power in 2007. The improvements 

in 2008 were really as a result of the inflationary cost of items 

that consumers had to pay. 

 

Now again they laugh, Mr. Speaker, because, you know, they’re 

sitting there. They’re smug. They have no interest in listening to 

what Saskatchewan people are saying about the fact that they 

want to see more return on the natural resources they own, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re smug because they don’t want to listen to the 

fact that the education experts are talking about the fact that 

there is underfunding in the education system in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. And they’re smug despite the fact that the 

Catholic school systems are underfunded compared to the 

public school systems in this province, Mr. Speaker. In Regina 

alone, it amounts to $2.7 million, Mr. Speaker, $2.7 million for 

the Catholic school systems in terms of underfunding compared 

to the public school systems in the city of Regina alone, and 

those numbers are even more dramatic elsewhere throughout 

the province, Mr. Speaker. But again that’s not something that 

the Sask Party government wants to hear about because they’re 

above all that, apparently. 

 

So as I said, the improvements in 2008 were really as a result of 

the inflationary cost of items that consumers had to pay. And in 

fact since then we’ve seen a contraction in the economy which 

my friend, the member from Rosemont, the MLA for Regina 

Rosemont, has expressed over and over and over again through 

presenting petitions in the House, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve 

actually seen a contraction in the economy. But again is that 

something that is alarming to the Sask Party government? Not 

at all, Mr. Speaker. Are they going to conduct a royalty review 

because of that? No. Actually we’ve heard definitively that they 

have no desire to do that, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that we 

are, Saskatchewan people, are not seeing a fair return on their 

ownership of those natural resources, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the minister’s second reading he also referred to the fact that 

some of the changes are a result of a New West Partnership. 

Well doesn’t that lead us to a whole new discussion, Mr. 

Speaker. And they’re laughing and smiling now. They’re so 

proud of themselves. They’re so proud of themselves, Mr. 

Speaker, because they were able to do one over on everyone 

again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Prior to the 2007 election, we had a great big debate in this 

province about TILMA, which is what? The Trade, Investment 

and Labour Mobility Agreement, Mr. Speaker. Big debate in 

this province about TILMA. What happened, Mr. Speaker? 

There were public consultations that were undertaken by the 

NDP government at the time — public consultations all around 

the province. I know it’s a novel idea but it’s something that 

really should be done. 

 

And throughout those consultations, Mr. Speaker, what did we 

find out? We found out that Saskatchewan people did not want 

to sign on to TILMA. That was something that they saw as a 

negative in many different ways — especially, Mr. Speaker, the 

municipalities of Saskatchewan. The municipalities of 

Saskatchewan knew that this was going to be a bad deal for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So what happened out of those consultations, Mr. Speaker? The 

NDP government decided that it wasn’t prudent for the NDP 

government at that time to sign on to TILMA with Alberta and 

BC. The Saskatchewan Party opposition at the time, Mr. 

Speaker, decided that it wasn’t prudent to sign on to TILMA, 

the agreement with BC and Alberta. And they said, no way 

would they do it. They wouldn’t sign on to TILMA because 

their stakeholders, especially in the rural municipalities of 

Saskatchewan, told them loud and clear that TILMA was not a 

good deal for Saskatchewan. 

 

Well let’s just flip the clock forward a bit. We get to 2007. Sask 

Party gets elected into government. All of a sudden they feel 

that they can do whatever they want, sort of like the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats was saying that he did when he was in 

opposition. In opposition he could say and do anything. Well 

it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, because now that the Sask Party is 

in government, they’re still doing the same thing. They’re still 

saying and doing whatever they want regardless of what 

Saskatchewan people have to say, Mr. Speaker. And 

Saskatchewan people said loud and clear, TILMA is a bad deal 

for Saskatchewan. 

 

So what happens after the Sask Party government gets elected 

in 2007? Well there is a new discussion. There’s a new 

discussion. BC and Alberta know full well that the Sask Party 

can’t sign on to TILMA because that would be an obvious 

break of a promise — although they’ve broken other promises, 

Mr. Speaker — but it would be an obvious break of a promise, 

Mr. Speaker. So what do they do? They have discussions and 

there’s this new deal that’s concocted and called a New West 

Partnership. And oddly enough, Mr. Speaker, when you read 

the New West Partnership deal, it looks vaguely like . . . Well, 

no. It doesn’t look vaguely like, it looks a whole lot like 

TILMA, Mr. Speaker. It has great similarities to TILMA. 

 

But what happened when that New West Partnership agreement 

was signed between BC and Alberta, Mr. Speaker? Were there 

public consultations undertaken by the Sask Party government 

at the time? No. Did they hold consultations across the province 

to see if the New West Partnership was something that 

Saskatchewan people were willing to sign on to? No. Did they 



March 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6523 

listen to what Saskatchewan people had to say about the New 

West Partnership, Mr. Speaker? No they did not, Mr. Speaker. 

So instead of signing on to TILMA, which they knew they 

couldn’t do because they vehemently said that they would not 

sign on to TILMA, they call it a new deal . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would remind the member 

that the debate is on The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment 

Act and I ask the member to tie her comments into the Bill No. 

157. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the reason I’m speaking 

about the New West Partnership is because it was in the 

minister’s remarks upon second reading, talking about the fact 

that Bill 157 is resulting as a change of the signing on of New 

West Partnership, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the New West Partnership, as I said, was something that the 

Sask Party government signed on to after they were elected in 

2007 without the same type of consultations that took place 

under the NDP government with respect to TILMA, despite the 

fact that the New West Partnership agreement looks a whole lot 

like TILMA, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So there you see the transparency, the accountability, and the 

willingness to listen to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, the 

residents of Saskatchewan, the owners of the natural resource 

that we’re talking about, Mr. Speaker. Their Sask Party 

government is not willing to listen to them. They will say what 

they want and they will do what they want regardless of what 

the people of the province think about the subject, Mr. Speaker. 

So we see again that although the Sask Party government talks 

about consultation, it doesn’t come to fruition. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in the minister’s second reading remarks he 

also says, quote: 

 

I note the consultation ministry officials had over the 

summer on amendments to this Act, with companies and 

officials representing the two main industry associations: 

the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers and the 

Small Exporters and Producers Association of Canada. 

Ministry officials have consulted with the Surface Rights 

Arbitration Board and representatives of the 

Saskatchewan Mining Association and Saskatchewan 

Potash Producers Association. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister has listed off one, two, three, 

four, five different consultations . . . I mean consultations have 

taken place with five different named organizations. But, Mr. 

Speaker, that doesn’t give me or the opposition much comfort 

in knowing that those consultations actually took place or took 

place in a proper way. Because as we saw with The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Amendment Act, despite the fact that there 

were six different organizations that were referenced in that 

minister’s speech upon second reading as having been 

consulted, five of the six organizations said that no, they were 

not consulted with, Mr. Speaker. Five of the six organizations 

that were named by the minister in her second reading speech 

were not actually consulted with, Mr. Speaker, and were quite 

upset that they were named by the minister in her second 

reading speech. 

 

So the fact that the Minister for Energy and Resources has 

named these organizations as having been consulted is cold 

comfort to the opposition, Mr. Speaker, because we don’t know 

for sure whether that’s actually taken place and we don’t know 

for sure whether they were properly consulted with. Some of 

the work that’s being done on the opposition side is to ensure 

that those consultations were properly constituted and that their 

voices were correctly portrayed in terms of the changes that are 

being undertaken, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, any time you’re moving to consolidation or 

amalgamation of rules in an industry, whether they be with 

Alberta and Saskatchewan or any other jurisdiction, it’s 

important to understand the impact because the impact can be 

both positive and negative. And we want to fully understand 

what those impacts are, Mr. Speaker. And we also need to fully 

understand the impact on our province, on our producers, and 

the net result that comes about of those changes to the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with the complexity of this legislation and the 

breadth and depth of changes, it’s going to take us some time to 

do the required consultations. Because as I said, we can’t be 

sure what we’re hearing is factual because we’ve heard it before 

and, quite frankly, found out quite the opposite. And we want to 

ensure that the meetings with these individuals and 

organizations and associations have been properly constituted 

and have been properly referenced and represented, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I want to allow some others to get in 

on debate of further Bills, so I’m going to adjourn debate at this 

time. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Walsh Acres has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 157, The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 144 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 144 — The Litter 

Control Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased today to rise to speak during the second reading of Bill 

No. 144. This is an Act known as The Litter Control 

Amendment Act, 2010. A number of my colleagues have spoken 

on this Bill to this point, Mr. Speaker, and there are a number of 

returning themes, Mr. Speaker, that come forward in this piece 

of legislation that I think we should not lose sight of. 

 

So here at the beginning of the spring sitting of the legislature, 

Mr. Speaker, this is the first chance we’ve had to address the 

specifics of Bill 144 since we left here in December, Mr. 

Speaker. Since that time, we’ve had the opportunity to do some 



6524 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2011 

consultation throughout the province, Mr. Speaker, and what we 

found are a continuing list of questions growing and, at the 

same time, Mr. Speaker, some continuing confusion regarding 

this legislation. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in addition to that there is . . . In addition to 

that, Mr. Speaker, there is some general support for the ideas 

that of course we need to continue to do the things that are 

necessary to reduce litter, but also, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that 

we have got this beverage container recycling system in place. 

We’ve got the ability not just in terms of reducing litter but 

also, Mr. Speaker, protecting the environment and also 

enhancing the recyclability of product, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So without fully understanding all the details in this legislation, 

Mr. Speaker, when I talk with individuals across the province, 

there is a general understanding that this legislation, The Litter 

Control Act, Mr. Speaker, needs to continue to evolve to meet 

the changing needs of the people of our province. 

 

[16:30] 

 

I think it’s safe to say, Mr. Speaker, that we realize that all of 

this began in 1973. When the original Act was passed in 1973, 

the purpose of the Act was to provide the provincial 

government with authority to address litter-related issues. Now 

we have to acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, that the ideas that we 

hold today about the environment and recycling, protecting the 

environment, ensuring that product use gets reused, Mr. 

Speaker, this, all that we know today, wasn’t known in 1973, 

Mr. Speaker. But we did know that we have to do something 

about controlling the products that people, without thinking 

seriously, Mr. Speaker, have a tendency just to throw away. 

And in Saskatchewan over the years we’ve done a tremendous 

job of reducing the number of items that go into our landfills. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s been some tremendous indirect 

benefit from all of this as well. I think every one of us in this 

Assembly, and I would bet most of the people who are listening 

to the debate today, have used the services of Sarcan in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I use the Sarcan 

facilities across the province on a regular basis, a personal 

basis, Mr. Speaker. I enjoy my visits to the Sarcan office in 

North Battleford, Mr. Speaker. It has now been in a couple of 

different locations over the years, Mr. Speaker, but Sarcan in 

The Battlefords now, Mr. Speaker, is in the industrial park of 

The Battlefords. And, Mr. Speaker, it has good hours and 

provides tremendous benefit, employment benefit, Mr. Speaker, 

to a considerable number of people through The Battlefords. 

 

While I’m on the subject of Sarcan and The Battlefords, I think 

as most people in The Battlefords know but not everyone across 

the province would know, Sarcan is run by Battlefords Trade 

and Education Centre. Mr. Speaker, years ago this used to be 

known as the Battlefords Sheltered Workshop. But as things 

have evolved, Mr. Speaker, and as people became more 

knowledgeable about inclusion of people with physical and 

mental challenges, Mr. Speaker, we’ve found ways to ensure 

that everyone in our economy, Mr. Speaker, and in our 

communities, can lead active and rewarding lives. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Battlefords Trade and Education Centre 

previously operated Sarcan along the railway lines across from 

the old armory. The old armory was, and still is, Mr. Speaker 

. . . Now it’s 100 years old. That building owned and operated 

by Battlefords Trade and Education Centre has pretty much 

used up its capacity in that 100-year-old building. There’s now 

a proposal, Mr. Speaker, that would see Battlefords Trade and 

Education Centre move to a new facility working closely with 

the Battlefords Residential Services Inc., to ensure that we have 

day programs available to people who are not able to work in 

the normal eight-hour-a-day, 40-hour-a-week employment 

programs throughout our community. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, at various times over the next little while, 

representatives from Battlefords Trade and Education Centre, 

representatives from Battlefords Residential Services Inc., will 

be making representation to government to ensure that the 

services that they’ve provided in the past, which includes the 

development of and the delivery of Sarcan services in The 

Battlefords, has the support, the ongoing support, of the 

Government of Saskatchewan, and that perhaps . . . and should, 

Mr. Speaker, over the course of the next year, begin developing 

a new facility to encourage the continuation of the development 

of and deployment of day programming for these wonderful 

people within our community. 

 

But every time I’m in the Sarcan building in North Battleford, 

Mr. Speaker, I have numerous conversations with the 

individuals who work there, Mr. Speaker, and every time I 

leave that building I leave with knowledge that I did not have 

when I went in, Mr. Speaker. I enjoy the people who are 

working at Sarcan. They are a great benefit to those of us in our 

community. 

 

That being said, Mr. Speaker, this legislation isn’t specific to 

Sarcan. But what has evolved over the years, Mr. Speaker, 

through The Litter Control Act and the development of Sarcan, 

has led us in a number of different directions. But what we’ve 

got here, Mr. Speaker, is a piece of legislation . . . And this is 

why the public doesn’t fully understand this and why we need 

to see additional information coming forward. Mr. Speaker, this 

legislation has a retroactivity provision that takes us back to 

1998 or roughly 12 years, Mr. Speaker. It’s a retroactive 

provision that essentially protects the Government of 

Saskatchewan against legal challenge for financial repayments, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The courts have weighed in on certain practices with regards to 

beverage container, regulations regarding beverage container 

financing, Mr. Speaker. But this government has said this 

legislation is going to protect government from any and all 

future lawsuits and will be retroactive to protect the government 

against payments that might be legally required. 

 

What’s confusing about that, Mr. Speaker, is not so much that 

the government wants to send the message that what was done 

during these 12 years was done essentially in the best interests 

of Saskatchewan people, but more importantly, Mr. Speaker, to 

ensure that there’s no cheques written; there’s no new financing 

that’s necessary to pay for court action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this doesn’t happen . . . This is what the public 

doesn’t understand. This doesn’t happen in the health care field. 

This doesn’t happen in mining or the oil and gas field, Mr. 

Speaker. This doesn’t happen in other sectors of our economy. 



March 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6525 

And so, Mr. Speaker, why is this necessary here? That having 

been said, Mr. Speaker, if indeed it is necessary here and the 

lawyers on the government side can convince us that it is 

necessary here, then why is it not going to apply in other areas, 

particularly areas of environmental protection, Mr. Speaker, 

whereby there are liabilities incurred on a regular basis? What’s 

to prevent the government from going back in the legislation 

and put non-court-action retroactivity clauses in anything 

relating to environmental mitigation, retribution, those sorts of 

things? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, a number of things that will require us to 

continue consulting with the people of Saskatchewan, with 

some members of the legal profession, Mr. Speaker, to ensure 

that if this legislation goes forward into committee, that we all 

have a firm understanding of the types of questions that we 

need to ask and the types of answers we need to get, to provide 

confidence that this legislation is indeed allowing the principles 

and the practice set up in The Litter Control Act originally and 

its evolution over the years. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that having been said, I just want the members 

of the legislature to know that there are some consultations that 

need to continue with regards to this piece of legislation, and 

that in order to do that we need to continue to take the time 

necessary to do those consultations. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 

would move that debate on Bill 144, An Act to amend The Litter 

Control Act, be now adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill 144, The Litter Control 

Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 147 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Draude that Bill No. 147 — The Public 

Interest Disclosure Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to be able to enter into the debate on Bill 147, The 

Public Interest Disclosure Act. 

 

As we know, the government introduced this particular piece of 

legislation in the fall, and at the time the minister in her second 

reading speech indicated that there would be an independent 

officer of the legislature that would be able to provide public 

servants access to someone outside of the operations of the 

day-to-day government in situations where they thought it 

important that someone be apprised of situations in their 

workplace that were not appropriate. 

 

As we know, the public in this province relies upon public 

servants to provide a number of critically important services in 

our province. We know that there are men and women that 

work in various ministries across our province, often 

responding to emergency situations. We know that they’re 

sometimes in situations where their own occupational health 

and safety is placed at risk. And we know that these men and 

women rely upon this Legislative Assembly to protect them as 

they go about providing the day-to-day services that our citizens 

have come to expect from government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do note that this particular piece of legislation 

does not apply to health regions or to school divisions in the 

province or municipalities, even though those three local levels 

of government receive funding from the province. And so those 

particular employees that provide important public services are 

not protected by this legislation, and they will continue to be 

protected by The Labour Standards Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that is troublesome with this 

legislation is that this legislation would not have protected an 

employee in the public service that alerted the public, through 

the official opposition, that an offender in our correctional 

institution had been let go early. And as a result of someone 

informing the opposition, an employee was terminated by the 

Government of Saskatchewan. With this legislation, we really 

aren’t talking about protection for people who blow the whistle 

on government. 

 

We also know that there was an occupational health and safety 

officer who was fighting for better working conditions in our 

correctional facilities who was terminated by the government. 

Her case went to arbitration, and she has been . . . The arbitrator 

ordered this government to reinstate her. And as I understand it, 

Mr. Speaker, no arrangements have been made for this 

particular employee to be reinstated. 

 

Now why was she fired? She was fired because she felt it 

important that people who work at our correctional facilities be 

protected, their health and safety be protected, as she was the 

health and safety officer. But the government of the day, the 

Sask Party government, didn’t like what this particular woman 

was saying. In the ministry they didn’t like that she was fighting 

to better the working conditions for people working at our 

correctional facilities. And as a result of that, they had her fired 

and terminated. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that this is a government that has 

fired an occupational health and safety worker. We know that 

this is a government that reacted to the opposition’s disclosure 

that an offender was unlawfully at large, that the public had 

never been notified even though this government assured the 

public that they would in fact notify the public if the system 

broke down. And what did they do? They fired an employee in 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing who they incorrectly 

believed was responsible for alerting the public through the 

opposition. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So we want to put it on the record that this is kind of like a first 

draft. It sets up some parameters to protect public servants, but 

it doesn’t go far enough. Public servants who want to report 

wrongdoing in their workplaces definitely need to be protected, 

but they’re not going to be protected by this particular piece of 

legislation. This Bill does not provide that protection. 



6526 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2011 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in the last provincial election the 

government said that they were going to have a transparent and 

open government, that they were going to protect the public 

service who blew the whistle. And in fact the minister in the fall 

proudly stood up in this Assembly and said that this has been 

one of the mandates that she’s been given by the Premier to 

introduce this legislation. Well, Mr. Speaker, transparency 

really would be the best possible defence for public servants 

who report wrongdoing, but with this particular Bill, the 

government’s continuing down the same path that got us to 

where we are today. And we have two examples of public 

servants who have been dismissed as a result of them trying to 

do the right thing. 

 

This Bill ensures that any complaints about wrongdoing in 

government is internal to government, Mr. Speaker. That is not 

transparency. If there is wrongdoing in government, we all need 

to be alerted, Mr. Speaker. It really does, this legislation, it 

prevents those complaints from being made public. 

 

The title of this Bill is interesting. It’s called The Public Interest 

Disclosure Act. And indeed disclosure would be in the public 

interest, but this Bill does not allow for disclosure. Instead it 

continues the pattern of this government of keeping things that 

embarrass the government and keeping those things hidden. 

And an example would be the carbon capture project. You 

know, we all know that this carbon capture project disappeared 

last fall, but the government, the Sask Party government, kept 

this particular decision of the federal government not to fund 

carbon capture in the province hidden because they didn’t want 

to be embarrassed. And when you think about the big projects 

that have been touted by this particular government — I’m 

thinking of the dome, I’m thinking of clean coal, I’m thinking 

of carbon capture — they really do have a lot to be accountable 

for because they raised the expectations of some citizens in the 

province. And those expectations were certainly dashed. 

 

Now the opposition is concerned that this Bill will only protect 

whistle-blowers who say the law has been broken, but not those 

who allege that policy has been broken. And it’s important that 

the public understand that the province not only has legislation 

and regulations, but they also have policy that guide our 

behaviour and guide the behaviour of people who work in the 

public service. And when policy is broken, which I understand 

it is often, people who are concerned that the policy is not being 

followed will not have the protection of this legislation when 

they, quote, blow the whistle. 

 

We also find it interesting that the minister has suggested that 

the commissioner may be part of the Provincial Ombudsman’s 

office. This is the same government that won’t commit to 

implementing the recommendations of the Provincial 

Ombudsman. How can public servants, not only public servants 

in the ministries, have confidence but also people who deliver 

services in the various Crown sectors, how can they have 

confidence that an officer working out of the Office of the 

Ombudsman will have any real teeth? 

 

And we know right now for instance that the Privacy 

Commissioner, who has a huge backlog, can’t get work done 

because he is dealing with an abundance of people who are 

wanting access to information, but this government’s refusing 

to provide that information, even though by law they’re 

supposed to. And he can’t investigate the complaints that are 

coming forward because he doesn’t have enough people to 

provide the investigative processes so that people who have real 

concerns about access to information in the province can find 

out what in fact is going on. Now the government says that this 

is a promise they kept. 

 

I note that the Premier at the Sask Party convention said that it 

was a debate whether or not the Sask Party had kept their 

commitment on marriage commissioners. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

there are a whole bunch of people in the province that believe 

that the Sask Party in the last provincial campaign said that 

marriage commissioners would be able to, if they did not from 

their own personal point of view want to marry people of same 

sex, that they wouldn’t have to do that. And there is a whole 

bunch of people in the community across the province, 

including people in my own constituency, that were told that by 

the Sask Party. 

 

And that didn’t come to be, Mr. Speaker. And so when the 

Premier says that’s a promise, that it’s debatable whether it was 

kept. There are people in the province of Saskatchewan that 

genuinely believe that the Sask Party made a commitment, a 

promise that people who perform marriages in the province 

would not have to perform same-sex marriages if it went 

against their personal viewpoint. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you know, this was a commitment that was 

apparently made in the Sask Party program document in the last 

provincial election. Now we note that the original platform 

document referred to a public integrity commissioner. I guess 

that when a government creates a post like this after three years 

of firing public servants, of which we know not only have 

public servants been fired because the government didn’t like 

what they were doing, i.e., the woman that worked for the 

Ministry of Labour because she was trying to defend 

occupational health and safety in our correctional centres. So 

she was fired because someone didn’t like what she was doing. 

 

And then we had a witch hunt trying to find the person that 

worked in Corrections who provided information to the public 

that an offender had been released, even though the government 

said that if that happened they were going to notify the public, 

and they didn’t do that. And so they went on a witch hunt and 

they fired someone who, Mr. Speaker, I note wasn’t the person 

that originally alerted the opposition. 

 

So I guess when a government creates a post like this after three 

years of firing public servants who don’t agree with them, 

public integrity really isn’t the goal anymore. It’s the 

appearance of keeping a promise that matters, not whether 

you’ve actually done any good for anybody, Mr. Speaker. So, 

Mr. Speaker, we will see, we will see whether in fact this 

legislation does what it says it’s supposed to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I note that they’re going to find someone who 

makes a false accusation. Well, you know, a lot of work can be 

done to ensure that someone who thought they were making an 

accusation that was correct is indeed a misleading statement. 

So, Mr. Speaker, that will be interesting to see how they try and 

deal with this one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is most troublesome about this legislation is 



March 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6527 

that we will never know for sure the contents of the wrongdoing 

that took place in the public service. We will never know that. 

It’s going to be given to us in some sort of big bundle. 

 

We know each ministry has to report when there has been theft. 

We know that. And it is reported by ministry. We know how 

much the alleged . . . how much was apparently taken. We 

know about fraud in Crown corporations and in various 

ministries. But we’re not going to know about wrongdoing in 

the public service because that’s not going to be provided to us 

ministry by ministry by ministry. They’re going to have a 

report, and I guess we’ll get it all bundled up, but we’re not 

going to know the actual numbers and where it took place. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we know all about redaction. I have a lovely 

access to information request where there were over 1,500 

pages basically redacted. I’ve talked about the Privacy 

Commissioner who can’t investigate access to information 

requests because he doesn’t have enough staff. 

 

And so it will be darn interesting to see how this, how this is 

going to work. Because at the end of the day, it’s supposed to 

be about protecting public servants. It’s supposed to be about 

honouring a pledge, a promise that was made by the Sask Party 

in the last provincial election. But I’m not so convinced that it is 

about protecting public servants. And I know it doesn’t honour 

the promise that was made by the Sask Party because they 

promised that there would be integrity in the legislation, and 

there isn’t integrity with this particular piece of legislation. 

 

Well they say I’m wrong. I guess we will see. We will see how 

this gets organized. We will see how the information is 

presented to the legislature. We will see whether this is buried 

over in the Ombudsman. We will see whether or not there is in 

fact an independent officer of the legislature. And we will see 

whether people are punished for bringing forward, bringing 

forward examples of wrongdoing in the public service. 

 

And we will see whether those people are protected. Because if 

I look at it so far, we have a woman in the occupational health 

and safety area of government who was fired because she was 

trying to do her job. And she has been reinstated by an 

arbitrator. And as far as I know, she’s not back at work, Mr. 

Speaker. She is not working. And really the person who fired 

her, the person who fired her for doing her job needs to be 

accountable. And there needs to be some sort of integrity but 

there isn’t. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I see that we’re close to 

5. And with that, I would adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 147, The Public 

Interest Disclosure Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 149 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 149 — The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to enter into this debate, a very important debate on 

Bill No. 149, An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 2000. And it 

may also be known as The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010. I 

think there’s a lot of points in here, and I’m going to be taking 

some time to talk about this, particularly when we talk about the 

record of this government in terms of administering its policies 

and what we’ve seen over the past three years. And there’s been 

real shortcomings when they’ve jumped the gun, so to speak, 

about some of their initiatives without thinking through clearly 

what the implications are for Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And Bill 149 is a very good example of why we have a lot of 

questions for these folks, a lot of questions in committee. But 

we see now the implications of when you have an 

administration, a government that is blinded by ideology and 

wants to open doors wide open but doesn’t really think of what 

the impacts are for the people of Saskatchewan. What are the 

long-term impacts for a Bill like The Income Tax Amendment 

Act? You know, this Bill here speaks about a five-year tax 

holiday, a five-year tax holiday for mining corporations, and 

they meet certain requirements. But we have some concerns. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being past 5 p.m., the Assembly will 

recess until 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6497 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6497 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6497 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6498 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6498 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6498 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6498 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6498 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6499 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6499 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6499 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6499 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6499 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Kinsmen Telemiracle 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6500 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6500 

 Team Holland Wins 2011 Scotties Tournament of Hearts 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6500 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6501 

 Prince Albert Pulp Mill to Reopen 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6501 

 New Report for New Democratic Party Policy Convention 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6501 

 Remembering Mel Watson 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6501 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Potash Royalties and Taxes 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6502 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6502 

 Rent Controls 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6503 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6504 

 Investments in Health Care 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6504 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6505 

 Support for Education 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6505 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6506 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Prince Albert Pulp Mill to Reopen 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6507 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6507 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6508 

MOTIONS 

 Appointment of Provincial Auditor 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6508 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6509 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6510 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6510 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 161 — The Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6510 

 



 

 Bill No. 162 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6512 

 Bill No. 159 — The University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6515 

 Bill No. 160 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6517 

 Bill No. 157 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6521 

 Bill No. 144 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6523 

 Bill No. 147 — The Public Interest Disclosure Act 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6525 

 Bill No. 149 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6527 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


