




















































Hansard: December 08, 2011


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 4A  THURSDAY, DECEMBER 8, 2011, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 97 

 December 8, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

An Hon. Member: — Introduction of guests. 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to thank the Government House 

Leader for his unnecessary assistance. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to all members of the legislature, I’m 

honoured today to introduce someone seated in your gallery, 

Michael Richter. Michael Richter is the executive director of 

the South Saskatchewan Independent Living Centre. The 

Independent Living Centre offers a variety of programs for and 

support for people with disabilities who live independently in 

the community. 

 

He’s here to join us for an announcement that we’re going to 

have later, and I’m asking all of my colleagues in the House to 

give a warm welcome to this man who’s dedicated to people in 

our community. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition, it’s my pleasure to join with the minister in 

welcoming Mr. Richter to his Legislative Assembly. I’m sure 

he’s very much looking forward to the announcement this 

morning. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to this Assembly, I’d like to introduce 

some friends in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, former neighbours 

actually in Rosetown. We have Kelvin and April Debler and 

their son, D.J. And with them is Kelvin’s cousin from Sweden, 

Mikaela Purtsi. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I certainly miss having them as neighbours. 

They’ve moved now to some opportunities in the Vanscoy area, 

but still in this great province, Mr. Speaker. And I certainly 

miss having D.J. around the neighbourhood. He’s a great young 

man. His one major character flaw is he’s a Detroit Red Wings 

fan. Mr. Speaker, I’ve continued to work on him this morning, 

and eventually we’ll convert him to a Boston Bruins fan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members of the Assembly to please 

give them a warm welcome to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the 

member in welcoming the guest from Sweden. And I know that 

often Swedes and Norwegians have some difficulties, but 

there’s never difficulties when you’re outside of Scandinavia. 

So I would like to say to her: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Norwegian.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s truly an 

honour for me to introduce to you and through you to the rest of 

the members in the Assembly, a grade school group from 

Humboldt that are sitting in the west gallery. There is 37 grade 

12 students from the Humboldt Collegiate and their teacher, 

David Millette. So it is great to see them here today. I hope they 

enjoy their proceedings and may everyone welcome them. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

A Piece of Saskatchewan’s Medical History 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, on December 4th, the Western 

Development Museum in Saskatoon in my riding of Saskatoon 

Nutana unveiled its cobalt bomb display, but don’t let the name 

fool you. This was not an instrument of destructive 

radioactivity; instead it was a world medical breakthrough in 

cancer treatment. 

 

There was a medical arms race in 1951 between Saskatoon and 

London, Ontario. Both medical institutions wanted to be the 

first to successfully treat a patient with an accurately calibrated 

dose of cobalt-60 radiation. This bomb, Mr. Speaker, didn’t kill 

thousands. It’s saved millions. 

 

Canada’s first full-time cancer physicist, Dr. Harold Johns and 

his colleagues including the former lieutenant governor of this 

province, Sylvia Fedoruk at the University of Saskatchewan’s 

Department of Physics, led the world in the development of a 

high-technology cancer treatment. The team of innovative and 

dedicated scientists won the race and changed medical history. 

 

The original cobalt-60 beam therapy unit, manufactured locally 

in Saskatoon, also known as the cobalt bomb, is on permanent 

display now at the museum. I invite all the members to check it 

out. This exhibit honours the 60th anniversary of the first 

successful treatment of cancer with this instrument. By the 

1960s, the cobalt-60 machine was standard equipment for 

radiation therapy worldwide. And these machines are still in 

use in many developing countries that previously did not have 

the necessary resources for good radiation therapy. 

 

It’s an incredible piece of Saskatchewan medical history and a 

testament to what an innovative and forward thinking 

government can accomplish. And as Joan Champ, the exhibit’s 

curator agrees, the cobalt bomb is a shining example of 

Saskatchewan’s innovation in health care research, an 

innovation that had a worldwide impact. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 



98 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2011 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Cowboy Christmas Parade 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On November 12th of 

this year, it was my pleasure to once again ride in our Cowboy 

Christmas Parade in the town of Battleford. Mr. Speaker, this 

parade was an opportunity for families to bring out children, 

horses, neighbours, the in-laws and team together in order to 

spread some real Christmas cheer. And it was a real delight to 

see the smiling faces lining the streets of Battleford. This 

parade is hosted and organized by the Battlefords Quarter Horse 

Club, Mr. Speaker, and is a unique parade since only horses, 

mules, ponies, etc., are allowed in the parade. There are no 

motorized vehicles allowed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a club to which I’ve belonged for nearly 35 

years. It’s been very active in various activities such as one of 

the first Terry Fox rides in Canada and has raised funds 

annually for that Terry Fox Foundation. All funds raised by the 

participants in this particular parade go to our empty stocking 

fund by our local food bank. This year we raised $7,000 for 

families less fortunate than us, and over the last four years, 

we’ve raised $34,000 for this fund. 

 

I would like to extend an sincere thank you and congratulations 

to Ray Cox and Shirley Smith and their committee on the 

continuing involvement in this very worthwhile endeavour. I’m 

sure that they would join me in thanking the many participants 

and the always important sponsor of this parade. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Northern Educator a True Pioneer 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to honour a constituent of Athabasca and a resident of 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, Saskatchewan. Vicky Caisse was a true pioneer 

in early education here in our province. She recently stepped 

down from teaching after serving to educate Saskatchewan’s 

northern youth in her kindergarten class for over 30 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Vicky was part of the first graduating class of the 

northern teacher education program, also known as NORTEP in 

1979. These students were women who had previously worked 

for the northern school boards as Native instructors — teacher 

aids who had completed a six-month training course, then 

returned to their home communities to work along side 

experienced educators. I suppose you could say they’re similar 

to the educational assistants, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The NORTEP program was tailored to meet the needs of these 

students and others facing similar economic, social, and 

geographical challenges. NORTEP and teachers like Vicky 

Caisse have done much to improve conditions in the North, yet 

there’s still an urgent call for further development and response 

to the needs of northerners as well as the future needs of the 

labour market. 

 

Vicky is a hard-working person who has done extraordinary 

things and dedicated her life to improve the lives of First 

Nations and Métis within her community. Mr. Speaker, full-day 

kindergarten is being discussed, and I feel it’s fitting to 

recognize this inspirational person. Perhaps we should provide 

all our children the opportunity to spend their whole day with 

amazing educators like Vicky. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to rise today and recognize this 

extraordinary northern educator. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Most Powerful Women Awards 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, two 

Saskatchewan women were recently recognized at the 2011 

Canada’s Most Powerful Women Awards Gala. Twyla 

Meredith, president and CEO [chief executive officer] of the 

Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation has been named to the 

Women’s Executive Network’s 2011 list of Canada’s Most 

Powerful Women: Top 100. She received her award in the 

public sector leaders category. Meredith has been with 

Saskatchewan Gaming since its inception and is the only female 

president of a Crown corporation in Saskatchewan. 

 

As president and CEO, Meredith is responsible for $137 million 

in annual revenues and more than 1,000 employees. She leads a 

corporate strategic planning process to create the organization’s 

vision, mission, and values while ensuring the integrity of 

casino operations and systems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the next Saskatchewan woman recognized for 

leadership in the public sector was Social Services Deputy 

Minister Marian Zerr. Marian became deputy minister of Social 

Services in June 2009. She is renowned for her competency and 

compassion, delivering effective and efficient service for the 

people of Saskatchewan. Marion exemplifies the best qualities 

of the Saskatchewan public service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing 

Marian and Meredith for their selection as two of Canada’s top 

100 executive women. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Northeast. 

 

Benefit Concert Raises Funds for Burn Victims 

 

Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to take this opportunity to recognize a benefit 

concert held on December 3rd with the aim of raising funds to 

help three people who were seriously burned in the recent 

explosion at Regina’s Co-op Refinery. 

 

The October 6th explosion and fire at the Co-op Refinery in 

northeast Regina forced 1,400 people from the facility and sent 

several to hospital with severe injuries. At the time of the 

explosion, there were serious concerns that the fire could spread 

and ignite gas and diesel tankers on the other side of the 

facility, but the decisive action of the workers on the ground 

averted a more serious disaster. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a number of the injured workers have yet to return 

to work, and one in particular, Irene Rombaut of Regina, 

continues to recover from her injuries that she suffered that day. 

The initial fundraising goal of the benefit concert was between 



December 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 99 

2 and $3,000, and in typical Saskatchewan fashion, Mr. 

Speaker, this goal was easily eclipsed with organizers 

estimating as much as $20,000 being raised to assist their 

fellow workers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this Assembly join me in 

thanking these individuals for their dedication to their 

colleagues and keep those injured in their thoughts and prayers. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Regina & District Chamber of Commerce 

Accomplishments  

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

stand in this House today and celebrate the accomplishments of 

the Regina & District Chamber of Commerce. Since January of 

this year, memberships at the chamber of commerce has 

increased by 176 new members for a total of 1,141. With the 

vision to be one of Canada’s most respected, influential, and 

innovative business organizations, it is not surprising that the 

Regina chamber of commerce is excelling at memberships. 

 

People in Regina and the province are looking forward — 

forward to the forecast that Saskatchewan’s real GDP [gross 

domestic product] will grow by 4.3 per cent in 2011 and 4.1 per 

cent in 2012; forward to the fact that Saskatchewan has the 

lowest unemployment rate in Canada at 4.7 per cent, well 

below the national average of 7 per cent; forward to a province 

of over 1.1 million people by the year 2015. The people of 

Regina and the province can look forward to four more years of 

government that will guide this province through continued 

economic growth. 

 

Congratulations to the Regina & District Chamber of 

Commerce and their members for 125 years of success. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Building Permit Statistics Indicate Growth 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to inform the Assembly that October building permit 

statistics released December 6th by Stats Canada indicating 

construction in Saskatchewan continues to rise at a rapid pace. 

 

Saskatchewan’s building permits were up 22.4 per cent in 

October compared to 2010 — 10 times higher that of the 

national average and the highest increase amongst the 

provinces. This increase correlates into $278 million in permits 

being issued this October alone. These statistics are another 

indication of the strong expansion of the province’s resource 

sector and growing population. This growth can be seen across 

the province, from rejuvenated rural communities and growing 

urban centres to expansion of the province’s construction and 

mining sectors. 

 

The province of Saskatchewan continues to move forward with 

construction in the mining industry is expected to increase by 

$50 billion in the next 20 years, supporting further increases in 

building permits in short and long term. 

 

I ask that all members in this Assembly join me in recognizing 

these impressive figures as another indication of our province’s 

vibrant and growing economy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:15] 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Combatting Youth Suicide 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we know that youth suicide is a challenge everywhere. 

And in northern Saskatchewan we have lost far too many of our 

young people to suicide, and the number of attempted suicides 

is extremely high. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when young people have no hope for their futures, 

it is discouraging not only to the young children but to our 

elders as well. To the Minister of Social Services: what 

supports are available in northern Saskatchewan for young 

people who are attempting suicide? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker, and thank you to the member for that very serious 

question. It is a concern. Suicide anywhere in our province or 

our country is a very sad fact and it indeed does happen, and it 

happens in northern Saskatchewan. We know that one is just 

too many, and it’s something that we are taking very serious 

and studying with. 

 

I have worked with the member in the past to meet with 

members or leaders from northern communities to talk about 

this. We have experience within the Ministry of First Nations 

and Métis Relations to deal with the problem and to work on 

ideas as well how we can educate around the situation, both 

pre- and post-. And that is what we’re working on. It’s very 

much a central part of the northern action plan that we are 

implementing. But again we don’t have all ideas with this. We 

are seeking counsel from experts, from members opposite, from 

whoever can help us along to address this in the best way 

possible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the sad truth is there are very 

few if no supports available for youth in northern 

Saskatchewan. Many of the youth are attempting suicide 

because, as I’ve mentioned, they’ve lost hope. 

 

Last night I travelled to Saskatoon to visit a young mother from 

northern Saskatchewan. No names, but her son attempted 

suicide and is at a mental health centre. But he is being sent 

home soon on his own and on her own. This mother is stressed 

and she is terrified because her son needs more help and there 



100 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2011 

are no supports for her or her son available in northern 

Saskatchewan. What does she do, Mr. Speaker? What does she 

do? 

 

So again to the Minister of Social Services: what does she have 

to say to this family? And what supports can this stressed 

mother and terrified young man access in northern 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I too do 

feel . . . My heart goes out to a family where we have a child 

that has attempted suicide, as there is reasons for that. And one 

of the things that we are doing through the child and youth 

agenda is to have seven human services ministries together 

where we talk about the issues of a child, not just through the 

lens of every ministry but through the eyes of a child. 

 

How can we do better? One of the things that we did last year 

was implement a budget that had $34 million so we could talk 

specifically about dealing with children individually. We’ve put 

more workers in place on assistance roles so they can be 

helping people who need support. And I agree; there is more 

work to be done. We’ve been doing it through Education. 

We’ve been doing it through Health. And we must do it more 

with the communities. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this particular family and this 

mother has asked for help from Social Services but has been 

denied. I have a letter from the mother which says, and I quote: 

 

If I don’t get help and if something happens to my son, 

then after that there’s no use of saying, I could have 

helped that family when she asked for help. I even asked 

for help from Social Services but got denied. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll send this letter across to the Minister of Social 

Services. And my question to her is this: will she intervene in 

this particular case to ensure that this young man can continue 

accessing the mental health services that he needs, and that his 

mother could be supported while she’s in the city helping with 

her son? 

 

And as well, Mr. Speaker, we need to begin to focus on a 

long-term strategy to help deal with this growing crisis in 

northern Saskatchewan. So again, will the minister intervene to 

help this family out today so that he can access more help as he 

needs? And this is his second attempt at suicide. It’s a cry for 

help. And the mother’s asking for your intervention so she can 

be supported and her son could seek that help. Will the minister 

commit to doing that today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, and to the member 

opposite, yes, I definitely will take the information. I have to 

look at it to know what the specific case is, and I know that we 

will be dealing with individuals. But in the big picture, yes, we 

know there’s more work that has to be done. When we sit as a 

committee in dealing with . . . The ministers talk from the 

health perspective or the education perspective or the 

corrections perspective about why we have children that are in 

this state of mind. We know there is more work to be done. It’s 

something that there’s been work done within individual 

ministries and we have a chance to focus it when we come 

together. 

 

I will be looking at this information. I definitely will review it 

immediately, and my commitment is to see what we can do as a 

government to make sure that people don’t fall through the 

cracks. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Long-Term Care Facility 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, last year we asked a series of 

questions about the government’s decision to enter into a sole 

source contract with Amicus, a company with ties to the chief 

of staff to the Premier. At the time, the government assured this 

House that there was nothing to worry about. Now the 

Provincial Auditor has stated: 

 

Neither the Saskatoon Health Region nor the Ministry of 

Health could tell us what criteria was used to award the 

contract or what process was used to determine if other 

healthcare providers were interested in bidding for the 

opportunity. 

 

So the obvious question to the Premier: was this decision made 

in the Premier’s office? Yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank 

you for that question. We’ve certainly had much discussion on 

this particular long-term care facility in this House over the past 

year and a half, I guess. Certainly the auditor has reported 

today, and we respect the recommendations of the auditor. 

 

The situation around Amicus is unique in that it was a pilot 

project. It is a pilot project where the Catholic Health Ministry 

approached the Saskatoon Health Region and the Ministry of 

Health with an idea. We looked at it. We certainly know that 

there is a lack of long-term care beds in Saskatoon. In fact we 

know that there are at any given time over 60 people living in 

an acute care centre — absolutely unacceptable to be living in 

an acute care centre. 

 

We needed to move on that quickly. We entered into a pilot 

project with Amicus, or the Catholic Health Ministry I should 

say, to see how this would work. Aging in place, a whole lot of 

benefits, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to say that that facility is very 

close to opening, Mr. Speaker, and we will certainly enjoy the 

benefits of this facility into the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we also asked if Saskatchewan 

taxpayers were on the hook for repayment on the debt, citing 

clauses in the agreement with Amicus that suggested this was in 



December 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 101 

fact the case. Again the Minister of Health claimed that there 

was no truth to these assertions. Today the Provincial Auditor 

states that the Saskatoon Health Region and Saskatchewan 

taxpayers will indeed be on the hook for this. Her report states, 

“Once construction is completed, Saskatoon assumes the risk 

over debt repayment and the operation of the new facility.” 

 

To the Premier: if Saskatchewan’s taxpayers are indeed 

assuming all the risk here, what exactly was the point of all this 

if not to reward friends of the government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear what the 

point of all this was, Mr. Speaker. It was about putting patients 

first, Mr. Speaker, something that that opposition obviously has 

no idea about. Whether it was the questions yesterday about 

third party delivery within the public system, they are more 

worried about the provider than the people that they’re actually 

serving, Mr. Speaker — the patients. And that’s the same as 

what Amicus is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ll be moving . . . There are 100 new beds that’ll be coming 

into circulation for long-term care needs, Mr. Speaker, in the 

Saskatoon Health Region that will allow us to move acute care 

. . . patients out of an acute care setting into the appropriate 

living facilities, Mr. Speaker, such as Amicus. We believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that it’s a pilot project. We’re going to see how it 

works, Mr. Speaker. But what I can tell you is that this 

government, each and every time, will choose the patients over 

process that that government always got hung up on. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Financial Reporting 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, today the Provincial 

Auditor, an independent officer of this Assembly, released a 

report and focused on the inappropriate accounting of this 

government of our provincial finances. In that report, she called 

the current reporting confusing, not fairly presented, and she 

highlights the government’s ability to manipulate the books and 

to manufacture desired financial outcomes: for example, in the 

fiscal year 2010-11, reporting a surplus to the public when it 

ran a deficit of $13 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people deserve to know the true 

state of our finances. Why won’t this government provide just 

that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, this government really 

appreciates the work of the auditor. This government is 

committed to full and transparent financial reporting, Mr. 

Speaker, especially to the people of the province. And we do 

that, Mr. Speaker, we do that through the summary financial 

statements which provide a comprehensive view of government 

activity, as well as the General Revenue Fund statements. And 

those are really focused on the programs and services that 

government provide to the people of this province. The GRF 

[General Revenue Fund] and the summary-based information 

each have a role to play in providing important accountability 

information to the public regarding the financial state of the 

province. 

 

The members opposite know this, Mr. Speaker, because they 

followed the same practices, Mr. Speaker. They followed the 

same practices, Mr. Speaker. But there is something that has 

changed, Mr. Speaker. For the first time in history, we have a 

AAA credit rating, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, under the good 

work of our Premier and our Minister of Finance, we’ve seen 

the debt go down by $3 billion, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, reporting through the summaries, reporting 

through the GRF, the news is solid for the state of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The statement made about debt doesn’t 

include the over $6 billion of debt that the auditor highlights 

that’s not included in our books, Mr. Speaker. And as to the 

minister’s comments about change in positions, times change, 

Mr. Speaker, accounting standards change, and it’s simply not 

acceptable for a government to set its own accounting policy. 

We wouldn’t accept that of companies in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, or anywhere else. We’re out of line with the rest of 

Canada. 

 

Over the past four years, this government has worked hard to 

manufacture desired outcomes. They’ve stripped over $2 billion 

from our rainy day fund. They’ve stripped over $2 billion from 

our Crown corporations. And our auditor had this to say in her 

report: 

 

It is an issue where Saskatchewan is not keeping up with 

other provinces. Other provincial governments and the 

federal government report publicly using their Summary 

Financial Statements that are prepared in accordance with 

generally accepted accounting principles. 

 

It’s time for public reporting to focus on the Summary 

Financial Statements. [She said that this change] . . . will 

provide citizens with the deficit or surplus result that fairly 

reflects Government’s management of public monies and 

resources under its control. 

 

Question to the minister: does he agree with the Provincial 

Auditor, yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

[10:30] 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, let’s be clear. What the 

auditor also included, Mr. Speaker, and I quote, that “The 

Auditor’s 2011 Report — Volume 2 describes how the 

government produces two sets of financial statements. One 

includes all government operations. These are the Summary 

Financial Statements.” And again I quote: “The Auditor has 

given these statements a clean audit opinion,” Mr. Speaker. 



102 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2011 

Regarding the GRF, Mr. Speaker, pursuant to The Financial 

Administration Act, 1993 that the members opposite will know, 

which is meant to ensure that the government reports based on 

how it’s both organized and how it operates, the GRF is the 

designated fund to which all public monies are to be deposited 

and from which all public monies are to be appropriated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as far as the claims regarding manufactured 

outcomes, Mr. Speaker, what we can see is from independent 

bodies — most recently from the Conference Board of Canada 

and from BMO [Bank of Montreal] today — Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, is going to be finishing first in real GDP for 2012, 

Mr. Speaker. Those aren’t manufactured. Those are hard-earned 

facts by the people of this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Canadian Wheat Board 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 

Agriculture and the Saskatchewan Party have openly supported 

and encouraged the federal government’s legislation to remove 

the Canadian Wheat Board’s exclusive statutory marketing 

authority for wheat and barley sales. 

 

There are many, many unanswered questions about the 

dismantling of the Canadian Wheat Board’s single desk. What 

is the impact to producer cars and shortline railroads? How will 

this affect transportation, producer grain costs? Premiums 

earned from the single desk for farmers are between 400 to 

$500 million a year. Where is the plan to ensure these funds are 

still going to farmers? How will producers be able to replace 

the Canadian Wheat Board’s leveraging power, their access to 

port capacity? 

 

To the minister: with all these unanswered questions, has he 

obtained any analysis of the impact of this dismantling on 

Saskatchewan producers? If yes, where is it? And if no, why 

not? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to the ruling that came down yesterday from the judge, 

I just want to quote part of that ruling that he came out with. 

And part of that ruling, and I quote, says, “The applicants 

confirm that the validity of Bill C-18, and the validity and the 

effects of any legislation that might become law as a result of 

Bill C-18 are not the issue of the applicant.” So what he is 

saying in essence is it’s not Bill C-18 that the ruling was about. 

 

What we should not lose issue with here though is what farmers 

are asking across Saskatchewan, what they are asking across 

Alberta and BC [British Columbia], and for that matter 

Manitoba, Mr. Speaker — is to have the choice to market their 

own grain as they see fit. And that’s the main issue here, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, that’s not what farmers are 

asking at all. In the summer of 2011, the farmers held a 

plebiscite. Sixty-two per cent of wheat producers and 51 per 

cent of barley producers voted in favour of the Canadian Wheat 

Board single-desk marketing system. Yesterday the Federal 

Court judge ruled that the federal Agriculture minister breached 

the Wheat Board Act by failing to consult farmers before 

introducing legislation to strip away the single-desk grain 

marketing system. In the ruling, the judge states, “Had a 

meaningful consultation process been engaged to find a 

solution which meets the concern of the majority, the present 

legal action might not have been necessary.” 

 

The federal judge’s ruling also states, “By failing to conduct a 

producer vote, the minister has acted contrary to legitimate 

expectations of Western Canadian wheat and barley producers.” 

 

To the minister: is he going to do the right thing, support the 

democratic rights of Saskatchewan producers, or does he agree 

with the federal government’s choice to break the law? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I notice this morning that the wheat growers 

across Western Canada and the barley growers across Western 

Canada have come out in support of the federal minister, asking 

him to continue with Bill C-18 to give them the opportunity to 

sell their own product. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how the members opposite would 

like it if when payday came around if some of their colleagues 

said, we’re not going to give you your whole payday; we’re 

going to give you maybe half, and we might only give you that 

a year from now or six months from now. I’m not sure how 

many members opposite would go for that. Because, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s the scenario our farmers are dealing with every 

day out there where they’re not receiving money for their 

product when they would like to sell it for how much they 

would like to sell at the time of that sale. All farmers are asking 

for is choice. 

 

The Canadian Wheat Board can function. The Canadian Wheat 

Board can stay in existence for those who would like to market 

their grain through it. But many producers out there across this 

province are saying, we want the choice to market our own 

grain. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, in the 2011 Canadian Wheat 

Board plebiscite, 62 per cent of wheat producers and 51 per 

cent of barley producers voted in favour of the single-desk 

marketing. A federal judge has ruled that the federal 

government broke the law by making changes to the Wheat 

Board without consulting with farmers. The judge stated that 

the government had to be “held accountable for [its] disregard 

for the rule of law.” 

 

The Chair of the Canadian Wheat Board has stated that there’s 

been no recent impact analysis done on the cost to producers of 

dismantling the Canadian Wheat Board and there are 

unanswered questions around the survival of producer cars, 



December 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 103 

shortlines and premiums. 

 

To the minister: since he is in favour of dismantling the single 

desk, does he have a pragmatic plan to ensure that producers 

continue to enjoy the obvious advantages of the single desk? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I think we’ve made it very clear from the very 

start of this process — many, many years ago actually when we 

were in opposition, and now in government — that we have no 

problem with the Canadian Wheat Board. It can function as an 

entity for the producers that would wish to utilize that as an 

opportunity to sell their grain. 

 

What we’re saying and the federal government is saying, that 

for those producers that would like that choice with their own 

grain — and I repeat, their own grain — they should have that 

choice to market it when they see fit, for how many dollars they 

would like to receive for that product. Right now they do not 

have that luxury, Mr. Speaker. They are told when they can sell 

it, who they can sell it to, and for how much they can sell it. 

And, Mr. Speaker, no other business in this country would be 

able to function under that scenario. 

 

Our producers — and many of them, Mr. Speaker, are new, 

young producers coming on stream which we need very much 

in this province — want to market their own grain. They turn 

on their computers in the morning; they can check prices right 

around the world. And yet when it comes to Canadian Wheat 

Board and the monopoly, they are not allowed to sell their own 

product. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Supply of Nurses 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday afternoon I 

had the pleasure of attending a Christmas reception held in 

downtown Regina by the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. And 

while it was a restaurant very close to Crave, Mr. Speaker, do 

not be alarmed. I know members from both sides of the House 

were invited, because I did see the Health minister there, along 

with his seatmate. 

 

Over the course of the reception, I spoke to a number of 

representatives from SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] and 

they told me, Mr. Speaker, that at present there are at least 18 

vacancies in the operating room for operating room nurses in 

the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region. And due to this 

shortage, Mr. Speaker, surgeries are being stalled, surgeries are 

being delayed, physicians are being frustrated, and patients are 

not happy, Mr. Speaker, and being served well. 

 

My question to the minister: can he confirm that there are 18 

operating room nursing vacancies in the Regina Qu’Appelle 

Health Region at this time, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Yes, I was certainly glad to attend the 

reception as well as a few members from the opposition, and 

my seatmate was there as well. We had a very good time, Mr. 

Speaker, and certainly had a good discussion with the president, 

Rosalie Longmoore, as well as the board, regarding some of the 

issues regarding nursing. It was more talking about the 

Christmas season than anything else, but we are very aware that 

in Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region right now, there is a 

shortage of operating room nurses. We know the absolute need 

to fill those positions, as we have a very aggressive target on 

wait times, Mr. Speaker, which we are going to meet by 2014. 

 

What I can report though, Mr. Speaker, that over the last four 

years, we have set a target of 800. We’ve recruited over 900 

nurses, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, about a week and a half ago, 

I was at SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology] with the graduating class there. There were 54 

newly graduating nurses, Mr. Speaker. I was proud to hear them 

talk about where they were going to be settling when they were 

done — 100 per cent here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in the Assembly, the 

Minister of Health refused to admit that his approach with 

for-profit clinics was presenting a drain to the public system 

and in the process hurting patient care and hurting the work of 

physicians and practitioners within our system. 

 

My question to the Health minister today, Mr. Speaker, in the 

for-profit surgical clinics that are at work in Saskatchewan, my 

question to the minister: are nurses employed in the clinic and 

how many nurses are employed in the clinic, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we know that we need both a full complement of 

nurses, absolutely, in our public system. We are offering 

surgeries through the private sector, Mr. Speaker. Third party, 

no paying out of pocket, no queue-jumping, which is helping us 

decrease the wait-lists that we see. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has moved from 400 training 

seats up to 700 training seats for nurses in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. It wasn’t too many years ago, if you went back under 

the NDP, that there was less than 100 seats for a year or two, 

Mr. Speaker, for nurses. If he’s complaining about a lack of 

nurses right now, he better look at the members on his own 

caucus that were Health ministers at the time or Education 

ministers at the time that reduced the number of training seats, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve increased the number of training seats. We’ve got a 

strong contract with our nursing union, Mr. Speaker, that are 

seeing nurses come back to Saskatchewan, as opposed to being 

the province that exported more nurses than any other province 

in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I am talking about the current 



104 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2011 

situation, and the minister refused to answer the question about 

the current situation. 

 

Admittedly, Mr. Speaker, I have not been the Health minister 

for the last four years, but I would ask the Health minister this 

question. Looking at the situation, here’s what I see, Mr. 

Speaker. We have a shortage of surgical O.R. [operating room] 

nurses in the Regina Health Region. There’s a shortage. This is 

causing a reduction in the amount of surgeries. It’s causing 

frustration for physicians practising in the region, and patient 

care is being harmed because of it. We have private, for-profit 

surgical clinics, Mr. Speaker, that are existing, that employ 

nurses to conduct the surgeries that are done in the system, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

My question to the minister: does he not see a connection 

between the shortage of surgical O.R. nurses in the public 

system, the presence of O.R. surgical nurses in the private 

system? Does he not see the connection there that one is 

draining resources from the other? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there were huge 

shortage of nurses before there were private clinics in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. If it wasn’t for the leadership of our 

Premier and the government of the day, the Sask Party, to 

recruit nurses, to set a target, which that opposition never would 

have done when they were in government, to set a target of 800 

more nurses in this province, Mr. Speaker, we would be short 

across the piece if it was still under the NDP [New Democratic 

Party], Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it isn’t the issue to reduce one or the other. It’s to 

properly staff all, Mr. Speaker, and that’s what we’re doing by 

increasing the number of training seats, by retaining 100 per 

cent of the graduating classes, Mr. Speaker, the best retention 

rate in Canada, I would say. The Regina Qu’Appelle Health 

Region, as we speak, are sending more nurses to the O.R. 

course to fill those vacancies because, Mr. Speaker, we know 

that there’s a greater demand. 

 

But what I’m proud to say is our government sees this, and 

we’ll be meeting that demand into the future. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to inform the House that earlier this 

day I tabled the Provincial Auditor’s 2011 report volume no. 2. 

It was laid before the Legislative Assembly in accordance with 

the provisions of sections 14.1 of The Provincial Auditor Act. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Enhancements to Disabilities Program 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very proud 

to rise in the House today to announce an expansion to the 

Saskatchewan assured income for disabilities program, or the 

SAID program. It was established in October of 2009. SAID 

provides income support, and that’s separate and distinct from 

social assistance, to people with significant and enduring 

disabilities. Initially enrolment had been limited to individuals 

living in residential care settings. Currently there are more than 

3,000 people with disabilities who live in residential care and 

enrolled in SAID. 

 

Today, following through on commitments made by our 

government in the recent provincial campaign, I am pleased to 

announce there will be a number of significant enhancements to 

SAID in 2012. These enhancements will increase the benefits 

paid through SAID and will make SAID available to as many as 

7,000 more Saskatchewan people with disabilities, and it will 

further distinguish SAID from the Saskatchewan assistance 

program. 

 

Effective January 2012, SAID beneficiaries in residential care 

settings will receive an additional $50 per month increase in 

their benefits. More than 3,000 SAID recipients will benefit 

from this increase. 

 

Shortly after this increase takes effect in the spring of 2012, the 

Ministry of Social Services will also deliver on another 

commitment to expand enrolment in the SAID program. This 

will result in as many as 7,000 more Saskatchewan people with 

significant, enduring disabilities joining the SAID program in 

June of 2012. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Expanding enrolment will be followed by substantial, 

additional benefit increases to the SAID program. Specifically, 

our government recently committed to boost SAID benefits 

over the next four years by $350 per month for people with 

disabilities who are living independently and $400 a month for 

couples with disabilities who are living independently. For 

people with disabilities living in residential care settings, in 

addition to the $50 a month increase in 2012, we will increase 

benefits by $100 per month over the next four years. 

 

Finally, we will also broaden the inheritance exemption in 

SAID in January of 2012 to include the proceeds of life 

insurance policy. This further distinguishes SAID from the 

Saskatchewan assistance program. 

 

Combined, these various significant enhancement to the SAID 

program support our government’s goal of making 

Saskatchewan the best place in Canada to live for people with 

disabilities. The enhancements to SAID in 2012 and beyond 

will continue our multi-year commitment made by our 

government to develop the SAID program with input and the 

participation of the disability community. 

 

We are truly looking forward to continuing to develop SAID 

with our community partners in the months and the years ahead, 

making the program even better on behalf of people with 

disabilities and their families right across our province. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 

the minister first of all for sending her remarks over a little 



December 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 105 

while ago, or earlier in the day. I really appreciated that. And a 

special thank you to our guest in the audience today, Michael 

Richter, who is here to hear the announcement. 

 

I know many people in Saskatchewan have been eagerly 

awaiting the next intake of SAID. I know the individuals who 

were part of the first intake were very pleased. The 3,000 or so 

were very pleased to be part of that program but will be very 

happy to hear about the increased benefits. They’ve been eager 

and hopeful that that would take place. And I know there’s been 

many others who have been waiting for this second intake for 

the last two years. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency office 

that’s a regular request. People want to know. Many people on 

social assistance — a number I’ve heard, about 70 per cent of 

people on social assistance — have some disability. So there 

are many, many people who are very happy to hear that this 

next intake will be happening in the very near future and there 

will be increased benefits. 

 

I also just want to thank all the organizations who have worked 

together to advocate and work with the government to ensure 

the government understands some of the unique needs of people 

with disabilities. And it’s all your good work that I think has 

helped move this forward. 

 

So I know again, as I’ve said, there’s many people in Saskatoon 

Riversdale and beyond who are looking forward to these 

improvements. It’s always a good thing when we can enhance 

benefits for citizens and especially for our most vulnerable. 

And the sooner we can get this done the better, Mr. Speaker. So 

thank you very much. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 1 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2011/ 

Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du  

Banc de la Reine 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 1, The 

Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2011 be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 1, The Queen’s Bench 

Amendment Act be moved the first time. Is the House ready for 

the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When will this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 2 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Collaborative Law) 

Amendment Act, 2011/Loi corrective 

(droit collaboratif) de 2011 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 2, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Collaborative Law) 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General, Bill No. 2, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Collaborative Law) Amendment Act be now read a first time. Is 

the House ready for . . . the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When will this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 3 — The Summary Offences Procedure 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 3, The 

Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2011 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 3, The Summary Offences 

Procedure Amendment Act, 2011 be read a first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 4 — The Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 4, The 

Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 4, The Pension Benefits 

Amendment Act, 2011 be read a first time. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 



106 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2011 

Bill No. 5 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2011 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 5, The 

Credit Union Amendment Act, 2011 be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 5, The Credit Union 

Amendment Act, 2011 be read a first time. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 6 — The Miscellaneous Business Statutes 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for CIC 

[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan]. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 6, 

The Miscellaneous Business Statutes Amendment Act, 2011 be 

now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for CIC that Bill No. 6, The Miscellaneous 

Business Statutes Amendment Act, 2011 be read a first time. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 7 — The Co-operatives Amendment Act, 2011/ 

Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1996 sur les coopératives 
 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 7, 

The Co-operatives Amendment Act, 2011 be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for CIC that Bill No. 7, The Co-operatives 

Amendment Act, 2011 be read a first time. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 8 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2011 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 8, 

The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2011 be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for CIC that Bill No. 8, The Land Titles 

Amendment Act, 2011 be read a first time. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 9 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that Bill No. 9, The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport that Bill No. 

9, The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 

2011 be read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 10 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2011 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that Bill No. 10, The Parks Amendment Act, 2011 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport that Bill No. 

10, The Parks Amendment Act, 2011 be read a first time. Is it 



December 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 107 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, next sitting of the 

House. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Marchuk, seconded by Ms. 

Campeau, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Belanger.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise today to speak to the Throne Speech of 2011. And before I 

get to the substance of the Throne Speech, I’d like to 

congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on your election, congratulate 

you again, and we look forward to working with you in the 

coming years as we make sure that this legislature functions in 

an appropriate way for all of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I also want to say thank you to our former Speaker from the last 

four years for the diligent way that he handled this job. And I 

know that all of us will be saying thanks to him for the record 

that he has presented and also has left for all of us as we move 

forward. 

 

It is also my pleasure to welcome all of the new members to the 

House — the one member on our side and all of the new 

members on the other side of the House. Because what happens 

as people are new to this place is that they get to learn how to 

be legislators by observing those people around them and 

across from them. And, Mr. Speaker, I think all of us who have 

been here for a while, and probably, Mr. Speaker, more than the 

rest of us, can identify those members who should be used as 

good examples and those members who should be, maybe their 

examples should be ignored. 

 

But I say to all of the new members, this is a very special place 

to be. It’s a very important task that you have. It ends up being 

the kind of place where you’re not always certain what’s 

happening in your world. But there’s no question about it — 

there will be a time and a place where your single vote will 

actually make a big difference in what happens for the people 

of Saskatchewan. So don’t be lackadaisical or don’t end up 

assuming that you can just ride along here. On every issue that 

comes up, you need to make sure you form your own opinion 

and that you end up making decisions on behalf of your 

constituents which are for the betterment of all of us in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I also want to make special note and congratulations to the 

nine members, I guess including myself, in our opposition 

caucus. We have quickly come together as a group. And we’re 

very pleased to be able to be here in the legislature as a group 

of capable experts in lots of new areas but who are here to make 

sure that the government is held to account on all of the 

decisions that they make, but especially in how they use the 

resources of the province. And, Mr. Speaker, we will take that 

task up in a very definite and direct way, and we will make sure 

that our questions are appropriate and raise the standard of 

governance in this particular province. 

 

Also want to say welcome to all of the new Pages who are here. 

You will end up getting to know us in various different ways, 

and we will get to know you. We appreciate the fact that you 

have chosen to apply to do this particular work, and we hope 

that you will learn many things from the work that you do here 

in the legislature. 

 

Also want to say thank you to the legislative staff. There are 

many tasks that you have, and any time we enter into a new 

legislature, there are new ways of doing things that we all have 

to get used to. So we ask that you have magnanimity towards us 

as members, but we also know that there will not always be 

clear answers on questions that we raise when we have the 

present makeup in the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to represent the constituency of 

Regina Lakeview, and this is the fifth time that the people of 

Regina Lakeview have elected me to come and be their 

representative in this place. 

 

[11:00] 

 

I want to say thank you to all of the voters in Regina Lakeview. 

What I know is that people in Lakeview are very up to date on 

the questions that happen in provincial government and on 

policy. And I know that when people go to vote in our 

constituency, they are looking very carefully at all of the things 

that are happening in the province. 

 

I also know that when I’m out and about visiting with people in 

Regina Lakeview or in the city of Regina or anywhere in the 

province for that matter, that I will get very good advice. I will 

get very hard questions. I will get suggestions around policy 

changes. I will get warnings about things that are happening 

here in the provincial government and in how we as legislators 

are doing our job. I want to say thank you to all of the people of 

Regina Lakeview who take that task seriously and those people 

who provide me with good advice. 

 

I want to say a special thank you to my constituency assistants, 

Connie Yakimchuk and Cory Oxelgren. They have served me 

well over a number of years, and I know that they will continue 

to serve the people of Regina Lakeview and of the whole city of 

Regina as we go into these next four years. 

 

I want to point out two people in Regina Lakeview who have 

been of a special assistance to me and I think to all the citizens 



108 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2011 

of Saskatchewan in my political career. And that’s Gary and 

Jessie Carlson. They are celebrating their 50th year of marriage, 

50 years in a whole number of different areas. But I wanted to 

specifically thank them because they have provided me with 

support and good advice over the years. 

 

And finally in the thank yous, I want to say thank you to my 

wife, Linda, my daughters, Ingrid and Solveig, for the support 

that they have provided over these many years. It’s not always 

easy to be a family of a politician as we all know. And they 

have been able to give me good advice or information, but most 

importantly just a chance to be myself away from this place and 

all of the pressures that are part of our life as politicians. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when the Throne Speech was presented on 

Monday this week, I’d have to say that my first reaction was 

disappointment. And it was disappointment for me personally, 

but more so disappointment on behalf of all of the people of the 

province. The election campaign was hard fought, and it was a 

clear result with 49 members on the government side and nine 

members in opposition. And it’s very obvious, visually, when 

you are in this legislature to see that power that is there with the 

government. I think all of us were expecting that when the 

Throne Speech was presented we would see and hear what the 

Premier and what the government intended to do in setting out a 

plan for the province, maybe on a four-year scale but maybe 

even on a longer term. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think we saw 

that. 

 

It kind of reminds me, in a way, of an analogy of a 

49-passenger bus, where you end up with the Premier driving 

this bus and partway through the week, partway through the 

week the Premier turned the heat up in the bus and everybody 

kind of fell asleep. And so what we end up with is people who 

are not enthused about this speech at all, not enthused about the 

direction where the government is going.  

 

And in fact, we haven’t heard from very many people here 

today about what it is that’s the government’s agenda because 

it’s my understanding that rather than having our normal 

number of days of Throne Speech debate, we will be ending the 

Throne Speech debate after three days. I’m not sure if this is 

unusual, but it’s not been usual in my years here in this 

legislature. 

 

Now what is the message that we’re sending to the public? Is it 

that the agenda of the government is so clear, so 

straightforward, so dramatically accepted by all of the public 

that, oh, we don’t even need to talk about it in this place? Or is 

it that people have fallen asleep with the heat in the bus and that 

they’re not ready to actually come and say something about this 

particular Throne Speech? 

 

And I guess if I was on the government’s side, as an 

experienced person in this legislature, I may be one who would 

be hesitant to get real excited about speaking about the Speech 

from the Throne because in this particular speech there are a 

whole number of things that are laid out as kind of a shopping 

list, but the vision, the plan, where we’re going to go, doesn’t 

appear to be there. There are some words about moving 

forward. Well practically, I think, that’s a message for every 

person who is alive on this earth. You’re moving forward 

somewhere. And that’s kind of what goes. But where are you 

going? What are you doing? How are you doing it? All of those 

kinds of questions are the questions that the people in 

Saskatchewan have as we are looking at this Throne Speech. 

 

Now you know, I’ve been asked, well what parts of this speech 

are good? Well I think there are some good parts relating to the 

further support for disabled people as we’re going to hear more 

about later this morning. I think there is some good parts about 

how there’s support for post-secondary students. It’s not the 

way that we would have done it. I think there’s some better 

ways to do it, but there is some information there. 

 

But when you look at the things that are there as it relates to 

health care, there’s not very much there. But more importantly, 

if you think about the main issues of our society as we move 

forward in the next decades, there’s a lot of things missing. One 

of the things we know is that the number one issue in the 

community right now is health care. And as I said, there doesn’t 

seem to be much in this particular document about that. But 

more importantly, when you look at the health of our 

community, of our province, of our earth, the major issues that 

all of us are concerned about — but especially young people — 

relate to the environment. And what you end up seeing in this 

particular document is absolutely no comment other than that 

we have a pristine environment in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now that may be true about parts of Saskatchewan, but there 

have been some major challenges to that special place that we 

have here from different environmental factors, whether it’s the 

acid rain related issues that come into our northwestern part of 

Saskatchewan, or whether it’s the number and amount of 

herbicides and pesticides that are used in our agriculture 

industry and how it affects the environment, or whether it’s the 

government’s own policy to remove wildlife habitat land from 

protection — and we still are waiting for an agenda around 

what they’re going to do with all of that. So what we have is no 

comment and no goal, no long-term perspective on where we 

go with the environment. 

 

On agriculture, there’s very little in this particular document 

about agriculture. There’s very little in this document about 

northern Saskatchewan and about the people of the North. And 

as our member from Cumberland was talking about yesterday, 

northern Saskatchewan is one of the five poorest areas in 

Canada as far as the rate of poverty, and that those are the types 

of issues that people expected, expected to be in this particular 

document. So we also know that there are a whole number of 

other issues related to northern Saskatchewan that appear to 

have missed the screen to be part of this particular Throne 

Speech. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the issues around our relationship with First 

Nations people and Métis people in Saskatchewan will be the 

defining issues for what Saskatchewan is as we look at the 21st 

century. And it’s absolutely important that we do this together 

because all of us are treaty people in this province. And we 

happen to be here on Treaty 4 territory, but we have 

responsibilities as successors to the people who signed Treaty 4 

but also the other treaties in Saskatchewan, and we need to live 

up to those responsibilities. 

 

In the same way, the First Nations people who are covered by 

the treaties are expecting that certain things will happen. There 



December 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 109 

doesn’t appear to be an agenda in that area that will allow this 

province to grow. And we’ve heard questions about that in this 

House this week, but the biggest question being, we have this 

wonderful resource of many, many young people who are 

looking for hope and opportunity in Saskatchewan, in Canada, 

in the world, and where is it and how is it that we as a province 

will use our resources appropriately to make sure that they can 

be the best that they can be and that they can be proud to be 

Saskatchewan people, proud to be treaty people, proud to be 

Métis people as we move forward. 

 

We also know that many of the interests of Métis people are 

protected in our Constitution of Canada, but we haven’t fully 

defined what that means. And we need to make sure that that’s 

front and centre in the agenda of the provincial government 

because there are so many areas that are impacted by the 

decisions that a government will make, whether they’re policy 

decisions or policy and financial decisions or just straight 

financial decisions. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are a whole number of areas in that 

world of relationships between Indian and Métis people and the 

overall community, but all of us are together as Saskatchewan 

people who want the best for everything. So I think rather than 

ignore some of these issues and stick them to the side, it is up to 

the government. It’s up to the Premier to show leadership and 

direction about how we’re going to resolve some of these 

issues. We know that in the election that some of these issues 

were used in ways that were more like weapons rather than 

ways to solve problems. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we look forward to the Premier, as leader, 

setting out where we’re going on some of these issues. And we 

need to make sure that we’re all together and that we know 

where we’re going, and this includes all of the different aspects 

of that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the questions that came to me this 

morning was when I saw the Provincial Auditor’s report, and 

one of the highlight features of this report was the word 

transparency. And we know that the Premier has used this word 

in many different ways, whether it’s about the lobbying registry 

or it’s about other aspects of how these things work. But in the 

Provincial Auditor’s report, there was this question about 

transparency, and I’m not sure if he’s embarrassed about this. 

We may hear something about this a little later. But it’s very 

much a question for the public when the officer of the 

legislature whose job it is to point out places where the 

government’s not being as clear or as transparent as they should 

be, where that officer in her very first report has this 

highlighted as an issue for the provincial government. 

 

[11:15] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we think there’s quite a bit of work to be done 

here. We will be helping them by, helping the government by 

pointing out where their problems are. We hope that the 

problems get fixed, not that they get pushed aside, that they get 

neglected. 

 

Also in this same light, it’s very curious that the government’s 

response around the Wheat Board this day is that we’re not 

concerned about the rule of law. We’re not concerned that laws 

are there to be kept and followed and we’re not concerned that 

things are done in ways that don’t follow the rules. And, Mr. 

Speaker, there are very clear ways to follow the rules and 

accomplish the agendas that you might have. But, Mr. Speaker, 

part of our role as legislators, but even more so part of our role 

as the Minister of Justice or as the former minister of Justice or 

as the critic in this area is to point out to our colleagues that the 

basis of how our society works is the rule of law. It’s this fact 

that we have come together and set up procedures whereby we 

will create policies which then are enacted into legislation 

which is to be used to make sure that the society is better. 

 

And on Monday when the Throne Speech was presented in this 

legislature, we had a very good visual example of the fact that 

we have three branches in our government. We have a 

legislature. We have an executive, headed by the Premier and 

the cabinet. And we end up having the judiciary whose job it is 

to make sure that those laws passed by the legislature are 

appropriately dealt with and followed by the executive branch. 

What we heard today in question period and what we heard 

yesterday in the media is both on a national level and on a 

provincial level. We have executive branch members who are 

not following the laws passed by the legislature or by the 

parliament. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this goes right to the heart of what our democracy 

is in this province and in this country. And so, Mr. Speaker, we 

all end up having to make sure that we look carefully at how we 

do things and what we say. And so, Mr. Speaker, I want all of 

us here in Saskatchewan to make sure that the way that we 

proceed is beyond reproach and will benefit all of the people by 

following the rules that we’ve set for each other. 

 

This is a matter that is serious for the whole country. We know 

that there have been a number of discussions in Canada about a 

change in how we govern ourselves, and one of those changes 

relates to this concept of much more power into the executive 

side of government overriding the legislative one. We always 

are at risk in Canada with the executive controlling the 

legislature, whether it’s in Ottawa or whether it’s in Regina. 

Some of the things that have been happening in Ottawa raise a 

lot of questions about this system whereby the executive can 

control parliament. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we as a small opposition here in Saskatchewan 

will be watching very carefully that some of those same 

methods of governing that we see starting in Ottawa, we want 

to make sure they don’t show up here in Saskatchewan. 

Because one of the reasons that our constitution is set up the 

way it is set up is to make sure that all of the various places of 

power within society have some balance. And there may be 

times when the balance in this particular legislature is a little 

uneven. I think we can see that. But it doesn’t mean that the 

concepts and the rules that have been here for centuries, even 

millennia if you go back to, you know, some of the Icelandic 

parliaments and things like that. But what you end up having is 

rules and ways of doing things that benefit the whole 

community. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we in this legislature are concerned about 

democracy. We’re concerned about the rule of law and I, as 

Leader of the Opposition, will point out these things. I know 

my colleagues will be watching. But what I especially ask today 



110 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2011 

is that the Premier and the government, in a position of great 

power, also looks carefully at how they respond to things, how 

they do things because it will make a difference in what 

happens in this province for the long term. 

 

Also what it makes a difference for is that individual, like my 

seatmate raised this morning, who can’t get services, we need 

to change policies or make sure that resources are available for 

people who are in trouble whether it’s lack of housing, lack of 

food, lack of resources to do things. All of those are why we’re 

in this place. But we go all the way back again to the rules and 

how we make our decisions, how we follow those decisions, 

how we check up on those decisions through the judiciary to 

make sure that whatever we do is for the benefit of all of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, throne speeches are important. They’re one of 

the two times a year when every member in this House gets to 

stand up and set out the kinds of issues that are of concern to 

them. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a surprise to me that there’s only 

three days of debate on this Throne Speech in this particular 

year, given that many people have great hopes for the new 

government which has a lot of power. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m disappointed. I’m a bit sad that what we 

have is a Throne Speech that doesn’t really meet the 

expectations of the people of Saskatchewan. So I will be voting 

against the Throne Speech. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the chance to 

enter into the Throne Speech debate today. 

 

Just before I begin with some remarks with respect to the 

substance of the Throne Speech and respond to some of the 

points that have been made in debate by members on this side 

and members on that side of the House, it’s important for me to 

offer my gratitude first and foremost to my family, to Tami and 

Megan and Colter and Faith for their enduring and truly 

amazing support for me in this particular work, and for their 

love. And so I want to thank them, as well as the constituents of 

Swift Current who since 1999 — either because they thought 

maybe I could give voice to their concerns or they just wanted 

rid of me — have sent me to Regina in successive elections.  

 

And really I will never forget, as amazing as this last election 

night was and the one before that — really, in each one in terms 

from a local perspective — I will just never forget what it was 

like on September the 16th, 1999 when the people of Swift 

Current first gave me the chance to serve. And so I know 

exactly how the member for Nutana feels and how the new 

members on this side of the House feel because it’s something 

that will never leave me. And I’m sure that’s true for every 

single member of the House. And I’m grateful for the people of 

Swift Current’s support and encouragement and will endeavour 

to work hard, first and foremost, as their MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] because without that, without those 

duties, I can do no other. 

 

I also would like to thank the campaign team that once again 

helped the most delinquent candidate in the province because I 

wasn’t able to go door knocking at all in Swift Current or 

campaign locally. I was campaigning in other parts of the 

province. And so my campaign team co-chaired by Bryon 

Campbell and another fellow by the name of John Wall led that 

effort there. And I wanted to thank them as well, as my mom 

was pretty key in that. And a few others that I’d like to mention 

if I can for the record: Lyle and Pat Quintin and Jackie 

LaRochelle and Shauna Fjaagesund. And there’s many others, 

and I’ll miss a few, but I just want to thank them on the record 

for their support and their help in the local campaign. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have thought a lot about the 7th of November, 

2011 in the days since. And I know a lot of members have, and 

some have reflected on that in their efforts in terms of the 

Throne Speech debate. I’ll just be very candid and tell you this, 

Mr. Speaker. I got a report on the weekend from our pollster. 

It’s a pollster that we trust, who has been accurate not only in 

forecasts in this particular province but in other forecasts, other 

predictive work he’s done for other elections, general elections 

in other provinces and nationally. And he remains very 

effective, by the way. The firm remains very effective. But I 

can tell you this, Mr. Speaker. I received on the weekend a 

worst-case number of seats potentially — I mean, that’s all 

forecasting — and then a best-case projection. I will tell you 

that what happened on 7 November far exceeded the best-case 

projection that I received on that weekend. 

 

And so I have thought about why that . . . I’ve thought about a 

couple of things with respect to that. Number one, why would 

that be? Well the answer to that, at least part one is the reason 

that we did much better than even some of the best in the 

forecasting business would have predicted we would do, I 

think, is because of the women and men that sit to your right 

hand, Mr. Speaker, because of the hard work of candidates, 

now MLAs on this side of the House — and, by the way, 

candidates, nine of them who were not yet . . . who were not 

successful — and just how hard they worked right through that 

weekend when those forecasts were tendered to me, right until 

the very end in terms of getting out that vote. They spent every 

single moment they could on the doorsteps and on the farm 

gates of this province making a case for a renewed mandate for 

the Saskatchewan Party government. 

 

They, I think — and I saw it first-hand in terms of campaigning 

with a number of them — they campaigned with humility. We 

recognized that in the first term we benefited from a lot of good 

fortune. We tried to do the right things in government with all 

of that good luck. But when we were campaigning, I think we 

had that approach, they had that approach of humility on the 

doorsteps, and they approached it as a job interview. And really 

that’s what it is. It’s a fairly long job interview, but that’s really 

what that process is for all of us. And they worked hard to make 

the case that they wanted to earn the support of those peoples, 

those folks on the doorsteps and on the farm gates of this 

province.  

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I need, I will thank them very, very much for 

all of their hard work. That’s why the numbers came in a lot 

stronger than we would have ever thought they would have. 

And I’m so very, very grateful to have as many as we do have 

on the bus that the Leader of the Opposition referred to. Better 

to caucus on a bus than in a Suburban, Mr. Speaker, as the Hon. 

Leader of the Opposition has referenced . . . [inaudible 



December 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 111 

interjection] . . . Well I’m just going to leave that alone. The 

hon. member has heckled from his seat, “At least we’re awake,” 

and I’m just going to leave that alone. 

 

There has been some interesting work in the wake of the 

election by political scientists, principally but not only at the 

University of Saskatchewan, that have been published in our 

daily newspapers here lately. And it’s interesting as they’ve sort 

of broken down the numbers, and they’ve dissected the election 

results and have reported it out publicly. And then the media 

have reported back that, for example, 29 out of 30 demographic 

groups voted for the Saskatchewan Party in this election. And 

they drilled down and ask a lot of questions why. 

 

[11:30] 

 

We know that on the surface there are other numbers. For 

example, we know 64 per cent of the popular vote, the highest 

popular vote ever received by a party in the province’s history. 

I think Walter Scott early on in our province’s life had 57 per 

cent of the popular vote. I think provincially we’ve done some 

analysis and found that only in Newfoundland and Labrador has 

there ever been a provincial popular vote higher than what we 

were able to garner and what we were grateful to receive here 

in the last election. And of course the last statistic is witnessed 

to your right hand, Mr. Speaker. It’s the 48 members that are 

here in the Legislative Assembly and a caucus of 49. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, you will understand then why we are just 

very humbled by that and why we have wanted to adopt, not 

just adopt, but conduct ourselves in an attitude of service, in an 

attitude of humility. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to make this 

commitment again on the floor of the legislature as one of my 

first comments with respect to the context of the Speech from 

the Throne. We say to the people of the province as we did in 

the Speech from the Throne, first and foremost, thank you. 

 

Secondly we are accepting this result with humility. We 

recognize that again our government benefited from some good 

fortune in that first term. And thirdly we are going to work hard 

every single day to try to earn the result of 7 November, 2011. 

The result happened then but we haven’t earned it yet. That 

comes, that started on November the 8th and actually, when we 

kept our first promise on that particular day to extend the PST 

[provincial sales tax] exemption on children’s clothing, to kid’s 

clothes for kids 18 years and younger. 

 

We’re going to work hard to earn the result of that election 

right through until the next election. 

 

So once again, these members on this side, and our candidates 

contesting in the nine seats represented on the other side, will 

be able to look those voters in the eye, those residents of the 

province whom we serve in the eye, on the doorsteps and at the 

farm gates and say, once again we did what we said we would 

do, and here are yet another set of commitments we make and a 

renewed vision for the province. And you can trust us to do 

these things because that’s been the modus operandi of this 

government and this party in office, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I noted in his remarks the honourable Leader of the Opposition 

lamented the fact that the Throne Speech debate is short. His 

contention I guess is that it’s cut short. Well, Mr. Speaker, if 

you take a look at the Speech from the Throne — and you have 

a bit of déjà vu, I’d understand it because what is in the Speech 

from the Throne is exactly what was in the platform that we just 

campaigned on — and so the Throne Speech debate actually 

started on the 10th of October 2011 and it was completed for 

the most part on the 7th of November. 

 

And do you know what, Mr. Speaker? The best thing then about 

this particular Speech from the Throne is that it wasn’t just 

debated by members in this House. It was debated by the 

people of this province who looked at two choices — one 

tendered by the opposition, one by this party — and chose this 

party’s platform. And that was the length of the Speech from 

the Throne that we had, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speech from the Throne has a number of components. I’ll 

just deal with them quickly, and then we can move on with the 

voting. I’m anxious to see how that will turn out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne, like the platform, 

begins with our vision for the province. And I was shocked that 

one of the first comments we heard from the Opposition Leader 

was, in his entry into the Throne Speech debate . . . Actually 

when it was released on Monday, his contention was that there 

wasn’t a vision in the Speech from the Throne. Mr. Speaker, the 

entire first part of the Speech from the Throne is a vision. The 

entire first part of the platform that we campaigned on in this 

election is the vision. 

 

And our vision has never changed, by the way, and neither will 

it. As long as we have the honour to serve in these benches over 

on this side of the House — well, or frankly, on any side of the 

House — our vision will remain unchanged. The platform for 

the vision, the bulwark for our vision for the province will 

always be about economic growth. That is the North Star of this 

government. More on that in a moment as to why that would 

be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But with respect to that general vision, we backed it up with 

specific goals and targets in the Speech from the Throne and in 

the platform, including that we would be 1.1 million people by 

2015. And I remember, Mr. Speaker, in opposition when the 

Saskatchewan Party proposed that we could get to 1.1 million 

people within a decade. I remember, Mr. Speaker, because the 

NDP on this side of the House at the time said that it was a 

statistical impossibility. It was the former member from Regina 

Wascana — not the current member for Regina Wascana Plains 

— the former member who in a local paper in the member for 

Arm River-Watrous’ constituency told the world that it was the 

NDP’s belief that it was statistically impossible for this 

province’s population to grow even at the national average, 

which is 1 per cent. 

 

You know what, Mr. Speaker, they were kind of right because 

since the election we have, since the election in ’07, we have 

not grown at the national average. Our population has not 

grown at the national average. It has exceeded the national 

average in population growth. It’s been the highest time of 

growth in our population in about 50 years, Mr. Speaker. And 

so we have a goal now to be to 1.1 million people by 2015. 

 

It’s an important goal, Mr. Speaker, by the way, because if a 

government lays out a target — the Minister of Health has 



112 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2011 

highlighted the importance here today of targets in health care 

— but if a government or a business or an organization is 

informed by some target, its actions are going to move towards 

delivering on a target. If you set a target for 800 nurses, you are 

going to train more and you are going to recruit more. And in 

four years, lo and behold you’re actually going to exceed that 

target. We’re at 900. 

 

If you set a target for short wait times, your actions will be 

informed by the target. You’ll deploy the private sector within 

the public system. You’ll provide more funding for the public 

sector, Mr. Speaker, and you will reach the target. And we are 

well on the way to reaching the target of a surgery within 90 

days for the people of this province. Targets are important. 

 

Early on in our first term, the minister of Social Services, now 

the Minister of Education, reported that there were over 440 of 

our fellow citizens with intellectual disabilities who were 

languishing on a wait-list either for day programming, their 

families for respite programming, or the dignity of a place to 

live, Mr. Speaker. And when that information was presented to 

this government, we asked that minister how much, how much 

would it take to deal with that? And I think the answer was 

about $76 million. Mr. Speaker, we set a goal to eliminate that 

wait-list. And while there is work to do, I can tell you we are 

ahead of schedule. I think we are over 70 per cent of the way 

there now. In my own constituency when there was 25 of these 

individuals with intellectual disabilities waiting for a place to 

live prior to the ’07 election, the wait-list is now one or two, 

from my last report just prior to the election. 

 

Targets are important. If you set a population target as this 

Speech from the Throne does in its vision statement, that 

target’s going to inform your action. You are going to do what 

you can do to attract more people. You are going to go to job 

fairs. You are going to sharpen the province’s efforts with 

respect to our immigration strategies. You are going to work to 

engage our First Nations and Métis in the economy to a greater 

extent. You are going to do the things that we need to do to 

keep up with infrastructure demands so we can accommodate 

more people. All that that government will do on the economy 

is going to be informed by the notion that we want there to be 

more people living in this province. The goal is 1.1 million 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other target that’s set in the Speech from the 

Throne and in the platform document is that we would steadily 

move towards eliminating the General Revenue Fund debt of 

Saskatchewan. Now, Mr. Speaker, some would say — not 

knowing the history, the recent history of the province — well 

that’s special, but what are the chances of that happening? They 

might say that for example if they had only looked at the record 

of members opposite where the General Revenue Fund debt 

was never meaningfully reduced. But here’s the good news, Mr. 

Speaker: yes, we had good fortune in government in those first 

four years. What did we do with that good fortune? Well first 

and foremost, we paid off over $3 billion of the General 

Revenue Fund debt. And that means that we have reduced the 

mortgage on the future of this province, on the next generation, 

and our work is not done. We need to eliminate that debt. 

That’s also part of the vision that we have. 

 

There are many elements to the vision of this government with 

respect to the Speech from the Throne, including how we treat 

our seniors with dignity and with support, ensuring that our 

youth can get the very best education and then employment 

opportunities thereafter, that people with disabilities get the best 

support possible. Our goal is of course to be the best in the 

country for individuals among us and their families who are 

dealing with the challenges of disabilities. 

 

Our vision is, and I quote — it’s in the Speech from the Throne, 

Mr. Speaker, simply put — “Our vision is that Saskatchewan 

will be the best place in Canada to live and to work and to start 

a business, to get an education, to raise a family, and to build a 

life.” 

 

Then the Speech from the Throne highlights how we are going 

to do that, and the first section of course is on growth. That is 

what this government will always be about. What are the 

elements of our growth agenda, Mr. Speaker? Well they remain 

unchanged. We believe we have to have competitive taxes. We 

need to lower taxes where we’re not competitive, Mr. Speaker. 

We need to maintain the Saskatchewan advantage. Debt 

reduction, we’ve already talked about that. That’s part of a 

growth agenda. Fiscal responsibility, fiscal probity is an 

important part of a growth agenda. That’s how we send a signal 

to the rest of the world, to businesses in the rest of the country 

and in the United States that things are a little different in this 

place called Saskatchewan. That you may be living in a 

jurisdiction where the debt is mounting and where the spectre 

of tax increases are there, where businesses are considering 

moving away from, Mr. Speaker. Things are different in this 

Saskatchewan. In this Saskatchewan, we’re paying down debt. 

In this Saskatchewan, we’ll balance the budget. In this 

Saskatchewan, we’re doing it so that we can remain 

competitive from a tax perspective. And so that fiscal probity is 

an important part of a growth agenda. Stable royalties, stable 

royalties are an important part of any effective growth strategy, 

growth agenda. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting. It’s very interesting to me 

and I think more than just a coincidence that days . . . I think it 

was days. I look at the members for, the two members from 

Moose Jaw we’re proud to have, Mr. Speaker. I think I recall 

that it was days after the election when the people of this 

province said no to a reckless tax hike on royalties that would 

threaten the expansion of the potash industry, and yes to 

stability, and yes to the Saskatchewan advantage. Days after 

that a German company called K+S made an announcement in, 

I think it was right in Moose Jaw. That’s where the 

announcement was made. They’re going to go ahead with a . . . 

was it a 3.4? 

 

An Hon. Member: — 3.25. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — $3.25 billion solution potash mine, Legacy 

Project, Mr. Speaker. And I had it asked of me, would they . . . 

if the NDP would have won that election and gone about with 

jacking up royalties in the potash sector, would K+S be 

investing in Moose Jaw and area today? Mr. Speaker, no, I 

don’t think they would. They wouldn’t know what they were 

getting into. They wouldn’t know about what royalties might 

come at them. We wouldn’t know if we could actually be 

competitive in the future against Jordan and against Russia and 

against all these other places where there is potash. In the 



December 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 113 

general election, the NDP acted like that we were the only ones 

with potash. And of course we’ve got 53 per cent of it. That’s a 

lot, but we don’t have all of it. In fact our tax rates today are the 

highest in the world, highest in the world — twice as high as 

the next highest country, which is the Kingdom of Jordan. 

 

Now the NDP government . . . Let’s just do a quick history 

lesson if we can and then move on with the growth agenda. The 

NDP government, to their credit, to their credit when we were 

in opposition and we were calling for this, said, this high tax 

rate is going to mean that if potash companies are thinking of 

expanding, they will not choose Saskatchewan. They will 

choose Jordan. They will choose Russia. By the way, there was 

an announcement about a $6 billion potash expansion 

announcement in Russia just in the last couple of months, 

demonstrating that we’re not the only ones with potash, that we 

must stay competitive and vigilant. 

 

So the NDP several years ago when they were still in 

government said — and we asked for this — well let’s reduce 

potash taxes temporarily so that companies will invest here and 

when the expansions are complete, they go back up to the high 

rate of taxes, the highest in the world. Good policy. The 

member for Athabasca would have, I think, been in the cabinet 

and helped in a part of that policy. It was the right thing to do. 

The current Leader of the Opposition would have been a part of 

that decision. It was the right thing to do. And they did it with 

our support. 

 

And do you know what happened, Mr. Speaker? — $12.9 

billion in expansion. Never mind the talk of new mines. That’s 

not K+S. That’s not other, like BHP or all the other alphabet 

favourites of ours that are happening in the potash industry. 

That’s the existing three players, valued players in the 

economy. 

 

It was the right thing to do. And those temporary incentives will 

be earned, and they’ll be back to paying the highest rate. And 

the people of this province will share in that revenue, unlike 

any other citizen of the world where there happens to be a little 

potash. So stable royalties is very much a part of our growth 

agenda. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who are these K+S people? 

 

[11:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well you know, the Minister of Energy 

asks an interesting question. He asks, Mr. Speaker: who are 

these K+S people? And if the name sounds familiar to members 

of this House, it wouldn’t surprise me because this is not the 

first time this German company has been in the province 

investing their dollars. This particular potash company was here 

before. This particular potash company built Lanigan. I believe 

they either built it or operated it, but they were operating the 

Lanigan potash mine before it became a Potash Corporation 

mine. 

 

Do you know how it became a Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan mine, Mr. Speaker? Well when the Potash 

Corporation was owned by the government, it was a Crown 

corporation. You will know, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP decided 

it would be good for the province if they ran the potash 

industry, if they nationalized, in other words basically 

expropriated with some compensation existing potash mines 

and basically run those companies out of town. And K+S was 

one of those companies, if you can believe it. 

 

So I think it’s a great coincidence or it’s ironic. Either way it’s 

a welcome development, that one of the companies that the 

NDP drove out of this province through nationalization is back 

under a Saskatchewan Party government, and they’re building a 

mine, and they’re creating jobs in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure they were watching the 

election carefully as were all of the potash players. I’m sure 

they were astonished on the 13th of April when they read in the 

Melville Advance, because there’s potash companies in that 

Melville area, they would have read the Melville Advance, 

when the former leader of the opposition, supported by the way 

I guess by his caucus, said that they could increase potash taxes 

by 80 per cent and if the potash companies didn’t like it, well 

the government could step in and run them just like they used to 

do, Mr. Speaker. That’s nationalization. That’s nationalization. 

Unbelievable at a time when we’re building the Saskatchewan 

advantage, when we want to tell those who’ll risk their capital 

investment and create jobs for Saskatchewan families, and raise 

taxes by the way for us that help us fund initiatives for the 

disabled and to reduce wait times, at such a time as that the 

NDP were talking about nationalization. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s not the only reason, but I think that’s why 

there is fewer members of the NDP today sitting in this 

Assembly because the people of this province said, that’s not 

right for the province, that doesn’t make sense today, and we’ll 

not let anyone take away the Saskatchewan advantage, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Another part of our growth agenda is infrastructure investment. 

Quickly we’ve invested $2.2 billion over four years, and 

admittedly we need to do more. We’ve had record investments 

in highways and transportation. The Speech from the Throne 

highlights that we need to do more. Crown infrastructure is 

important to a growth agenda. We’ve been in net investing in 

SaskTel in addition to the dividend policies of the government. 

And with respect to SaskPower, we inherited a multi-billion 

dollar infrastructure deficit for this fundamentally important 

utility, and we’re dealing with that as well today. 

 

Supporting agriculture to mitigate against risk is also part of an 

effective growth agenda, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been there for 

producers in the past. We will be there for them in the future 

under the leadership of the member for Saltcoats and in 

partnership with the federal government. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

didn’t touch on it in the Speech from the Throne necessarily, 

but it goes to agriculture policy. You bet this side of the House 

supports choice for farmers with respect to the national 

government’s Wheat Board position. 

 

I’ll tell you this. I’ve heard members opposite say, well you 

supported Canpotex during the potash takeover, when BHP was 

trying to take over the Potash Corp. You will remember, Mr. 

Speaker, we tried to mount a vigorous defence against that 

takeover, and we were worried about the future of Canpotex, 

which is the marketing agency for Saskatchewan potash, at 



114 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2011 

least the international marketing agency. And I remember the 

member for Regina Rosemont, who’s had a, who’s had a bad 

week, Mr. Speaker. We can just can talk a little bit about the 

First Nations revenue-sharing policy. But he also said today 

from his seat today that well, how could you support Canpotex 

and not support the Wheat Board? Mr. Speaker, this is 

incredible. And I’ve heard this argument put forward by some 

union leaders as well. Mr. Speaker, with the Wheat Board we 

support choice. We support that the Wheat Board would exist 

but that it would be voluntary. 

 

Canpotex is a voluntary marketing agency. It has always been a 

voluntary marketing agency. Agrium and Mosaic and 

PotashCorp are the shareholders, and they voluntarily decide to 

pool together and market. And by the way, that’s not all the 

potash. All the potash is not marketed through that voluntary 

marketing board. Actually about 48 per cent of it is directly 

sold by the companies into the United States, the North 

American market, and yes, some in Saskatchewan as well. And 

the former member for Northcote didn’t know that we used any 

potash in Saskatchewan, but we do. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . It’s not 

analogous. When we support voluntary choice for marketing in 

wheat, it’s completely consistent with the position we had with 

respect to Canpotex. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would say this: if there really was 

40,000-plus farmers that voted for the Wheat Board, if there 

was — and I wonder about it because I’ve had some 

conversations at the Safeway in Swift Current of people 

concerned with those who actually are deceased that were sent 

a ballot and votes were tendered — Mr. Speaker, I could tell 

you that if there are that many farmers that voted for the Wheat 

Board, the good news for the Wheat Board then is that that’s a 

pretty good base of support in a voluntary choice system. 

They’ve got 40,000-plus farmers — if there are 40,000 farmers 

that actually voted that farm — to actually work with the Wheat 

Board. So it should be a win-win both for those that want 

choice and for the Wheat Board that wants to continue and sell 

Saskatchewan grain and Western Canadian grain around the 

world. 

 

So agriculture policy’s part of our growth agenda. Engaging 

First Nations and Métis people in the economy is part of our 

growth agenda, and it will ever be thus, Mr. Speaker. I could 

tell you . . . And there was some questions raised, good 

questions, by the critics opposite on First Nations and Métis 

Relations and I think even better answers from the Minster of 

First Nations and Métis Relations on some of these issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the first time in history, our government has 

negotiated a power generating agreement with First Nations, 

not unlike what SIGA [Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 

Inc.] was to be for the gaming industry, so that First Nations 

can be involved directly in the economic opportunities and 

spinoffs that come from generating electricity. We know we’re 

going to need more megawatts in the future. And why wouldn’t 

we want to partner with First Nations companies to be a part of 

that supply? 

 

For the first time in a long time, maybe ever, a significant 

portion of an important resource, forest, was shared. That 

resource was shared with First Nations because, Mr. Speaker, in 

the past under the NDP there was a lot of talk about these 

issues, but when it came to their FMAs [forest management 

agreement] rarely did they include First Nations, tribal councils, 

or individual bands to receive some of that fibre, to be a part of 

that business. Mr. Speaker, there is a new FMA in the province 

to supply fibre to a reanimated forestry industry, thanks to a 

mill I think that’s reopening in Prince Albert. And First Nations 

are going to be a part of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve worked hard to build a dynamic partnership 

with SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies] and 

First Nations University. SIIT is one of the most effective 

post-secondary institutions in the province, period. And we 

have increased our supports and partnerships with that 

institution as we seek to increase the engagement of First 

Nations in this growing economy. The Minister of First Nations 

and Métis Relations is focused, as well, on the educational 

outcomes gap that we must reduce. There’s resources behind 

that initiative and its across-government approach including 

Education and Social Services as well, Mr. Speaker. That is 

also part of our growth agenda. 

 

Fair and balanced labour legislation is part of our growth 

agenda as well. We’re not advocating for things and we haven’t 

changed things in the first four years that don’t exist in other 

places. We think essential services to protect people in the case 

of a work stoppage who have concerns with respect to health 

and safety, we think that’s common sense. We were the last 

government to have essential services, but that changed four 

years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve made changes with respect to freedom of 

expression in the workplace and secret ballot certification, Mr. 

Speaker, balanced labour legislation, competitive labour 

legislation, and a labour environment that is accountable to the 

stakeholders. The most important being, first, the public in the 

case of public sector unions. The second most important being 

the union members — not the union leadership, but the union 

members. These are the principles that will inform the changes 

we’ll make going forward and we’ll seek consultation in this 

respect with all the stakeholders. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the growth agenda is there. Also included in 

it, as one final component, is our innovation agenda, Mr. 

Speaker. And that innovation agenda is going to help us build, 

together with industry partners in the university, a new global 

food security institute at the University of Saskatchewan. It’s 

already helping us make historic investments in clean coal 

technology that are grabbing the attention of the world, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s why there’s now a uranium research centre of 

excellence at the University of Saskatchewan, welcoming 

partnerships from Hitachi. 

 

We’re going to take our resource strength and build the next 

economy. Our government sees a role for it where the private 

sector won’t yet go and research, but we’re partnering with 

industry to build the next economy, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 

fundamental to our growth plan. 

 

And we are focused on the plan, as I’ve said earlier, not for 

growth itself, not for the sake of the stats . . . And we heard 

some in member statements and they’re great statistics. And 



December 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 115 

every time you hear those statistics from this side of the House, 

Mr. Speaker, please understand, and for members opposite, 

please know that these statistics point to something more 

important. When the economy is growing, when our tax base is 

expanding, that’s how we can provide better public service. 

That’s how we are able to reduce debt. That’s how we can drop 

114,000 low-income people from the income taxes altogether. 

That’s how we can reach out to people with disabilities. That’s 

how we can find millions more, millions more to reduce wait 

times. Not talk about improved public health care, but do 

something about public health care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, growth is going to pay for the Saskatchewan 

advantage housing plan. Our five-point plan — quarter of a 

billion dollars — it’s opening up 4,600 entry level units in the 

province. It’s how we’ll pay for the Sask first-time 

homebuyer’s tax credit. It’s how we’re going to pay to improve 

the secondary suite program so we can open up more basement 

suites and other accommodations in the province. 

 

It’s how we’ll pay for the Saskatchewan advantage scholarship 

where, next year at graduation, high school students who 

graduate are going to receive up to $2,000 — $500 in any 

single year for up to four years — to go against their tuition, no 

questions asked, no bureaucracy. Here’s the Saskatchewan 

advantage scholarship: attend tech school, go to university, be a 

part of this dynamic and growing economy because, when you 

are done that degree or that diploma, there will be opportunity 

waiting for you. There will be a job waiting for you. And you 

can get all your tuition back if you stay in the province. In one 

of the most effective graduate retention programs in the 

country, that’s what growth pays for. 

 

Growth is going to pay for our partnership with parents to save 

for their kids’ education as we bump up the federal RESP 

[registered education savings plan] program. It’s going to pay 

for the active families benefit which is in the Speech from the 

Throne. 

 

It’ll pay for our initiative to support seniors in personal care in a 

meaningful way, an issue we’ve heard at every SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] convention 

I’ve been at where these non-profits, a lot of them run by 

municipalities, need some support so they can deliver personal 

care and long-term care to seniors. They’ve been asking for a 

long time for support, even longer from those members when 

they sat here. They’re getting it, Mr. Speaker. It’s in the Speech 

from the Throne. And growth is paying for it in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Just very quickly, growth is going to pay for 2,000 new child 

care spaces. That’s on top of the 35 per cent increase in child 

care spaces over our first term, admittedly with more work 

needed. It’s going to pay for our SAID initiative in terms of 

improving income for those, and actually creating some income 

for people with intellectual disabilities. It’s being announced 

later today. It’s going to pay for another $4 million in 

investment for families and children and adults with autism. 

 

Growth is going to pay for better health care. We were talking 

about it this week in cabinet about the need to continue with our 

plan to lower wait times in the province. It takes resources, and 

not a little bit of resources, to do more surgeries. Whether 

they’re in the private system or in the public system, it takes 

money. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to make sure that 

investment is there. And when we make those announcements 

and advance those funds, we will know that it wasn’t a money 

tree that provided it. It was growth that paid for those surgeries 

and it’s why we’ll always pursue it. 

 

With respect to our rural health care strategy when we’re 

forgiving student loans for doctors who will go to rural 

Saskatchewan or nurses or nurse practitioners or adding seats 

for nurse practitioners or STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue 

Society] ambulance or you name it, we will always remember 

that growth is paying for those things and that the growth 

agenda is paramount in the activities of this government. It’s 

true for our help for parks and rinks and safer communities, Mr. 

Speaker. Everything we campaigned on, all that is in the 

Speech from the Throne is going to be delivered because of 

growth. But, Mr. Speaker, it will be delivered within a balanced 

budget, and that too was a central question in this most recent 

campaign. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve listened carefully to members opposite since 

the election, to the new Leader of the Opposition, to members 

as they’ve engaged in this particular Speech from the Throne, 

and what I’ve not heard is any comment about the campaign 

they ran. I have not heard one single member stand up and say, 

you know, I think there is a disconnect between us and the 

people of the province. I don’t think we’re on the same page as 

the people of the province, and I think we need to do better. I 

haven’t heard any members in the NDP say anything like that. 

 

[12:00] 

 

They were promising, in our last count, $5 billion worth of 

stuff. They were doing two announcements a day in that 

campaign — $5 billion worth of promises. Mr. Speaker, they 

were promising things with money that is not theirs. That 

money belongs to the people of the province. And our ability to 

afford all of these things we want to do in health care and 

education and in social services is predicated not only on 

growth, but that we have a balanced budget, that we’re fiscally 

responsible, that we don’t have the train wrecks that we see in 

Europe and other places in terms of their fiscal health. 

 

And I still haven’t heard members opposite make that 

admission. In fact what I’ve heard unbelievably is members 

opposite stand up and question, question the spending of 

government — which is their job, don’t get me wrong. But 

while they’re doing it, while they’re saying I think this 

government’s spending too much — and I’ve actually heard it 

— while they’re saying that, they might want to say, we 

campaigned to spend a lot more than you’re spending, and that 

was probably a mistake, but having said that now, we’ve been 

on the Damascus road and we think you’re spending too much 

as well. Nothing like that, nothing approximating that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll make this prediction. As long as 

politicians on either side of the House do not take their cues 

from the people of this province, do not approach this place and 

these duties with humility, understanding that we’re going to 

make mistakes and we need to admit of those and quickly 

address them, as long as that happens, those members on either 

side of the House are in peril of losing their seats in the next 



116 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2011 

election. I think that was part of what happened on the 7th of 

November, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Right. 

The Minister of Energy has again helpfully pointed out that 

there was a hopeful sign from the member for Regina 

Rosemont, who came out early on after, I think, the mid-term 

was released, the mid-term financial report, which showed a 

smaller but a balanced . . . a smaller but a surplus. And he 

indicated — unequivocally, I think would be fair to characterize 

it — the member for Rosemont said, First Nations revenue 

sharing is not on; the people of this province rejected it. 

 

Was it 24, 48 hours later, someone got to the member for 

Regina Rosemont and said, no, no, no, no, no, we’re not wrong. 

We’re not wrong. The people of Saskatchewan were wrong. 

The people of Saskatchewan who unequivocally voted on this 

issue, they’re all wrong and we’re right. And someone got to 

the member for Rosemont, and he had to come out and have 

another scrum and said, I misspoke, that it’s the policy of the 

party and it’s the right policy. 

 

In his entry in the Throne Speech today, Mr. Speaker, the 

Leader of the Opposition, supported with — ironically enough 

— with some heckling from the member for Regina Rosemont, 

talked vaguely and mysteriously about whether some party in 

the election used weapons. And so we were trying to discern 

what he was talking about, and then the member for Rosemont 

said, well it’s First Nations policy. 

 

And so what does that mean exactly, Mr. Speaker? If a party 

and a people . . . Well the member for Riversdale maybe is 

explaining what it means. If the party . . . If the people of this 

province and a political party reflecting them says First Nations 

and Métis relations issues, Métis issues are fundamentally 

important to the future of this province and we want a 

government that’s prepared to act on them and we want a 

government that’s prepared to ensure they’re engaged in the 

economy, but, but we just fundamentally don’t believe that the 

resource revenues of the province, which belong by definition 

to all of us, should be shared disproportionately with any group 

— First Nations or non-First Nations or any group, Mr. Speaker 

— what they’re saying is if the people of the province believe 

that and a political party believes it as we do, and then we say 

that publicly, that frank and open, honest opinion, somehow 

that’s a weapon, or maybe something even more nefarious 

they’d suggest it is. 

 

Maybe, Mr. Speaker, maybe it’s, maybe it’s this. Maybe it’s the 

fundamental fairness of Saskatchewan people who do want to 

make sure that no one’s left behind, that we’re working with 

First Nations, that we’re working on Métis issues, that we are 

working on northern issues. Maybe it’s the fundamental 

fairness of Saskatchewan people that says do that. But that 

doesn’t mean anybody gets any special deal on a resource that 

belongs to everyone, Mr. Speaker. That is a fair position to hold 

on behalf of the people of this province, on behalf of this party, 

and it will remain the position and the policy of the 

Saskatchewan Party and the duly elected government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was one particular engagement in the 

Throne Speech debate by a new member that I just want to 

close with, touch on and close with, by a new member opposite. 

I want to first of all say again, if I can, as I do, as a bit of a 

context for this, how grateful I am to have so many new 

members in our caucus, 15 of them. And again I know how 

hard they all worked, and we’re just that much better. We’re a 

much better organization already, Mr. Speaker. You got to hear 

amazing speeches from rookie members who really deserve the 

. . . [inaudible] . . . I want to thank them very much for that. 

 

And there was also a very effective speech in terms of its clarity 

from the new member for Nutana. And I want to congratulate 

her on a very clear speech in terms of the Throne Speech 

debate. So clear, Mr. Speaker, that it I think would cause a few 

questions that would form debate going forward. And by the 

way, that’s what this place should be all about — that kind of 

debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I noted in the member’s speech that she talked 

about the family heritage, the family tradition in terms of social 

democracy. That’s also something that all members on this side 

can understand and members on that side understand. Ours is a 

political heritage in my family too, and these kinds of 

discussions happen. She talked about those discussions in her 

own home though in the terms of the, and I quote, the context 

is, the quote here is “the evils of capitalism.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know again, again I would just say, and I’m 

the proud son of someone who was involved in small business 

all of his life. He dropped out of school in grade 8, got his GED 

[general educational diploma] but moved out of school in grade 

8. And together with his brothers they started into business 

right away, and at some considerable risk. It was never a huge 

business. They had a few people working for them in freight 

and then later in furniture moving. And then they tried to rent a 

few homes out to people and keep good care of them. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, I always used to . . . My early 

interest in political debate was to hear that kind of depiction 

from New Democrats, from those who are proud to call 

themselves socialists, as the member was. And again I give her 

credit for it in her remarks because, Mr. Speaker, when we say 

those kinds of things, we are talking about the free enterprise 

system. We are talking about a capitalist system that really 

fundamentally in our province is about small businesses. Yes, 

there’s big companies that are here. But we know that 80 per 

cent of new jobs are created by small businesses. 

 

And it used to bother me a little bit because I understood early 

on that what my dad was doing was risky, that he had no 

promise of bringing home any particular amount of income. 

What other small people do, what farmers do, frankly, is very 

much this case as well. And I understand though that if he did a 

little better one year, he should maybe keep a little bit more 

than that particular year so that he was ready to get through a 

tougher year. And also when he did a little better, of course 

there might be another person hired or the tax base might be 

expanded. And, Mr. Speaker, what that is, what I’m just 

describing, are what the member would refer to, I think, as the 

evils of capitalism. Well they say no. They’d probably say no, 

no, we just mean big companies. That’s probably what they’d 

say — we just mean the big multinational corporations. 

 

Well it’s a bit of an integrated value chain proposition here, Mr. 

Speaker. One of the most important clients for my father in his 

moving business was the Royal Bank of Canada — one of 



December 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 117 

those evil banks that the NDP and self-described socialists rail 

against. Well the Royal Bank of Canada was moving, moved 

their bankers around quite a bit — thankfully, it’s how I got to 

go to university — and other banks did too, and the Mounted 

Police and the Wheat Pool. You know, they did business with 

those large, evil corporations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We do need to make sure that in this country there is a balance, 

that we have a tax system that ensures that capitalistic activities, 

that entrepreneurial activities are about creating a tax base so 

we can remain fiscally competitive and then invest in people 

and in quality of life. But let’s not forget that the heart of it is 

that system. And it works pretty well, Mr. Speaker, not 

perfectly but it works pretty well — certainly shouldn’t be 

depicted as an evil. 

 

Mr. Speaker, she then talked about, and I quote, “many socialist 

programs introduced in this Assembly” over the years. And 

again, I want to give her credit for that depiction because, Mr. 

Speaker, when we use that word socialist as a descriptor for 

members opposite, save for the new member for Nutana, they 

get very upset. They get very upset. They don’t want to be, for 

some reason, they don’t want to be called socialists. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I give credit to the member for Nutana for her 

clarity because we are going to have some discussion around 

the role of government in the economy. We’ve already had it in 

health care, Mr. Speaker, where we’re clearly on the side of 

public health care that involves a private component if it 

delivers results. And the future potential leader of the NDP, the 

member for Massey Place, is dead set against it. He’d rather 

give people ideology than surgery. That’s the kind of debate 

that we’re about to have, and I think if there’s clarity on both 

sides — and I credit the member for Nutana — I think that’s a 

pretty good thing. 

 

One final comment I will say is this, and I hope members 

opposite will clarify this, including the Leader of the 

Opposition. That member there is going to be a very able critic 

for the Minister of Energy and Resources. She is the 

Agriculture critic and the Minister of Energy and Resources. 

And her comments about energy were all again about, and I 

have the quotes here, they all seem to be about how our 

resource sector and what we’re doing in the province is a “race 

to the bottom.” A race to the bottom. And then she goes on to 

vilify the industry in terms of CO2 and a few other issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I expect to hear that from the federal NDP 

because we’ve seen the federal NDP actually go down to 

Washington and join the argument, the ill-informed argument, 

of those who would depict our oil from Canada as dirty. And 

don’t just think that implies oil sands oil, Mr. Speaker. When 

those interests in the United States depict our oil as dirty, it 

hurts the Bakken play. It hurts the Viking play. It hurts the 

Lower Shaunavon. It hurts the trade relationship. And we need 

to be a force for good in that debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We do need as a country and as a province to say, we should 

always be doing better by the environment. We should always 

make sure resource extraction is more sustainable. But by the 

same token, we need to go down to the United States and here 

in this legislature say, but you know what? In this country — 

more than in Venezuela, more than in the Middle East, more 

than in any other oil-producing country in the world — we’re 

spending more per capita of public dollars to clean up coal, to 

reduce the CO2 footprint of oil extraction. Companies are 

spending more. The federal government’s spending more. 

Habitat’s being reclaimed. 

 

We can always do better, Mr. Speaker, but let’s be a voice of 

support for an industry that employs thousands, creates 

economic opportunity for the small business, and let’s avoid 

throwing them under the bus, especially in this particular 

Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to energy policy, I think this is going 

to be interesting going forward. In the campaign, the NDP 

proposed some renewable objectives. They proposed some 

changes to our grid, to our fleet of electrical generation that we 

know would cause massive hikes in people’s electrical rates. 

We know that. We have to do this in a ordered and methodical 

way. We have to invest in the new technologies. We have to 

have our greenhouse gas regulations move forward in a way 

that does hold industry accountable for emissions but then, Mr. 

Speaker, ensures that any proceeds from potential penalties for 

high emissions stays in the province and is reinvested in 

technology so that we’re always about the solution. 

 

The solution is technology. The solution in this is not a wealth 

transfer, Mr. Speaker, where we lose money from the West to 

Central Canada or from one company to another, where we 

move emissions around. The answer is technology, and we’re 

not waiting. We are investing record amounts in the clean coal 

project in Boundary. There might be even more developments 

on this front in the days ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the debate that we’ve heard from both sides of the 

House, I think, has been informative. But there might be 

nothing more important than how the member whom we 

welcome to the Assembly concluded her speech by saying that 

the NDP speaks for 99 per cent of the people of the province, 

and because we have, because we have some . . . Or the 

province. And because we have some sort of growth agenda, 

that we speak for the 1 per cent. I guess the very, the very, very 

rich is the implication; I don’t know. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was surprised to hear that, so I checked the 

election results again. And as it turns out, the NDP doesn’t 

speak for 99 per cent of the province, and, Mr. Speaker, neither 

does the Saskatchewan Party. Mr. Speaker, we would never be 

that presumptuous, even after a successful election, to claim to 

speak for any percentage of the people of this province. What 

we would claim is our intention to work hard to do that, to 

speak for the people of this province, to speak for all, to serve 

them all, not claim presumptuously that we know everything 

that is on their minds and everything that’s best, but that we 

would continue to listen and to work and to keep our promises. 

 

Mr. Speaker, though, I do think the election results show that 

49 members on this side of the House — well 48 — do speak 

for some people. They spoke for some people on election night 

— people waiting for surgery in this province, people with 

disabilities in this province, seniors, young people who want to 

stay here, who want to build a life here, people who want a 

fiscally responsible government. I think members on this side 

of the House are going to work hard to speak for them — 



118 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2011 

farmers in rural Saskatchewan, workers, Mr. Speaker, union 

and non-union, and now more than ever, now more than ever, 

because of the work of members on this side of the House, for 

urban centres and rural centres, Mr. Speaker, and yes, for our 

northern communities. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to encourage all members of this House to 

be participating in this debate and the upcoming budget debate 

with this in mind, that we are here to serve, that we were just 

returned to this Assembly to represent our particular 

constituents. And yes, we have parties, and yes, we have 

policies and principles, and that’s also a strength of the system. 

But if we always remember why we’re here and that these seats 

truly are on loan, we’re going to at least have a small chance, a 

better chance, an improved chance of doing justice to the great 

honour that we’ve been given by our respective constituents to 

come represent them here in this Assembly. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of a government that admits 

that’s there more work to be done, I want to tell you today that 

I’m going to be voting for the Speech from the Throne. And 

when I do that — and I hope it’s true of all my colleagues — 

when we do that, we’re thinking of people back home, our 

constituents that sent us here. We’re thinking about generations 

yet to come. We’re thinking about moving this province 

forward. We’re thinking about the fact that Saskatchewan today 

is a leader in this country like it never has been and that we 

must work in this Assembly to ensure that leadership continues. 

That’s why I’ll be supporting the Speech from the Throne, Mr. 

Speaker, and unable to support the amendment. Thank you very 

much. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — There being no further members who wish to 

speak to the amendment, I will put the question. The question 

before the Assembly is the amendment to the address in reply 

moved by the member from Athabasca, seconded by the 

member from Regina Elphinstone: 

 

That this Assembly does not support the Speech from the 

Throne because of its failure to move Saskatchewan 

forward in becoming a fairer, greener, and more inclusive 

province. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion to the 

address in reply? Those in favour of the motion please say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed please say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — The nos have it. Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 12:17 until 12:18.] 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour of the amendment please 

rise. 

 

[Yeas — 9] 

 

Nilson Forbes Belanger 

Wotherspoon Broten Chartier 

Sproule McCall Vermette 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed to the amendment please 

rise. 

 

[Nays — 45] 

 

Wall Morgan Bjornerud 

Norris Draude Boyd 

Eagles McMorris Cheveldayoff 

Huyghebaert Toth Reiter 

Duncan Ross McMillan 

Harpauer Harrison Hickie 

Hutchinson Elhard Hart 

Tell Parent Brkich 

Stewart Ottenbreit Weekes 

Campeau Heppner Wilson 

Michelson Kirsch Merriman 

Doke Cox Makowsky 

Jurgens Steinley Doherty 

Lawrence Tochor Moe 

Marchuk Phillips Docherty 

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the amendment, 9; 

those opposed, 45. 

 

The Speaker: — I declare the amendment lost. 

 

Debate will continue on the main motion, the address in reply. 

If there are members who wish to speak to the main motion, 

they should do so now. Seeing there are no further members 

that wish to speak to the main motion, the address in reply, I 

will put the question. It has been moved by the member for 

Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview: 

 

That a humble address be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor as follows: 

 

To His Honour the Honourable Gordon L. Barnhart, 

Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, and 

Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 

session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 

gracious speech which Your Honour has pleased to 

address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 



December 8, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 119 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Call in the 

members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 12:22 until 12:23.] 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. 

 

[Yeas  45] 

 

Wall Morgan Bjornerud 

Norris Draude Boyd 

Eagles McMorris Cheveldayoff 

Huyghebaert Toth Reiter 

Duncan Ross McMillan 

Harpauer Harrison Hickie 

Hutchinson Elhard Hart 

Tell Parent Brkich 

Stewart Ottenbreit Weekes 

Campeau Heppner Wilson 

Michelson Kirsch Merriman 

Doke Cox Makowsky 

Jurgens Steinley Doherty 

Lawrence Tochor Moe 

Marchuk Phillips Docherty 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 

 

[Nays  9] 

 

Nilson Forbes Belanger 

Wotherspoon Broten Chartier 

Sproule McCall Vermette 

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the humble address, 

45; those opposed, 9. 

 

The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 

adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This Assembly now stands adjourned until 

Monday at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:26.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 97 

  Chartier ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 97 

  Reiter ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 97 

  Nilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 97 

  Harpauer ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 97 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 A Piece of Saskatchewan’s Medical History 

  Sproule ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 97 

 Cowboy Christmas Parade 

  Cox ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 98 

 Northern Educator a True Pioneer 

  Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 98 

 Most Powerful Women Awards 

  Eagles ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 98 

 Benefit Concert Raises Funds for Burn Victims 

  Doherty ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 98 

 Regina & District Chamber of Commerce Accomplishments  

  Makowsky.................................................................................................................................................................................... 99 

 Building Permit Statistics Indicate Growth 

  Merriman .................................................................................................................................................................................... 99 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Combatting Youth Suicide 

  Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 99 

  Cheveldayoff ................................................................................................................................................................................ 99 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 100 

 Long-Term Care Facility 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 100 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 100 

 Financial Reporting 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 101 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 101 

 Canadian Wheat Board 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 102 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 102 

 Supply of Nurses 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 103 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 103 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 104 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Enhancements to Disabilities Program 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 104 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 104 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 1 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 105 

 Bill No. 2 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Collaborative Law) Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi corrective (droit collaboratif) de 2011 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 105 

 Bill No. 3 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 105 

 Bill No. 4 — The Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 105 

 Bill No. 5 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 106 

 Bill No. 6 — The Miscellaneous Business Statutes Amendment Act, 2011 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................... 106 

 Bill No. 7 — The Co-operatives Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1996 sur les coopératives 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................... 106 

 



 

 Bill No. 8 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2011 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................... 106 

 Bill No. 9 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 106 

 Bill No. 10 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2011 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 106 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 107 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 110 

 Recorded Division (amendment) ................................................................................................................................................. 118 

 Recorded Division (main motion) ............................................................................................................................................... 119 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


