




















































Hansard: May 11, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 60A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 11, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7595 

 May 11, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

Clerk: — Members, I wish to advise you that Mr. Speaker is 

not present to open today’s sitting. 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 

request leave for an extended introduction. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has asked 

leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to the Assembly a number of 

people seated in the galleries today. They are firefighters from 

throughout the province. 

 

In particular I would like to introduce, from the Saskatchewan 

Professional Fire Fighters Association, President Kirby 

Benning, Secretary-Treasurer Brian Belitsky, and 

Vice-president Lloyd Zwack. They are joined by members of 

all eight professional fire departments in Saskatoon, Regina, 

Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Swift Current, North Battleford, 

Yorkton, and Weyburn. 

 

Mr. Speaker, much to the chagrin and sadness of some of the 

women that work in this office, the firefighters are not here 

today to audition for the calendar. They are here today to 

witness passage of amendments to The Workers’ Compensation 

Act. The amendments will expand the occupational disease 

presumption for firefighters to include primary site esophageal 

cancer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the firefighters presented a compelling case for 

making this change, and I’m pleased that with the co-operation 

from the members opposite we will be able to pass the 

legislation today and support these brave men and women. I 

hope that all members will join me in welcoming these 

professional firefighters to their Assembly. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to join the 

minister in welcoming the firefighters to our Legislative 

Assembly. As the minister has said, they are here on a very 

important day to witness changes to, amendments to the 

Workers’ Compensation Board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to particularly introduce Kirby 

Benning, president; Brian Belitsky, secretary-treasurer; and 

Lloyd Zwack, vice-president. Also I’ve noticed in the hall, 

some firefighters from fire hall 2, which is in my constituency 

in Saskatoon. And I ask all members to welcome these 

firefighters to our Assembly. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I would request leave to make an extended 

introduction. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Premier has asked leave for 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. On 16 August of last year, I received a call providing 

notice of what would be in the news the next day, the 17th of 

August, specifically that there would be a takeover bid, a 

hostile takeover bid of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

by BHP Billiton, the Anglo-Australian mining giant. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that changed a lot of things for the 

government, but most importantly it made . . . It was a very 

important day in the life of a province and in the lives of many 

of those who work in our potash industry and for people right 

across Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government benefited from the advice 

of many from those who worked directly in the industry. I was 

grateful for the counsel that I received from former premiers of 

this province, from former Premier Devine, and had a chance to 

chat with former Premier Calvert, a couple of occasions to 

touch base with the premier, former Premier Romanow, and 

Premier Lougheed of the province of Alberta. 

 

We got good advice from a number of them. And there was a 

common denominator in much of the advice, especially as I 

recall from Premier Romanow, and that was that we would 

want in this province to have a task force of the senior officials 

from various ministries who would know this deal and its 

potential inside and out and from every single perspective and 

be able then to advise the government accordingly. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we took that advice and immediately 

established, under the leadership of the deputy minister to the 

Premier, Doug Moen, we established a task force of senior 

officials within government who did a lot of work, exhaustive 

work to do just that: to know this deal and all of its 

implications, to engage the right outside parties, to advise the 

Assembly, the Government of Saskatchewan appropriately. 

And they worked very, very hard on this particular initiative. 

And we just thought it appropriate at some point here during the 

session to be able to acknowledge those professional public 

servants who lent their voice and their skill to the effort of the 

government. I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there are 

those who are not represented here who were not formally part 

of the task force, but were rather contracted by them, including 

the Conference Board of Canada and also Gowlings, a firm in 

Toronto. 



7596 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2011 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, through you and to you I’d like to 

introduce to all members of this Assembly these women and 

men who were very much central to the government’s position 

on the BHP takeover and its communication of that position as 

well: Doug Moen, the deputy minister of Executive Council; 

Kent Campbell, the deputy minister of Energy and Resources 

— and maybe they’ll give us a wave, if they don’t mind, as we 

introduce all of them — Chris Dekker from Enterprise 

Saskatchewan; Laurie Pushor, chief of staff to the Minister of 

Energy; Wes Jickling from Intergovernmental Affairs; Hal 

Sanders, Energy and Resources; Cory Hughes, Energy and 

Resources. I think I saw Kirk McGregor, there he is from 

Finance; Rick Hischebett from Justice; Tony Koschinsky from 

Justice; as well as Heather Sinclair, I think I saw Heather, 

there’s Heather from Justice; Rod Fink from Energy and 

Resources; Brian Southam from Energy and Resources; Kirk 

Brecht from Energy and Resources; as well as Dylan Jones who 

is the associate deputy in charge of Intergovernmental Affairs 

for the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

There are a number of, there’s a few on the task force who 

couldn’t be here today, well, one of them could be, but is doing 

other things: Reg Downs from Executive Council, also Graeme 

Mitchell from Justice, and Wolfgang Langenbacher who was at 

the time in Executive Council. 

 

I also want to thank all members of this Assembly, some of 

them who in a formal way and others in an informal way, 

provided advice to the Government of Saskatchewan and 

indicated then their support for the position of the Government 

of Saskatchewan when we came to that conclusion. And that 

was manifest in a resolution from this Assembly, which was an 

important part of the development as well. And we want to 

acknowledge the work of two ministers assigned to lead the file 

for the government, and that was the Minister of Energy and 

Resources, the member for Kindersley; and the member for 

Meadow Lake and the Deputy House Leader, the Minister of 

Enterprise as well on that file. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this province was so very 

well-served by these professionals who have joined us today. 

And it is a small but important, I think, measure to thank them 

formally in this Assembly. And I do so make that request of all 

members now that we welcome them here to their Assembly, 

and we thank them for their service on one of the most 

important issues that the province has faced in recent years. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

want to join with the Premier and offer a thank you to this 

potash task force that was put together during some very 

difficult times, I think, for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the first thing that came to mind when I 

looked at this group of professionals in the Saskatchewan civil 

service was that how poignant this is when we just had a 

memorial service for former Premier Allen Blakeney, who put a 

very high regard and stock in the whole concept of having a 

professional civil service that is there to offer good advice, 

sound advice, and solid advice to the political leaders in this 

province. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this just signifies how timely 

that commitment of Mr. Blakeney’s is, or timeless maybe 

would be an even more appropriate term. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to have these people here in the 

Assembly so that we can offer, join with the Premier and offer a 

thank you for the service, not only to Saskatchewan as a 

province, but to each and every citizen. And on behalf of Her 

Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, please accept our thank you also 

for the good work and good advice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am pleased to introduce 24 

public service employees who are seated in the Speaker’s 

gallery. They are here to take part in the parliamentary program 

for the public service. These professional civil service members 

are employees from the following ministries. We have 

Agriculture, Enterprise Saskatchewan, Finance, Government 

Services, Public Service Commission, and the Legislative 

Assembly Service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have an opportunity to meet with some of these 

individuals in a while, and they’ll ask a whole array of 

questions I’m sure. We usually do talk about how and why and 

when and where the work that they do meets with the work that 

we do, and we have great fun in understanding how the work 

that everybody does makes this province move. So I’m looking 

forward to meeting with you, and I ask all my colleagues to join 

me in welcoming these civil service members to our Assembly. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the minister and welcome the many civil servants who 

are here with us today in the Assembly. Mr. Speaker, these are 

the people who work day in and day out on behalf of the people 

of Saskatchewan and provide those services that are so 

important to the people. 

 

So on behalf of all members of this Assembly, I’d like to thank 

you for the work that you do on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan, know that it’s appreciated, and know that the 

work that you do for the people is in the interest of the people. 

And we in this Assembly acknowledge that. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, seated in your gallery today is a couple of 

constituents of mine from Shellbrook. They are Tracy and 

James Azevedo. If I could just get them to give a little wave. 

 

Thank you for coming from Shellbrook today. We had a very 

good conversation in my office earlier, and Tracy is with the 

delegation from the Saskatchewan House of Prayer. She’s been 

down here many times. I’ve introduced her a short time ago in 

regards to the Saskatchewan House of Prayer. But today she 

brought her husband, James, down to view the proceedings of 

the Assembly today. And I thank her and her husband, James, 



May 11, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7597 

for both coming down, and I’d ask all members to help 

welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I am very pleased to introduce, seated in the east 

gallery, 45 grade 8 students from the St. Theresa elementary 

school here in Regina and in my constituency. And they are 

accompanied here today by their teachers Ryan Forrest and Dan 

Brown. 

 

They are going to take in a part of the proceedings of the House 

here. Then they’re going to tour the legislature, and I’ll catch up 

with them a little later for a photo and some refreshments in 

room 255. And, Mr. Speaker, I know with 45 students, that’s 

going to be a pretty good-sized drink bill when it’s all over 

with. But I’d ask the members to join with me in welcoming 

our future community leaders to our legislature. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure today to help welcome the firefighters here today. And 

I want to simply commend them for bringing an annual lobby 

to the legislature. It started many years ago when I was much 

closer to the front end of my political career than the end I’m at 

now. 

 

I feel a special affinity to this group because, Mr. Speaker, I 

was the minister that was in the right place at the right time, and 

we co-funded a research chair at the University of 

Saskatchewan to try and prove the volumes of literature that the 

firefighters kept giving us year after year about cancers. And 

that was the beginning of today’s culmination of the 

presumptive legislation that’s going to be enacted. I want to 

congratulate our friends, the firefighters, this day above all 

others. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great pleasure 

today to introduce to you and through you to all members an 

individual seated in your gallery, and that’s my dad, Chris 

Broten. He took the day off from work today and is in Regina 

on some personal matters, and we were able to have lunch 

together. And it’s a real honour to have him here in the 

Legislative Assembly. Partisan politics skipped a generation, I 

suppose, but I know he follows everything quite closely, and I 

truly do appreciate his support as my dad. So I’d ask all 

members to join me in welcoming Chris Broten to the 

Assembly. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like 

to join the member opposite in recognizing Mr. Chris Broten. 

He has served the province with considerable distinction. He 

works within the Ministry of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration where in Saskatoon he is a 

tireless force of good and making sure that there are 

opportunities for individuals right across that community and 

well beyond. And so I’d like to join the member opposite and 

invite all members of this Assembly to welcome Mr. Broten to 

his Assembly. 

 

[13:45] 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I’m honoured to rise in the legislature today to present a 

petition by citizens concerned about the unreasonable rent 

increases being experienced in the province of Saskatchewan 

and their call for rent controls, their call for action on 

something that has been termed unacceptable. In the prayer it 

says that they: 

 

Respectfully request the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan to take the following action: cause the 

government to immediately enact rent control legislation 

that protects Saskatchewan tenants from unreasonable 

increases in rent. 

 

This petition is signed by a number of active and engaged 

citizens in the city of Regina. I so present. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

rise to present a petition that speaks to the issue that I think we 

all believe strongly, that all Saskatchewan children have a right 

to learn in a supportive and stress-free environment that ensures 

they have the best possible chance to succeed in school. And 

it’s distressing that the government’s own data shows that a 

growing number of students require additional support to 

succeed in school, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we know that educational assistants provide support to 

students with special needs, including learning disabilities and 

behaviour problems, and ensure that their behaviour doesn’t 

disrupt the learning environment for other children and are also 

an integral part of the professional team that deals with students 

who have different support needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition was circulated across the province 

actually, and we have a number of them, some of which I’m 

tabling today, and speaks to the issue that Saskatchewan people 

feel very strongly about. And the prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

provide funding for the required number of educational 

assistants to provide special needs students with the 

support that they need and maintain a positive learning 

environment for all Saskatchewan students. 

 



7598 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2011 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed on behalf of citizens in 

Melville, Prince Albert, and Regina. I so present. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

rise today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty 

in Saskatchewan. And we know that freedom from poverty is 

an enshrined human right by the United Nations, that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security. 

Saskatchewan’s income gap between the rich and the poor 

continues to grow, and now one in five children in 

Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. And we know that 

people living in poverty have long identified affordable 

solutions including recent national and provincial initiatives 

such as the Saskatoon health disparities report and the Canada 

Without Poverty, Dignity for All campaign. They all call for a 

comprehensive poverty elimination strategy. I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the government to act as quickly as possible to 

develop an effective and sustainable poverty elimination 

strategy for the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I do so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of my constituents who live in the 

neighbourhood of Hampton Village, and it’s about the need for 

a new elementary school for their children: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes including education property taxes; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to 

neighbouring communities to attend schools that are 

typically already reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

residents of Hampton Village. I so present. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of a potash royalty review because 

the people of Saskatchewan are owners of the 1,000-year 

strategic resource, and as the owners of that resource they 

deserve to receive the maximum benefit from the resource. 

Additionally, Mr. Speaker, the CEO [chief executive officer] of 

PotashCorp has said that there’s a new norm for potash moving 

forward in the world and that their profit margin of $732 

million last quarter proves that new norm standard. The prayer 

reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to begin 

a comprehensive, transparent, and public review of 

Saskatchewan’s potash royalty system with a view to 

maximizing the return from this strategic resource for its 

owners, the people of Saskatchewan, who wish to use 

these additional potash royalty revenues for needed 

investments in health care, child care, education, 

affordable housing, infrastructure, and other social 

programs as well as public initiatives such as debt 

repayment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by good folks from 

Yorkton, Esterhazy, and Regina. I so present. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise yet 

again today to present a petition regarding restoring funding 

equity to Regina Catholic schools. Regina Catholic schools 

received $275 less per pupil than Regina public schools in the 

2009-2010 fiscal year, amounting to a funding inequity of $2.7 

million in total. And that total is growing, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 

growing across the province, given that this affects all the 

Catholic school divisions in Saskatchewan. That funding 

inequity places program delivery and staffing levels at risk, and 

we’re already seeing programs being cut for the fall of 2011. 

The Government of Saskatchewan has denied Catholic school 

boards in the province representation on the 

government-appointed committee mandated to develop a 

long-term funding formula for Saskatchewan school boards. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the government to address the funding inequity 

between Regina Catholic schools and Regina public 

schools that provides $275 less per pupil funding for 

Regina Catholic school students, totalling $2.7 million, 

and make known that the continuation for another school 

year of funding inequity places program delivery and 

staffing levels at risk in Regina Catholic schools; and in 

so doing, immediately restore funding equity to ensure 

that every student in Saskatchewan, whether enrolled in a 

Catholic or public school, receives equitable resources to 

ensure every student in Saskatchewan has access to a 

quality education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions today are signed by residents of 

Regina, Saskatoon, Cut Knife, North Battleford, Mervin, Prince 



May 11, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7599 

Albert, and Humboldt. I so present. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today and present 

petitions in support of personal care home funding. Mr. 

Speaker, Saskatchewan residents require different levels of care 

in their senior years, and that personal care homes play a vital 

role in providing the seniors who live in them an appropriate 

level of care. And, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Ministry of 

Health currently does not fund personal care homes, although it 

does fund special care homes which provide services to seniors 

requiring higher levels of care. Therefore: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the government to provide a subsidy to personal 

care homes, permitting the seniors who rely on them to 

live in dignity and independence without bearing an 

undue financial burden. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the petitions are signed by residents of the 

constituency of Saskatoon Fairview, Saskatoon, Warman, and 

Dalmeny. I so present. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again to 

present a petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan concerned 

about the detrimental effect that Bill 160 would have on human 

rights law on the province if enacted. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

withdraw Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public 

consultations informed by a public policy paper before 

any amendments to the Human Rights Code, the law that 

supersedes all others in our province, are even considered. 

 

And today the petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon, 

Regina, Kerrobert, Cowessess, North Battleford, Radville, 

Weyburn, Moose Jaw, and Yorkton. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise once again to present 

petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of our 

finances by the Sask Party. They allude to a record that includes 

the running of deficits and increasing of debt at times of record 

highs in revenues, Mr. Speaker, three consecutive years of 

loading debt to this province, well over $1.3 billion, and this 

year alone increasing the total public debt by $548 million, Mr. 

Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask 

Party government for its damaging financial 

mismanagement since taking office, a reckless fiscal 

record that is denying Saskatchewan people, 

organizations, municipalities, institutions, taxpayers, and 

businesses the responsible and trustworthy fiscal 

management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by good folks and concerned 

citizens of Carlyle, Carievale, Pilot Butte, Regina, and 

Lumsden. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Indian Gaming Authority Donates to Children’s Hospital 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 

pleased to report the Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority, 

SIGA, donated $500,000 towards the new children’s hospital in 

Saskatoon. 

 

The children’s hospital is the culmination of years of hard work 

and dedication by people from across Saskatchewan who want 

to ensure that our youth can access the best possible care right 

here at home. Our province is known around the world for our 

resource wealth, but we can all agree that Saskatchewan’s most 

precious resource is our children. 

 

Our government announced that we have fulfilled our 

commitment to fully funding the construction of the children’s 

hospital, a $200 million investment. The long-held dream of a 

children’s hospital for Saskatchewan is now becoming a reality 

through the tireless efforts of the Children’s Hospital 

Foundation, the Saskatoon Health Region, and all those who 

have donated to this project. 

 

This donation is a significant contribution from SIGA, who 

gives back to the community through donations and 

sponsorships to many well-deserving causes. While this facility 

will benefit everyone in Saskatchewan, it will be especially 

important to our First Nations youth. 

 

I would like to ask all members to join with me in recognizing 

SIGA for helping to bring us another step closer to realizing our 

dream of a new children’s hospital. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Compensation Coverage for Firefighters 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, during our session last fall, a 

delegation of firefighters came to the Legislative Building to 

lobby for changes to The Workers’ Compensation Act. Mr. 

Speaker, today on behalf of the official opposition, we are 

proud to say their message has been received, resulting in 

amendments to the Act which will put our compensation 

coverage for firefighters in line with other provinces. 

 

Under The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2011, primary 



7600 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2011 

esophageal cancer will be added to the list of cancers, 

presumptive occupational diseases for Saskatchewan’s full-time 

professional firefighters. This expansion is in addition to the 

nine forms of cancer and heart disease relating to firefighters 

already under law. 

 

There are close to 700 full-time professional firefighters in 

Saskatchewan. Our support for these brave women and men is 

demonstrated through legislative work like this. It is an 

example of how responsible opposition and government can 

and should be in protecting working people. I would like to 

thank both opposition and government caucuses for their 

important work on Bill 174. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we must also continue to protect and advocate for 

these brave women and men. Firefighters are at increased risk 

for cancer because of their work. We must continue to monitor 

and expand the list of potential diseases risked for our 

firefighters face in the workplace. As our knowledge grows 

regarding their exposure, so too should our protection and 

compensation for these selfless workers. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 

members to join me in showing our gratitude and recognize 

these brave women and men. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Missing Children’s Month 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

to advise the House that May 2010 has been proclaimed 

Missing Children’s Month in Saskatchewan. This important 

proclamation reflects our government’s concern and support for 

all missing children and their families. This also demonstrates 

the Saskatchewan government’s commitment to protecting 

children and youth as well as our appreciation for the ongoing 

efforts of Child Find Saskatchewan. 

 

Missing Children’s Month in Saskatchewan coincides with the 

20th annual Green Ribbon of Hope Campaign organized by 

Child Find Saskatchewan and its national organization. 

Throughout our province and across Canada, the green ribbon 

has become a well-recognized symbol of remembrance of 

missing children and an expression of hope for their safe return. 

May 25th is National Missing Children’s Day in Canada. 

Together this special day and month provide an important 

opportunity to raise awareness on behalf of missing children 

and their families. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I encourage all members of this Assembly 

and all Saskatchewan people to join with Child Find 

Saskatchewan in the month of May by wearing a green ribbon 

of hope as a symbol of remembrance for the safe return of all 

missing children in our country. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

 

Masters National Badminton Championships 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

to rise to congratulate a group of Saskatoon badminton players 

on their performance at the recent Masters National Badminton 

championships held recently in Ontario. Bill Metcalfe, who 

lives in Saskatoon Riversdale, and his partner from Ontario, 

Sally Dakin, won the Mixed Doubles Masters title in the 55 to 

60 age category, defeating Saskatoon players James Taylor and 

Marcia Jackson in a bit of a barnburner, 24-22 and 21-16. 

 

Bill, the men’s singles defending championship in the 55 to 60 

category two years running, was defeated in a hard-fought final. 

He and partner James Taylor also had some success in men’s 

doubles making it to the semifinals in the 55 to 60 category. 

This championship was a qualifier for the International 

Badminton Federation’s World Masters to be held in 

Vancouver in August. Competitors needed a top-four finish at 

nationals to qualify. Bill, who recently turned 60, will be 

representing Canada in men’s singles, men’s doubles, and 

mixed doubles in the 55 to 60 category. 

 

Bill was first introduced to badminton in high school, but took 

the sport up seriously in his early 20s and has proudly 

represented Saskatchewan at various badminton championships 

since then. He has taken home 32 national Masters medals over 

the years — 17 gold and 15 silver. Bill is a great example for all 

of us. He plays to win, but he also has such a love of the sport 

and a desire to always improve. I have no doubt he will be 

winning championships for years to come. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in 

congratulating Bill, James, and Marcia on their success at 

nationals and wishing them the best of luck at the worlds this 

summer. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw North. 

 

Snowbirds Begin 2011 Season 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Saturday the 

skies over 15 Wing Moose Jaw were filled with excitement as 

the Canadian Air Force Snowbirds demonstrated their acrobatic 

precision and speed, manoeuvrability and timing in performing 

their Acceptance Show for the 2011 season. The Acceptance 

Show is a demonstration of acrobatic professionalism and is the 

first official performance of the new season. It is performed 

before military officials, families, and dignitaries. I, along with 

honorary colonel of number 2 Canadian Forces Flying Training 

School, the Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing, 

were delighted to be in attendance. 

 

This year is the 41st season of the Snowbirds demonstration 

team, which will be performing 55 shows in 33 locations 

throughout Canada and the United States. The performance 

included a number of new manoeuvres to delight and awe 

audiences and is timed to selected music to add to the audience 

experience. 

 

The Snowbirds have performed great shows over the past 40 

years, and this year will prove to be an exciting and entertaining 

for all audiences. Congratulations to commanding officer, 



May 11, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7601 

Lieutenant Colonel Maryse Carmichael and the entire Snowbird 

team of pilots, mechanics, and support staff as they take off for 

another exciting season. I ask this Assembly to join me in 

recognizing the Canadian Snowbirds, one of Canada’s most 

cherished national symbols. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Asthma Awareness Month 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, May is 

Asthma Awareness Month. There are over three million 

Canadians that suffer from asthma. It affects people of all ages, 

but especially affects many of our children and youth. Asthma 

can limit people’s ability to participate in various activities and 

can make people more susceptible to flues and other diseases or 

worsen their symptoms. 

 

Something that many people do not realize though is that most 

all Canadians with asthma could live symptom-free if they 

manage their asthma well. Despite this fact, approximately 60 

per cent of Canadians with asthma do not have optimal control 

of their disease. This results in reduced quality of life for 

individuals suffering from asthma as well as increased health 

care costs. Improving control of asthma symptoms by using 

prevention methods and medications, instead of reaction or 

rescue medications, can help reduce hospital admissions and 

improve overall health of individuals. 

 

Asthma Awareness Month is about increasing the general 

public’s awareness of asthma as well as communicating to 

Canadian people that asthma can be managed. People with 

asthma can live healthy and happy lives, but they have to be 

given the proper tools and information. Asthma Awareness 

Month is important for encouraging Canadians who are dealing 

with asthma themselves or in their children to seek help and 

information that will allow them to live life to the fullest. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

Member’s Reports 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 

member for Saskatoon Massey Place has been touted as a 

potential future leader of the NDP [New Democratic Party]. He 

is given very important jobs by the current leader like ensuring 

the demise of Ryan Meili. His future seemed very bright. That’s 

why we’re all surprised he’s now been demoted to offering up 

spy reports on the Minister of Education. First in committee on 

April 18th, the member for Massey Place made the following 

report, and I quote: 

 

Someone from the community called me and told me that 

on one occasion the minister shared a meal or a coffee . . . 

And following that, the minister left the restaurant and 

seemed quite animated or agitated because of something 

that she heard. And the minister immediately went on her 

cellphone in her car and made a call following the meeting 

. . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, then he reported on a random note found 

in the men’s washroom. This was his undeniable proof about 

the government’s alleged attitude towards teachers. And most 

recently, the member from Massey Place has reported on the 

minister’s activities in her own office. He reported that — wait 

for it — she looked out her window, Mr. Speaker. It’s all 

getting a little creepy. 

 

Perhaps the member should give up on his spy games and stick 

to what he does best, taking out potential leadership candidates 

in his own party. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Contract Negotiations with Health Care Workers 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, on Monday, 60 health 

care professionals withdrew services in Prince Albert to bring 

attention to this government’s failure to provide over 3,000 

health science professionals with a fair and respectful contract. 

Mr. Speaker, the government ignored them, and today 150 

specialized health care professionals have withdrawn services 

in Saskatoon to once again highlight chronic understaffing and 

unfair wages. 

 

To the minister: the government has money to pay health region 

CEOs up to 60 per cent wage increases, yet they offer 

specialized health care professionals less than the inflation rate. 

Does he believe that this is a fair and respectful contract offer 

that values the work these people do? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the issue around the health sciences certainly 

is disconcerting that of course there was job action on Monday, 

and we see it again today in Saskatoon. 

 

The two parties were at the table yesterday, and SAHO 

[Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations], according 

to a news release, has taken more to the table. They offered the 

one group that the Health Sciences were concerned about — 

paramedics, Mr. Speaker, that they were underpaid and 

certainly lower than the Western Canada average, Mr. Speaker 

— that was addressed with, I believe, about a 9 per cent 

increase on top of the 7.5 to address that particular profession, 

Mr. Speaker. If you look across the piece, the offer that I 

believe SAHO has offered Health Sciences is fair and 

competitive, most importantly competitive with Western 

Canada. It puts us at, on top or above in many different 

professions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would ask both sides to get back to the bargaining table. I 

think there’s much more discussion that needs to take place at 

that level. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan EMS 

[emergency medical services] workers were the lowest paid in 



7602 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2011 

Western Canada and the government was publicly embarrassed 

into increasing their offer for EMS workers. That increase does 

nothing to increase the offer for other health care professionals 

or solve the chronic understaffing that is putting patients’ lives 

at risk. For example, Saskatchewan has the lowest number of 

respiratory therapists per capita in Canada. Calgary Foothills 

Hospital has more respiratory therapists than all of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

To the minister: why is he putting patients’ lives at risk by 

offering a contract that is less than the cost of living increases? 

How does that increase the recruitment and retention of 

respiratory therapists, speech pathologists, and any other heath 

care professionals? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, over the last three and a 

half years of this government, we’ve worked hard to make sure 

we have the proper complement of human resources across the 

province, whether it’s physicians — where we’ve got more 

work to do — whether it’s registered nurses, psychiatrist 

nurses, or any of the health sciences, Mr. Speaker, that are 

negotiating right now. In fact over the last three and a half 

years, we’ve seen an increase of their membership by over 20 

per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In other words we’re not experiencing out-migration of these 

professionals. We’re seeing in-migration of those professionals, 

Mr. Speaker. And that’s why it’s extremely important to be 

competitive with Western Canada. And I think if they were to 

look at the agreement put forward by SAHO, you’d find that 

very many of those professionals will be at the average or 

above the average in Western Canada. Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 

a fair and reasonable offer. I’d ask both parties to get back to 

the table and find some common ground, Mr. Speaker. I think 

that’s the best agreement, is when it’s a negotiated agreement. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s quite the actually 

the destructive style that this government pursues in 

negotiations. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the only negotiation this 

government has done is through intimidation with the help of 

Bill 5, that has corrupted the bargaining process, and Bill 6, that 

allows them to intimidate and threaten workers and public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, health science professionals have been without a 

contract for two years. The government has the money, but 

chooses to give it to health region CEOs instead of the people 

that actually care and provide for families. SAHO’s last offer is 

a clear sign that the government has no intention of negotiating 

a fair and respectful contract. 

 

To the minister: will he come to his senses, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, put Saskatchewan people ahead of his own agenda, 

send the contract negotiations to binding arbitration so a fair, 

respectful deal could be worked out and the families can get the 

health care they deserve in this province? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve already said in 

my answer, that we really believe that there’s still much more 

discussion that can happen at the bargaining table. That’s why 

we’re asking both parties to get back to that bargaining table, 

Mr. Speaker, because we believe that a negotiated settlement is 

the best settlement. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from an article that was in 

the paper a number of years ago and it says, “I firmly hold to 

the view that the best contracts are always those negotiated at 

the bargaining table between the parties.” It goes on to say, Mr. 

Speaker, “Today, again along with the Minister of Health, [and 

at that time in quotes in this article] John Nilson, yesterday, I 

would encourage the parties to get back to the bargaining table 

and hammer out a negotiated settlement.” Said by Lorne 

Calvert, Mr. Speaker, in 2002 when those members oversaw a 

28-day strike by this very union. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Policies Regarding Rent Controls 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A 

minister of this government said in a scrum yesterday that in 

reference to the unacceptable rent increase of more than 60 per 

cent faced by the people in the Portnall apartments, “We’re glad 

this is happening in an isolated way.” 

 

Sadly, this isn’t an isolated problem. In Moose Jaw, tenants 

were given 100 per cent increases. In another case a retired 

senior who has lived in an apartment since 1974 is being forced 

out by an increase of 30 per cent — something her fixed 

income cannot meet, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There are simply too 

many tenants in Saskatchewan that are being gouged. 

 

To the minister: knowing that these types of rental increases 

aren’t isolated, is the government ready to take steps to protect 

Saskatchewan renters with second-generation rent controls? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve had this discussion 

in the House for many days now talking about rent controls. 

And we know that the members opposite are in favour of rent 

controls, and we know that our government believes that what 

we need to do is have more homes on the market and more 

money in the pockets of the people so that they can have some 

options. 

 

Mr. Speaker, right now we know that the vacancy rates have 

improved in seven out of nine of Saskatchewan’s largest cities. 

In fact the vacancy rate when the members opposite were in 

power was 1.2 per cent. Today it’s 2.5 per cent. Mr. Speaker, 

we also know that there’s the multiple housing unit 

construction increases just brought out yesterday. It said that 

multiple unit starts are up 745 units between January of 2011 

and April of 2011. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s more work to be done, and we know that. 

And we know that in every one of these cases is an individual 

that’s looking for a home. But at the same time, the rent control 



May 11, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7603 

that the members opposite are talking about is not the answer. 

More units is the answer. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if she’d read 

that whole story yesterday, she would have known those units 

were for home ownership — home ownership. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the same minister yesterday used the analogy that 

if a car dealer doubled their price, a customer could look 

elsewhere. And no one is writing us or coming to the legislature 

to complain about a shortage of cars, but they certainly have 

been talking about a shortage of affordable housing. The 

minister effectively dismissed their concerns, saying he’s happy 

to see market forces prevail. 

 

To the minister: considering the lack of new rental construction 

that’s occurred over the past four years, isn’t it safe to say the 

market has failed and by not responding to this, this 

government has in turn failed the renters of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I think there are a number 

of statements that members opposite should think about. When 

there are new homes being built, that means there’s 

opportunities for people to move out of rented units, have their 

own home, and there’ll be more rental spaces available for 

other people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2007 when the members opposite were in 

government and increases were going up by 21 per cent, the 

members opposite had the opportunity to put in rent control and 

they decided against it. In fact one of their own consultation 

summaries talked about although there was a mixed response 

regarding rent control, the general conclusion was that rent 

controls create uncertainty and will lead to a decline in housing 

availability and quality. As well rent controls would be a 

disincentive for investment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need more housing. That’s why we put 

together a plan to make sure that we’ll have 4,600 more units in 

place. Mr. Speaker, more work to do, but that’s what we’re 

doing. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — And we hear now that work won’t actually 

start until mid-July from the minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has repeatedly failed the people 

of Saskatchewan when it comes to consulting. In the case of the 

housing summit, it’s obvious that the views expressed by the 

people there means nothing or the government would be 

moving quickly to enact rent control legislation to protect 

Saskatchewan renters. 

 

To the minister: a simple yes or no question. In a scrum 

yesterday, did the minister say, when asked about extending the 

notice period for rent increases, respond by saying, “We 

specifically asked some tenants as to whether they thought it 

was beneficial, and the tenants, their preference would have 

been to have rent control”? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we do consultation all the 

time with tenants, both at the forum and at various other places. 

Mr. Speaker, the reality of it is there are tenants that would 

prefer rent controls to a longer notice period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the analogy that’s used is that you can simply go 

somewhere else if prices have gone higher, does not apply very 

readily to tenants when they live . . . [inaudible] . . . This is their 

home. They’ve got additional costs in moving. It’s not a simple 

matter that market conditions prevail. For a tenant that’s in a 

place . . . They may be a school student that’s in the middle of a 

year; they may be a senior. For them it’s a difficult situation. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s something that this government takes 

very seriously. We are working to provide more homes. We are 

working to ensure that people have got good varieties and good 

options so that they can move. Mr. Speaker, there’s more work 

to be done and we intend to continue to do that work. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The statement 

that the tenants want rent control and that this came up at the 

housing summit is alarming. The Premier said on May 3rd in 

reference to the housing summit, “There’s not a lot of interest 

in rent control.” The Premier further said that “rent control was 

not in demand as a result of the summit.” I suppose that logic 

can be followed if you ignore the input of the renters 

themselves. 

 

To the minister: in the last six days of this sitting, we still have 

time to work together and protect tenants. Will the government 

commit to working with our members on an amendment to 

provide some protections for Saskatchewan people and families 

that are facing economic evictions? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, what the members opposite 

are asking for is some short-term gain, but it’ll be long-term 

pain. What they’re actually, what we really need to know is that 

we have to send a message there’s this province is open to 

investment, that we are wanting developers to come in here . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I would like to listen to 

the answer the minister is providing. I recognize the Minister of 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the members opposite, I 

was at the summit for those days and I did talk to the non-profit 

organizations that were there. We paid for the way for many of 



7604 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2011 

those organizations to come. I had an hour and a half meeting 

with them and the discussion that they had was a long-term plan 

to have a home in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had questions from every one of those, from 

individuals, had an opportunity to discuss each area, whether it 

was Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Meadow Lake, Regina, right 

across the province. And those people were saying, what are we 

doing? How can we be involved in making sure there’s 

partnerships in the province and we have more units? Mr. 

Speaker, that is our goal, to make sure that everybody can call 

Saskatchewan home. And we will do that whether the members 

opposite want it or not. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Consultation on Legislative Amendments 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday the NDP voted against Bill 155, The Natural 

Resources Amendment Act, because once again this government 

has put forward a Bill without doing proper consultation. When 

the government put forward its changes to The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act last year, the Sask Party government did not 

consult with the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations] or First Nations stakeholders who should be consulted 

when the government deals with wildlife issues. Bill 155 also 

deals with wildlife management. 

 

When I asked the minister in committee Tuesday evening 

whether he had consulted with the First Nations or the FSIN, 

the minister said, “We believe that specifically FSIN would 

have been invited but obviously don’t appear on my list . . .” To 

the Premier: why is this government refusing to consult with 

First Nations people? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to thank the member for the question. Mr. 

Speaker, in regards to this Bill, the Government of 

Saskatchewan consulted widely with a number of organizations 

in dealing with the governance of the Fish and Wildlife 

Development Fund, Mr. Speaker. So we consulted with a 

number of agencies and organizations that have membership on 

the stakeholder, on the existing steering committee which will 

now be an advisory council, and those organizations that do put 

names forward into the future. 

 

I want to be very clear, Mr. Speaker, that the changes that were 

made to this Act, to The Natural Resources Act, will have no 

impact on treaty rights. The FWDF [Fish and Wildlife 

Development Fund] land will remain Crown land, and First 

Nations access will not be impacted any way. And I want to 

make sure that that’s very clear for the public in Saskatchewan, 

and that is being communicated to the FSIN that this has . . . 

These changes are governance changes and have no effect on 

access to FWDF land. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, that communication should be 

made during the consultative process, and the FSIN, I 

guarantee, will not accept that. Mr. Speaker, what the Sask 

Party government fails to realize is that consultations regarding 

Bill 155 aren’t just supposed to be pleasant conversations that 

the Sask Party sees to have fit. The Sask Party government has 

an obligation under the law, a duty to consult. Considering this 

legislation breaks the law in failing duty to consult, will the 

Premier immediately repeal this legislation before it is 

proclaimed? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. Mr. 

Speaker, the member will know, the member will know — and 

we went through this on a number of occasions in committee — 

that the steering committee, the steering council as it has 

existed in the past has not had its roles and responsibilities or 

the makeup of that committee clearly defined in legislation. We 

have taken the step to clearly define in legislation what the roles 

and responsibilities and expectations of the stakeholders as well 

as the responsibilities of the minister and of the government, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to be very clear when the member talks about duty to 

consult, that actions undertaken by the new advisory council 

will be assessed to determine if duty to consult will apply as it 

has in the past, Mr. Speaker. The relationship . . . Because of 

this Bill, Mr. Speaker, the relationship with First Nations does 

not change at all. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a very disturbing pattern 

that is occurring under the Sask Party government, a pattern of 

disrespect, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party government failed to 

consult with First Nations people with Bill 132, when the Sask 

Party government removed 3.5 acres of wildlife habitat 

protected land from legislation. The Sask Party government are 

ignoring the concerns with Bills 162 and 161 about further 

restricting voting rights and how that will affect First Nations 

people. The Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations used 

an expletive when referring to a comment made by a First 

Nations chief. The Sask Party government got rid of the 

Aboriginal employment development program and placed the 

First Nations University of Canada in jeopardy of being shut 

down. And the list, Mr. Speaker, goes on. 

 

Now we see further disrespect by once again failing to consult 

with First Nations people with respect to Bill 155. Again, will 

the Premier immediately repeal Bill 155 and pursue proper and 

meaningful consultations? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I think the disturbing 

pattern is the member not understanding what the legislation 

actually does. Mr. Speaker, clearly where the legislation moves 

this fund into, from a steering committee with not a clear 

definition of what the steering committee actually does and the 



May 11, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7605 

interaction between the steering committee and their roles and 

responsibilities, to one that is clearly defined within the 

legislation. 

 

The duties of the council, as stated under the new legislation, 

shall advise the minister on things like the allocation and 

expenditure of the fund, the acquisition of lands, the 

administration of lands, the disposition of lands acquired, the 

annual budget, and the annual work plan for the fund, Mr. 

Speaker. None of the activity of the fund, whether it’s a steering 

council, as it’s been in the past, or now an advisory council 

with clearly defined roles, has no bearing, Mr. Speaker, on the 

relationship between the fund and the lands and First Nations in 

the province, Mr. Speaker. That’ll be clearly outlined to the 

FSIN to alleviate any of those concerns. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Care of Children 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. All 

members of this Assembly have a responsibility and obligation 

to protect the children in our province, Mr. Speaker. Last week 

we had two reports released, Mr. Speaker. One was the 

Children’s Advocate report, and the other was a report by a 

former assistant deputy minister in the Department of Social 

Services. Both reports highlighted the fact that the government 

is failing to meet the needs of children in its care. Both reports 

highlight an increase in child fatalities and injuries in care. 

 

To the minister: have you had the time to read both reports, and 

has the Premier taken the time to read both reports, and what 

steps is the government taking as a result of these reports to 

ensure that vulnerable children are protected, nurtured, and 

cared for in our province? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite, 

yes, I assure you I’ve taken the time to read both of those 

reports, and both of those reports are very important because 

they’re talking about the children in our province. And both of 

them have a number of recommendations that we have looked 

at and many of them have already been fulfilled, things like the 

caseload numbers. Both of those reports talk about having more 

front-line workers and that’s what we’ve done in this budget, 

have hired 30 more caseload workers so that people are on the 

front line helping our children. They’re talking about things like 

the emergency foster homes and making sure they have things 

like criminal record checks and they have first aid training. Yes, 

that’s something that we’ve done already, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve talked about the PRIDE [parent resources for 

information, development, and education] training that’s 

important so that foster families, people who are looking after 

children that are in the responsibility of government, that they 

actually have more training and understand the responsibilities. 

That’s been undertaken, Mr. Speaker. And more importantly, 

the caseload numbers are going down. We know that there are 

always going to be children in our care, and the important thing 

is that, if we can see a trend downward, it means that the work 

that’s being done is being done well. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing a trend. We’re seeing 

more children injured and more fatalities in the care of the 

government over the last three years. Mr. Speaker, the minister 

can stand and talk about all the things she’s doing but front-line 

workers don’t see the reduction in caseloads, the reduction in 

work, the reduction in pressure the minister talks about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, children are important in our society, and we all 

have a responsibility to look after them and an obligation to 

ensure that they’re safe in our communities. Mr. Speaker, Tim 

Korol, the assistant deputy minister, was hand-picked. He was a 

friend of the former minister of Social Services, hand-picked as 

a special adviser to her and then as an assistant deputy minister 

to review the situation. He has brought forward a report, and he 

finished the job he was hired to do even after being fired, Mr. 

Speaker, a report called Saskatchewan Child Welfare: The 

Secret Shame, Mr. Speaker, a secret shame. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what assurances can the minister give us 

that the government is taking the welfare of these children in 

their care seriously, Mr. Speaker? All of the indications are to 

the contrary — more injuries and more deaths, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite, I 

know that if the member would read that report, he would know 

that there isn’t more injuries and more deaths. The trend lines 

really have not changed. They haven’t gone down, which is 

really scary and I wish, Mr. Speaker, that they would. 

 

But I want to tell you that the report that was written by the 

individual the member talked about, it doesn’t matter to me 

who wrote it. What I wanted to look at was the 

recommendations that he brought forward: recommendations 

like more checkups for foster homes — that’s the type of thing 

we’re doing; ensure that the Aboriginal children that are in our 

care are looked after securely and that there’s a cultural value in 

their lives — and we make sure that that’s being done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we put more money into the Aboriginal child and 

family services so they can also hire more front-line workers. 

That’s very important so that the First Nations and Métis 

children can be put in homes of extended families. That’s 

something they’ve been asking for for a long time, and we’ve 

done it this year. Mr. Speaker, we put more money into the 

Aboriginal child and family institute to make sure that training 

could take place so that foster families within the Aboriginal 

families could have more families in the extended unit, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There’s more work to be done. And children are our future, and 

I assure you we’re looking after them. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 



7606 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2011 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a great deal more work to 

do, and they hire a special adviser to the minister to deal with 

this issue. They make that individual an assistant deputy 

minister with the responsibility of bringing back 

recommendations, Mr. Speaker. And as that assistant deputy 

minister works through the department, looks at concerns 

brought forward by families and others and brings them to the 

minister, what happens, Mr. Speaker? He’s fired, Mr. Speaker. 

He’s fired. Then what happens? The deputy minister’s fired. 

The minister’s moved. And what do we have? A continued 

increase in both injuries and fatalities of children in care in our 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, was the minister moved and was Tim Korol fired 

because the government wasn’t prepared to protect children in 

their care? 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what this 

government wants to do for children in their care. They put 

forward for the first time ever a committee with seven 

ministers, seven ministers who put all their resources together 

and put forward a budget of $34 million for a child and youth 

agenda. The first time ever in this province, and maybe in 

Canada, where we go across boundaries and talk about taking 

down the silos between ministries and talking about a child. 

 

It is not about a ministry. It is not about a government. It is 

about the children. And that’s why we have new child care 

workers. That’s why we have a 24-7 intensive family support 

model to prevent children from coming into care. That’s why 

we put $17 million to address education and employment for 

First Nations and Métis people. That’s why we put forward 

$1.6 million for fetal alcohol spectrum disorder and ASD 

[autism spectrum disorder]. And they’re the kind of issues that 

are dealing with our children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have to talk about the reason children are in 

care. And that’s what we’re doing as a government, and I’m 

proud of it. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member of the 

Crowns and central agency. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m instructed 

by the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to 

report Bill No. 147, The Public Interest Disclosure Act without 

amendments. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill, and the Bill now be read 

the third time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill No. 147 

and that the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third 

reading. I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 147 — The Public Interest Disclosure Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — I move that this Bill now be read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Social Services that Bill No. 147, The Public Interest 

Disclosure Act without amendment be now read a third time 

and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the committee Chair of 

the economy. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on the Economy to report 

Bill No. 167, The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2011 without amendment. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 

Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill be now 

read the third time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Highways has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole of Bill No. 167, The Saskatchewan Grain Car 

Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 without amendment and 

that the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 



May 11, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7607 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third 

reading. I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 167 — The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I move that this Bill be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Highways that Bill No. 167, The Saskatchewan Grain Car 

Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 be now read the third time 

and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Human 

Services Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 159, 

The University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010 without 

amendment. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

request leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on this Bill and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education 

has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 159, The University of Regina Amendment 

Act, 2011 without amendment and that the Bill be now read the 

third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to 

third reading. I recognize the Minister of Advanced Education 

and Immigration. 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 159 — The University of Regina 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

move that this Bill be now read the third time and passed under 

its title. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Advanced Education and Immigration that Bill No. 159, The 

University of Regina Amendment Act, 2011 be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 174 — The Workers’ Compensation 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice 

and workers’ compensation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Workers’ Compensation 

Amendment Act, 2011. Mr. Speaker, our government has the 

utmost regard for the critical services provided daily by 

firefighters to save lives and protect our communities. Medical 

research indicates that firefighters are often exposed to 

hazardous, job-related conditions that over time can have 

serious effect on their health. 

 

Since the presumption for professional firefighters was included 

in the Act in 2003, the list of occupational diseases has been 

expanded based on the best available medical evidence. Mr. 

Speaker, this government is moving to amend The Workers’ 

Compensation Act to further expand the occupational disease 

presumption for firefighters to include primary site esophageal 

cancer. 

 

Currently 10 jurisdictions including Saskatchewan have 

established rebuttable presumptions with respect to firefighters 

and certain forms of cancers. Five jurisdictions already include 

esophageal cancer within the presumption. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed expansion would be in addition to 

the already established presumption in Saskatchewan that nine 



7608 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2011 

forms of cancer and heart disease are occupational diseases for 

firefighters. These include primary site brain cancer, primary 

site bladder cancer, primary site kidney cancer, primary 

non-Hodgkins lymphoma, primary leukemia, primary site 

ureter cancer, primary site colorectal cancer, primary site lung 

cancer, and primary site testicular cancer. 

 

It is important to note that the legislation does not prevent 

firefighters, their families, or volunteer firefighters from filing a 

Workers’ Compensation claim if they do not meet the specific 

requirements outlined in the presumption. As with all injuries, 

these will be investigated and adjudicated on a case-by-case 

basis with consideration given to the type of injury and the 

available scientific evidence. 

 

The Workers’ Compensation Board has identified 60 firefighter 

claims received since 2003 of which 39, or 65 per cent, have 

been accepted. This total includes cancers that are not currently 

within the established presumption, but have been found to be a 

result of working as a firefighter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out to all members that there 

is no incremental cost to employers as a result of this 

amendment because claims for these diseases are already 

considered under existing legislation and policies. Rather the 

amendments simply mean that we recognize the risk that 

firefighters take in order to protect our lives, our homes, and 

our communities and want to respond more readily if they find 

themselves in a time of need. 

 

This province’s workers’ compensation system has brought 

stability to the Saskatchewan workplace for the past 80 years by 

providing coverage at a competitive cost and protecting 

workers and employers against the risks and uncertainties of 

litigation. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, this amendment further addresses 

the link between specific occupational diseases and the 

profession of firefighting. Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured to move 

second reading of Bill No. 174, The Workers’ Compensation 

Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

the motion moved by the Minister of Labour Relations and 

Workplace Safety that Bill No. 174, The Workers’ 

Compensation Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to 

join with the minister by putting on the record a few comments 

on behalf of the official opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters 

Association executive do an incredible job on behalf of their 

members in the area of occupational injuries and illnesses. 

Through their lobbying efforts they have, among other 

legislative changes, achieved the introduction of presumptive 

cancer legislation in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, they have a 

proud history in the area of occupational health and safety, and 

for those efforts I want to commend their work, and I’m sure all 

members in this legislature do as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, occupational health and safety in Saskatchewan 

also has a proud history, a history of not only leading Canada 

but of impacting the world. Mr. Speaker, I want to turn your 

attention to a recent book by David Bennett called Northern 

Exposures. Mr. Deputy Speaker, David Bennett worked as a 

firefighter in England from 1972 to 1977. While there he 

became a local union secretary and health and safety 

representative. Mr. Bennett holds an M.A. [Master of Arts] in 

history and philosophy from Cambridge University and a Ph.D. 

[Doctor of Philosophy] in philosophy from McGill University. 

Mr. Speaker, I want to at this time read a piece about what Mr. 

Bennett had to say about the history of occupational health and 

safety right here in our province. And I quote: 

 

The first law in the new era of health and safety was that 

of Saskatchewan in 1972, two years after the Occupational 

Safety and Health Act in the United States and two years 

before the Health and Safety at Work Act in the United 

Kingdom. The Saskatchewan law came about under the 

influence of Bob Sass, associate deputy minister of 

Labour, and it is largely to him that we owe that particular 

evolution of health and safety in Canada. Not only did the 

Saskatchewan law set the tone of Canadian legislation but 

its precepts found their way into the generic health and 

safety convention of the International Labour 

Organization (ILO), No. 155 in 1981. The Saskatchewan 

law was heavy on worker participation in health and 

safety and the articulation of three health and safety rights: 

the right to participate in the form of joint workplace 

committees; the right to refuse unsafe or unhealthy work; 

and the right to know — information, education, and 

training from the employer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we deal with issues of occupational health and 

safety, it is important for us to understand this history. Having 

personally listened to Mr. Sass speak, I know that Mr. Sass 

practises occupational health and safety with passion and set a 

standard for all of us to aspire to. This passion, Mr. Speaker, we 

all witness here today with the work being done by the 

Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters Association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we must understand that workers killed on the job, 

whether immediately or whether it be from something 

contracted years prior, is our responsibility. Today we move 

forward with the passage of Bill 174 to amend The Workers’ 

Compensation Act, 1979. Mr. Speaker, I’ll not go over the 

entire list of occupational diseases presumptions for firefighters 

in our legislation, but I’ll say that the addition of the primary 

site esophageal cancer is a necessary addition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make special mention of the efforts of 

the Saskatchewan Association of Fire Chiefs who were calling 

on the government of Saskatchewan to expand the current 

presumptive legislation to include part-time and volunteer 

firefighters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, firefighters have among the highest rates of 

occupational injuries and illnesses, and they are on the front 

lines protecting us and our families. We owe them all a debt of 

gratitude for their service to our province. Mr. Speaker, I want 

to end by saying, when it comes to occupational health and 

safety, it is always a time for action. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 



May 11, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7609 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion moved by the Minister of Labour Relations and 

Workplace Safety that Bill No. 174, The Workers’ 

Compensation Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

committed? I recognize the minister of workers’ compensation. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I designate that Bill No. 

174, The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2011 be 

committed to the Committee of the Whole and be considered in 

the Committee of the Whole later this day. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands committed to the 

Committee of the Whole. The minister’s requested leave for 

Bill No. 174, The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 

2011 to be committed to the Committee of the Whole and to be 

considered in the Committee of the Whole later this day. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. Leave has been granted. 

 

Bill No. 173 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments Corporation. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 

to rise today to tell members of the Legislative Assembly about 

Bill No. 173, The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment 

Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the highest priority of any government must be 

the protection of its citizens and their property. The legislation 

before us today deals with an issue that is specific and 

important. The Automobile Accident Insurance Act was passed 

in 2002 and that Act has a serious flaw. When criminals steal 

cars, they often drive recklessly. They have little regard for 

their own safety or the safety of others. You don’t have to be an 

expert in risk analysis to predict what’s going to happen. It’s a 

recipe that is all too likely to end in a crash, but it’s the kind of 

predictable outcome that highlights the serious flaw in this 

legislation. Under this current legislation, criminals who crash 

stolen cars are entitled to all the same injury benefits that the 

law-abiding citizen would receive after actually paying for the 

insurance. Criminals can receive the coverage, even though 

they stole the car, even though they didn’t pay for any 

insurance. 

 

Make no mistake — the people in Saskatchewan, when people 

in Saskatchewan have a car stolen, they are victims of a serious 

crime. They are often serious economic consequences for 

victims of car thieves. Dealing with the loss of a stolen car can 

put tremendous stress on a family budget. But the victimization 

is about more than money. People in Saskatchewan depend on 

their vehicles. They depend on their vehicles to visit family and 

to get groceries. When a criminal steals a car, all of these 

everyday activities can become a huge source of stress. 

 

For many people in Saskatchewan, a vehicle is more than a 

means to get from point A to point B. Many people in 

Saskatchewan depend on their vehicle to earn their living. 

Farmers depend on their trucks to care for their livestock and to 

get field work done. Tradespeople such as electricians and 

plumbers depend on their vehicles to get to job sites and to haul 

their tools. For people who depend on their vehicles for their 

livelihood, the loss of that vehicle can mean a loss of many 

days of work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is important to remember that these law-abiding 

vehicle owners pay for their insurance every year. Mr. Speaker, 

that’s what makes the flaw in this legislation so serious. The 

legislation means people in Saskatchewan are victimized twice 

when criminals crash their stolen cars. The first victimization 

comes when the criminal steals the car and causes all of the 

stress that comes with that situation. The second victimization 

comes when the current legislation forces law-abiding citizens 

to pay for the criminal’s benefit with their own insurance 

premiums. 

 

Let’s be clear, Mr. Speaker. When the Auto Fund pays for a car 

thief’s benefits, the money has to come from somewhere. Auto 

Fund payouts come from the premiums that are paid by 

law-abiding drivers in the province. These payouts can be 

significant. Under the current legislation, a criminal has several 

benefits, one of which is if the criminal can’t go back to work 

after destroying a stolen car, he or she could qualify for income 

replacement benefit. The Auto Fund’s payments for the income 

replacement benefit can be as high as $80,000 a year. That’s not 

all, Mr. Speaker. After two years of receiving the income 

replacement benefit, the Auto Fund could be forced to provide a 

pension of 10 per cent per year. Mr. Speaker, many people 

would be happy to have a job that paid $80,000 a year with a 10 

per cent pension. The flaw in this legislation gives criminals the 

chance to receive that income complete with a cushy pension 

plan for wrecking your stolen car. The flaw compounds the 

injustice by forcing Saskatchewan people to pay for it through 

their insurance premiums. 

 

Some may argue that criminals can’t receive the income benefit 

while physically in prison. Mr. Speaker, that’s cold comfort. 

The reality is that a criminal who is convicted but receives a 

suspended sentence could still, under the current legislation, get 

the income replacement benefit. Even criminals who get jail 

time could still receive the income replacement benefit after 

their release. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are probably those who will brush this off as 

an issue that is insignificant. They’ll look at the total revenues 

and expenditures within the Auto Fund and say that a few 

thousand dollars doesn’t matter. Mr. Speaker, those people are 

wrong. When the Auto Fund awards benefits to a criminal, the 

money comes out of the premiums of law-abiding car owners in 



7610 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2011 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know a young family with a one-year-old son 

and a Honda Civic. The insurance on this Civic is just over 

$1,000 a year. If the Auto Fund pays even one criminal the 

maximum income replacement benefit for even one year, the 

cost will eat up the premiums from that family for the lifetime 

that they are driving. Mr. Speaker, the young family I 

mentioned earlier has only one car. If a criminal steals their 

Civic, they’ll be walking. Whether they’re going to work or 

going to get groceries, if they are to slip and injure themselves 

while they are walking, Mr. Speaker, they will not be covered 

by insurance and will have access to no benefits, Mr. Speaker, 

while the criminal who may crash their car will have full 

benefits under the current legislation, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, that is unacceptable for the people in Saskatchewan 

and that’s unacceptable for this government. 

 

Fortunately people in Saskatchewan elected a government to fix 

these kinds of flaws in legislation. Bill 173 will ensure that 

criminals who crash stolen cars will not have access to Auto 

Fund benefits. Law-abiding Saskatchewan citizens will no 

longer be forced to pay for the criminal behaviour of car thieves 

through insurance premiums. When criminals steal cars and 

drive recklessly, they will have to face the consequences of 

their decisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people expect their elected 

representatives to move quickly on issues like this one. They 

understand the need for respectful debate, but when the issue is 

clear, they want action. In the April 9th edition of The 

StarPhoenix I was pleased to read that the NDP is following our 

lead to fix this flawed legislation. The member for Regina 

Dewdney committed that the opposition would support such 

changes. I’d like to thank the member for that support. The 

people of Saskatchewan are counting on him to keep his word 

and pass the legislation as soon as possible. To give credit 

where it’s due, the previous government included provisions in 

the current legislation to strip drunk drivers of their benefits. 

We’re looking forward to working with the opposition to 

implement this correction to the current legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to holding criminals 

responsible for their actions, and protecting law-abiding 

citizens. This legislation is the latest example of the initiatives 

we’re taking to keep our communities safe. Mr. Speaker, this 

government will always protect law-abiding citizens and hold 

criminals responsible for their actions. Criminals that steal cars 

and cause collisions have to face the consequences of their 

decisions. Law-abiding citizens should not have to subsidize 

criminal behaviour through insurance premiums. Mr. Speaker, 

Bill 173 makes sure that law-abiding motorists will no longer 

have to pay for crimes of car thieves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 173, The Automobile 

Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second 

time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

the motion moved by the Minister Responsible for 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance that Bill No. 173, The 

Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2011 be now 

read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? I recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

extremely pleased to enter into the debate on this very 

important legislation. Mr. Speaker, when this was first brought 

to my attention by a reporter asking if we would support these 

amendments to the legislation, Mr. Speaker, my reaction was 

instantaneous because in my opinion this was an oversight, 

something that was missed unintentionally as we moved 

forward to hold accountable people who were driving and 

causing injury to others, or themselves for that matter, while in 

the act of a criminal act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there is no question about our support for this 

particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. It was an oversight, 

as I had indicated. And I think the people of Saskatchewan 

benefit from the fact of the co-operation that allows a Bill like 

this to pass on very short notice, to be in place as protection for 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance that Bill No. 173, The Automobile Accident 

Insurance Amendment Act, 2011 be read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

committed? I recognize the Minister for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that Bill No. 173, The Automobile Accident Insurance 

Amendment Act, 2011 be committed to the Committee of the 

Whole, and request leave for the said Bill to be considered in 

the Committee of the Whole later this day. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands committed to the 

Committee of the Whole. The minister has requested leave for 

Bill No. 173, The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment 

Act, 2011 be considered in the Committee of the Whole later 

this day. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I do now 

leave the Chair for the House to go in Committee of the Whole. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ASSEMBLY 

 

Bill No. 174 — The Workers’ Compensation 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Deputy Chair: — The first item of business before the 

committee is Bill No. 174, The Workers’ Compensation 

Amendment Act, 2011. Clause 1, short title. 

 



May 11, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7611 

[Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to.] 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice 

and consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

enacts as follows: Bill No. 174, The Workers’ Compensation 

Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that the committee report the 

Bill without amendment. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — It has been moved that the committee 

report Bill No. 174 without amendment. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 173 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Deputy Chair: — The last item of business before the 

committee is Bill No. 173, The Automobile Accident Insurance 

Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

Clause 1, short title. Is clause 1 agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

[Clauses 1 to 7 inclusive agreed to.] 

 

[15:00] 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice 

and consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

enacts as follows: Bill No. 173, The Automobile Accident 

Insurance Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

I recognize the member of Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — I move that the committee report the 

Bill without amendment. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — It has been moved that the committee 

report Bill No. 173 without amendment. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Chairman, I move that the 

committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — It has been moved by the Government 

House Leader that the committee rise, report progress, and ask 

for leave to sit again. 

 

Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Deputy Chair: — Carried. 

 

[The Deputy Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of the 

committees. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 

committee to report Bill No. 174, The Workers’ Compensation 

Amendment Act, 2011 without amendments. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a third 

time? I recognize the minister of labour and workers’ 

compensation. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 174 — The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2011 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, by leave I move that this 

Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has requested leave for 

Bill No. 174, The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 

2011 to be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. Leave has been granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this 

Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved that Bill No. 174, 

The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2011 be now read 

the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of 

committees. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 

committee to report Bill No. 173, The Automobile Accident 

Insurance Amendment Act, 2011 without amendment. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a third 

time? I recognize the Minister for Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance. 

 



7612 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2011 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 173 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, I move that 

this Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has requested leave for 

Bill No. 173, The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment 

Act, 2011 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize 

the Minister of Saskatchewan Government Insurance. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — I move that this Bill be now read a 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved that Bill No. 173, 

The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2011 be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 162 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hickie that Bill No. 162 — The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And it’s a pleasure to rise and offer some comments on Bill 

162, changes proposed to the local elections Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill has been a bit contentious, I would say, in 

many of the comments that have been made and many, I think, 

from where it initially started last fall. But the government, 

despite there being some opposition and some questions in one 

particular area, seems bound and determined that this piece of 

legislation should go ahead as is and are not offering any 

comment for further consultations on the legislation proposed. 

 

I guess, Mr. Speaker, I need to go back to the beginning when 

the legislation was tabled. And on November 30th of 2010, 

there was a press release that was put out by the Government of 

Saskatchewan that speaks to this Bill being introduced, The 

Election Amendment Act or The Local Government Election 

Act, 2010, and it actually was tied in the same press release 

with The Election Amendment Act, 2010. And I mean obviously 

from both of the Bills putting forward a number of the same 

initiatives, mainly the voter identification and photo ID 

[identification] as it has been referred to on numerous times, 

there is some differences in the pieces of legislation but, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that is one area where they are similar. 

 

And in the press release the minister made the comment that it’s 

appropriate and necessary for Saskatchewan to follow suit with 

the standards that are being used for the next federal election. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that federal election has been held, and I’m 

sure all of us are aware of issues that came about with the 

identification and how that was defined and how it was applied 

at a variety of polling stations. And the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs made the comment in the same press release that “Voter 

identification improves accountability and transparency in local 

elections . . . These amendments help our entire province move 

forward.” 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are many people that would 

disagree with that. And I know myself and many of my 

colleagues will disagree with that. And there are many people 

throughout the country who disagree with the federal 

government requirements and how they have been applied. In 

fact there are court challenges that are currently ongoing, I 

believe, in British Columbia was the main one that I read about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there has been a fair bit of discussion, not only in 

comments made in this House, but in a broader context. And I 

think first and foremost we need to look at the explanatory 

notes and some of the changes that are being proposed. And, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are some good ones that looks at the 

existing provisions that are in with the current legislation and 

changes that are being proposed, and I think first and foremost, 

terms of office. 

 

That is something that has been requested by municipalities, to 

look at the length of term for municipal governments. And, Mr. 

Speaker, this has been talked about in SUMA [Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association] for quite some time and 

SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] for 

quite some time. And at the last chance to make any changes, 

the government actually didn’t go ahead with them. They left 

off, they put forward other changes, but left off the term of 

municipal governments and school board officials, moving that 

from three to four years. And then for some reason they came 

forward with it on this piece of legislation. Now, Mr. Speaker, I 

don’t think anyone really disagreed, and we expected it to be 

brought forward the last time when the municipalities were 

pretty well unanimous that they supported the initiative. So it 

was a bit of a surprise. But then when it came forward this time, 



May 11, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7613 

it is packaged in with some other changes. 

 

There is some existing provisions on by-elections that are being 

changed, also changing of polling places. And there is 

clarifications when it comes to duties of a returning officer and 

appointment of officials, and clarification that enumerators 

need only be appointed if the council or a board has directed the 

preparation of a voters’ list. So there’s a number of other 

provisions that are contained in this piece of legislation and the 

amendments to the legislation. I would say many are good; they 

are what’s been requested. There is some changes when it 

comes to the whole idea of the use of a voters’ list, Mr. 

Speaker, that I guess we will deal with a little more in 

committee. 

 

But what it talks about is the existing provision is in election 

materials. The returning officer shall provide, free of charge, 

one copy of the advanced poll list mentioned to each candidate 

who requests one. And the change will clarify that an advanced 

poll list is only required when a voters’ list is being used. So 

municipalities have the option of compiling a voters’ list or 

using voter registration forms. And currently section 61(1.1) 

requires the deputy returning officer to prepare an advanced 

poll list, whether or not a voters’ list is prepared. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, I don’t know how this does away with concerns of 

inappropriate voting, but it’s something that for sure I will be 

asking questions on once this Bill moves to committee. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of changes that have been 

put forward in this Bill, and I know, and I’m sure you’re aware 

also, that the most contentious of all has been the requirement 

for identification and photo ID that was put forward by the 

government. Now, Mr. Speaker, many people will say that, and 

I know the minister had stood and talked about there will be a 

number of other options that are available to voters, a number 

of other pieces of identification that will be acceptable at the 

polling stations. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that really just confuses the matter even 

more and raises a number of concerns because what this is 

doing is putting the list of acceptable identification into 

regulations. And what that will mean, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

after this session of the legislature, there is more than enough 

opportunity for the government to require any type of 

identification that it likes. And there will be absolutely no 

public debate on the required pieces of identification because 

when it’s in regulations there will be the ability of the 

government to change the identification required for a voter to 

carry to a polling station, and it will only take an order in 

council that will be signed off in cabinet and that the people of 

this province will have no opportunity for discussion. The 

people and the taxpayers and the voters of this province will 

have no opportunity for input, and we will only find out about it 

after the fact, Mr. Speaker, once it is already signed off and is 

the law of the province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that makes many people nervous. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was an editorial in The New York Times 

April 26th of 2011, and it notes that Republican lawmakers 

across the United States are passing laws requiring citizens to 

show photo ID before they can exercise the right to vote. The 

New York Times stated that the clear intent and effect of the 

photo ID legislation is to lower voter turnout and particularly 

participation in elections by groups that traditionally support 

the Democrats — the young, the poor, and African-Americans. 

 

Rarely noted outside of the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly 

is that that is currently what’s going on and is being put forward 

by the Sask Party government and that they are pushing through 

the Assembly these two pieces of photo ID legislation. And 

evidently it’s been inspired by Republican vote suppression 

legislation and is for the same purpose, to lower voter turnout 

and particularly voter turnout by groups who do not support the 

Saskatchewan Party government — the young, the poor, and 

minorities. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the right to vote and to have an impact on 

the decisions that affect you in your daily lives is fundamental 

for a democracy that we enjoy here in Canada and in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And it’s a right that should be 

exercised by everyone in a free and democratic society, not just 

the comfortable or the privileged or those who are doing 

relatively well under the status quo, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The list of people that this government has failed is long and is 

growing. This government has failed seniors in this province. 

And we’ve all talked of and seen and met with seniors who are 

struggling to cope with the rising cost of living and in particular 

rising rents and the rising cost of utilities. Soon they will be 

impacted by the rising cost of food, and they’ve already been 

hit with the rising cost of transportation. And now they’re 

frustrated by this government’s broken promises on health care 

which are coming more and more quickly. And many seniors 

are telling us that they feel let down, even betrayed, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, by this government. 

 

Now at a time in their lives when many of them no longer have 

a driver’s licence and may not be travellers, world travellers, 

Mr. Speaker, and have a passport, this government is 

demanding that seniors present a photo ID when they vote. And 

seniors, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are one of the committed, most 

committed demographics in our society that feel a 

responsibility and understand the responsibility that each and 

every one of us bears and takes that responsibility seriously to 

make sure that they get out and vote. And they are being set 

aside by this government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

This government has failed people in all walks of life. Students 

are angry about the cost, the rising cost of tuition; the cost of 

rent, utilities, and car insurance. First Nations people and Métis 

are angry about this government’s lack of consultation on issues 

like The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act and lack of 

consultations on Bill 155 that we heard about today, Mr. 

Speaker. And homeless people, there are an estimated 2,200 

homeless people in Regina alone. They are angry that this 

government has done nothing to help put a roof over their head. 

 

Now this, these are all people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that are 

being disenfranchised by the changes put forward in this Bill 

and the requirement for a photo ID to be able to exercise your 

right to vote in whether municipal or provincial elections. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has also vetoed the selection of a 

bipartisan committee for the Chief Electoral Officer, and they 



7614 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2011 

have ignored the current Chief Electoral Officer’s 

recommendations when it comes to changes that are needed for 

the elections Act, and instead went ahead and put in their own. 

They’re preventing another political party in this province from 

accessing its funds and competing on a level playing field in the 

political field, Mr. Speaker. And they’ve made it harder for 

people to exercise their democratic rights to free speech and 

hold protests in Bill 43, Mr. Speaker. Now they want to make it 

harder for the very people whom this government has failed the 

most to cast a ballot. 

 

The government says that they’re trying to harmonize the rules 

in Saskatchewan to make them more like those in other 

provinces or at the federal level. But the federal legislation is 

currently being challenged in the Supreme Court of British 

Columbia by a coalition of organizations including people with 

disabilities, seniors, renters, and people who are homeless. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this does not sound at all like a Bill that has been 

widely through the consultation process and, Mr. Speaker, we 

have to question as to why this Bill is being so ardently pushed 

forward by this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government also claims that people will not 

be disenfranchised, and they’re pointing to measures in the 

legislation that give people alternatives. But all of us in the 

Assembly have seen instances where deputy returning officers 

have been overzealous in their interpretation of the rules. There 

is a very real danger that the clear preference for photo ID 

would lead to some people being exactly that — 

disenfranchised, Mr. Speaker. And moreover some people will 

find it difficult, if not impossible, to be able to comply with this 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many renters change address frequently. It will be 

difficult for them to prove, for example, that they currently 

reside at a given address. And what if they’ve recently moved 

and not yet received updated documentation from the 

government? And what if they have not received mail from a 

government agency? 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of these will disenfranchise the voters. And we 

all know as politicians, Mr. Speaker, that it’s important for 

citizens to get out and vote. And, Mr. Speaker, if anything, of 

anything I have learned while being in this job, it’s the 

importance of people voting — the importance of people 

voting, whether it’s for their library board or their school board 

or for municipal city councils or councils or reeves and 

councillors in the rural municipalities, or whether it’s voting for 

provincial politicians or federal politicians. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, all of us have an impact on the lives of 

taxpayers and citizens in our province. And I believe that it is 

incumbent on each of us to encourage people to vote, not to be 

passing legislation that makes it more difficult, makes it more 

awkward, and puts more of a responsibility on the voter to 

prove to us that they are actually citizens. Mr. Speaker, it 

should be, the onus should be on us as legislators to support the 

Chief Electoral Officer to make sure that processes are put in 

place that make it convenient and easy for voters to vote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill puts it all backwards. And it is not 

incumbent on the voters; it is incumbent on us to make sure that 

we put forward a system that is easily accessible to citizens of 

this province, that we encourage them to vote and to speak their 

voice with their vote, and make sure that they are active and 

have every opportunity possible to be active in the democratic 

process, selecting people to represent them at whatever the 

level of political involvement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there seems to be some real gaps when it comes to 

this legislation. We’re looking at issues that have not been 

recommended by the Chief Electoral Officer as recommended 

changes to the elections Act or the municipal elections Act in 

the province of Saskatchewan. The government has totally 

ignored those. The government has also ignored, with the 

provincial changes, a long-standing premise or convention that 

the opposition is also consulted when it comes to changes for 

the elections Act. 

 

Now the Minister of Justice made the commitment, is my 

understanding — I don’t sit as a member on the committee — 

but on BOIE [Board of Internal Economy] that he made a 

commitment to continue with that convention of having 

discussions with the opposition to make sure that every member 

of this Assembly was comfortable with the changes that were 

being put forward to change the provincial elections Act, Mr. 

Speaker. And then it was just gone. That commitment was 

gone. Not only does it make me question the word of the 

Minister of Justice. I guess from here on in what we need to do 

is any commitments that the Minister of Justice is making to us, 

we need to ask for in writing, Mr. Speaker, with it signed. 

Because this is a long-standing convention in this Assembly, 

that all members need to look at the changes that are being 

proposed to the elections Act, that all members need to have 

time to look at them, understand how they work, have input 

into the changes that are being proposed, and are in agreement 

with those changes when they move forward to the floor of this 

Assembly. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what that does is . . . And you will know. 

They have always said that each of us as representatives of our 

community are in fact representative of our community. And 

we represent the citizens of our constituencies, and we have an 

obligation and a responsibility to go back and talk to those, our 

constituents, talk about the changes that are coming forward, 

talk about changes that are being proposed. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that not only keeps our constituents informed of the changes 

and the importance of the changes that are happening in this 

legislature but it also lets us, as legislators, receive feedback 

from our constituents, people that maybe have worked in a 

polling station, people that have maybe been a returning officer 

at one time, maybe people that have worked on election 

campaigns and seen problems that have happened at polling 

stations, what works best. Are these changes something that 

will improve the process to make it easier and more readily 

accessible to taxpayers to be able to get out and vote? Or is it 

things that don’t solve the problems that are there and in fact 

cause more problems than they are solving? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t have that chance with this. The 

Chief Electoral Officer didn’t have the chance with this. And 

when it comes to the municipal partners, there is numerous 

questions as to whether our municipal partners actually had a 

legitimate opportunity to voice concerns on local government 

elections and the changes that are being proposed in Bill No. 



May 11, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7615 

162. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while this government has disenfranchised so 

many in our community and ignored so many in our 

community, Mr. Speaker, the changes that are coming forward 

in this session of the legislature, changes to the provincial 

elections Act and also The Local Government Election Act, are 

concerning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the two pieces of . . . Both pieces are requiring the 

photo ID, and that truly has become the major point of 

discussion and debate on both of these pieces of legislation. My 

colleague, the member from Saskatoon Meewasin, spoke 

yesterday on the provincial election Act and the changes 

proposed there and the implications of requiring photo ID, and 

having the ID and types of applicable ID listed in the 

regulations. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when we look at this local government 

elections Act and the changes proposed, we would assume that 

the Chief Electoral Officer would have been consulted on 

legislation affecting the provincial elections, and that 

municipalities would have been consulted on legislation 

affecting municipal elections. But, Mr. Speaker, if you have 

that assumption, I believe that that assumption would be wrong. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party government has 

ignored many recommendations from the Chief Electoral 

Officer designed to improve the conduct of provincial elections 

but has introduced photo ID legislation for which the Chief 

Electoral Officer sees no need. So here we have the person that 

is in charge of elections in the province of Saskatchewan has 

never requested this, was never even consulted on this piece of 

legislation, but the government is going ahead with it anyways. 

So it has to be some other motive, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And the case in respect to the proposed municipal voting 

legislation is even more outrageous. Municipal organizations 

were obviously not consulted on the photo ID provisions, and 

when the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association 

considered the matter after the legislation had already been 

introduced, the president of SUMA wrote to the Saskatchewan 

Party Minister of Municipal Affairs on April 19th of this year, 

Mr. Speaker, and asked, and I quote, “. . . the government to 

remove the voter ID sections via amendments during the 

committee deliberations.” Now SUMA made this request 

because voter identification changes, and I quote, “presented 

numerous challenges” including that they, and I quote again, 

they “appear to be unnecessary,” and they “raise the possibility 

of voter intimidation.” Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe I have ever 

heard the term voter intimidation used in connection to a 

Canadian election. For sure I’ve never heard it used in an 

election, a municipal election in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 

Speaker, SUMA went on to say, and I quote, “They are likely to 

negatively impact voter turnout.” 

 

So here we are, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re not looking at 

legislation that encourages voting. We’re not looking at 

legislation that puts the onus on the government or the 

municipal government to put in place a system that is secure 

and has safeguards but makes it easy and accessible for voters 

to get out and vote. We are looking at a system that is likely to 

negatively impact voter turnout, raises the possibility of voter 

intimidation, presents numerous challenges for the 

municipalities, and appeared to be unnecessary. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, where has the cases of voter fraud in 

municipal elections ever arisen? Do any of these changes, 

especially the voter . . . or the photo ID, Mr. Speaker, improve 

the system, make the system safer somehow? Well when we get 

into more of the consultations that have taken place since the 

legislation was tabled, and we look at the opportunities and the 

options of what is acceptable, Mr. Speaker, you will clearly 

agree with me and say, no, that it does not make it more 

accessible or encourage Saskatchewan residents to get out and 

vote. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what’s been the response from the 

Saskatchewan Party government when this letter came to the 

minister from the president of SUMA? Well the response of the 

Sask Party government was not to make the changes that 

SUMA desired, to avoid what they referred to as voter 

intimidation and lower voter turnout, but to cynically mislead 

the executive of SUMA into believing that it was too late in the 

process to make any changes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we were in estimates the other night. And of 

course I had a debate with the minister as to whether I could 

actually ask questions about this Bill or the proposed changes 

because he said, well it has nothing to do with the budget of 

Municipal Affairs because any changes to the municipal 

elections Act wouldn’t take effect until 2012 when the next 

municipal election was. 

 

But what the minister has been committing to with the 

municipalities to try and get over their uncomfortableness and 

dissatisfaction with what’s being proposed and their concerns 

of what has been proposed by this government is that they are 

committing to education — we’re not sure what that means; it’s 

just kind of a general statement — committing to education for 

what’s required. But also they are downloading onto 

municipalities the responsibility to change the municipal 

elections and the processes they follow, which is what this 

Bill’s all about, and put the requirements of verifying 

identification and all of the other changes. They are also 

committing to training people within the municipalities to be 

able to run elections and to be able to handle the concerns that 

are raised when these new changes and this new Bill comes into 

effect. 

 

So for the minister to say, well this doesn’t have anything to do 

with my budget, we shouldn’t be talking about it at estimate, 

Mr. Speaker, he’s incorrect. Because if you were committing to 

provide educational services to municipalities for changes that 

you are implementing with no consultations, if you are 

committing to training returning officers and people for the 

municipal elections to be able to comply with the changes that 

you are putting in place without consultations with any of the 

municipal partners and without proper consultations, and you 

are taking on this commitment then, Mr. Speaker, that has an 

impact on the budget of Municipal Affairs. 

 

And it’s only right that if the minister or someone in the 

Saskatchewan Party government has decided that photo 



7616 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2011 

identification needs to be a major point of municipal elections 

and is required in municipal elections, if they aren’t going to 

listen to anyone and do proper consultations with not only the 

stakeholders but the population — because, Mr. Speaker, we 

are stakeholders; the general population in the province of 

Saskatchewan is stakeholders when it comes to changes in The 

Election Act — then they need to pay for it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there was more than a number of criteria, I 

think, for this Bill to be applicable to estimates because it does 

have an impact on the budget of Municipal Affairs. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, not only did we receive the first letter that was 

dated April 19th from SUMA, then there was a second letter 

that came on April 27th, 2011. Now in this second letter from 

the president of SUMA, to the Saskatchewan Party Minister of 

Municipal Affairs, it was stated by the president, and I quote: 

 

Based on our recent discussions with your officials, it was 

our understanding that our interest in making changes to 

the provisions could not be accommodated within the 

remaining sitting days of the twenty-sixth Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this understanding that was communicated by 

the Saskatchewan Party government could be no further from 

the truth. This Legislative Assembly sits until May 19th, so the 

end of next week. The photo ID legislation is not yet in 

committee and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know quite well that 

in committee is where any amendments desired by SUMA 

could be accommodated. And there’s plenty of time to 

accommodate these concerns of SUMA. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when the minister says to SUMA or 

someone in the Government of Saskatchewan that there is not 

enough time to make any changes to this legislation, the 

minister the other day in estimates argued that we couldn’t talk 

about this Bill because it had no impact on the budget and 

estimates are to talk about the budget of the specific 

department. And he said this has no impact on the budget of 

Municipal Affairs because it impacts municipal elections that 

don’t happen until 2012. Doesn’t happen till 2012, but yet the 

minister says these have to go through right now. 

 

And he won’t accommodate SUMA, who is one of their major 

partners, and in fact many people would say the first level of 

government as they deal with municipalities. They deal with 

providing services to citizens on the ground, and many people 

see them as the first level of government. This minister would 

not even give them the consideration or respect for concerns 

they had to set aside this part of the proposed changes. 

 

It’s not needed, Mr. Speaker, until 2012. That’s the minister’s 

own comments. It’s not needed in 2011. It’s not needed till 

2012. Why can’t it be set aside? Why cannot there be 

amendments made that would make this more acceptable to 

SUMA, a major partner, first level of government across this 

province that provides service to citizens? But the minister is 

not accepting of the idea that he should accommodate everyone. 

It’s kind of — or anyone — it’s kind of my way or no way, and 

that’s what the minister has said, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, even though it’s not needed for a year or over a year, 

the minister says no, can’t be done. 

Now the interesting part about all of this, Mr. Speaker, there’s 

lots of interesting parts and it’s been quite a twisted journey 

going through this whole process. 

 

In December of 2010, there was a press release that was put out 

by Municipal Affairs and it was about . . . no, it wasn’t by 

Municipal Affairs, it was by SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance] that talked about . . . And I didn’t bring it with me, 

Mr. Speaker, but it is a press release that was put out by SGI, 

and it was encouraging people or letting them know that there 

was the option not to put a box number on your driver’s licence, 

but to put your actual address or land description as your 

address. And it always struck me as a little odd why SGI would 

be doing this. Why would you not add it as part of the criteria 

for your driver’s licence if you’re going to go to a demand for 

photo identification to vote in municipal, in provincial, and it is 

currently being implemented federally. 

 

And box numbers are no good, Mr. Speaker. We ran into a 

number of problems in the last two federal elections — three, 

actually, three federal elections — where box numbers were not 

accepted as a legitimate address, and people had to have other 

pieces of identification that may not be a photo ID. But, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s been lots of questions about why not just move 

ahead with it and put on SGI require, instead of a box number, 

that you would have your actual residence listed on your 

identification. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we go onto the Internet on the 

Municipal Affairs website, there is some consultation 

documents that have been posted. And it’s interesting to see 

that acceptable identification includes an original piece of ID 

showing the voter’s photograph, name, and address rather than 

a post office box, as long as the ID is issued by the Government 

of Saskatchewan, the Government of Canada, or an agency of 

one of those governments. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a whole list of cards that are on here. 

And it’s kind of an unusual list. Driver’s licence, well that’s got 

my address and my photo on it. Health card doesn’t have my 

photo or my address. Canadian passport has all of it. Certificate 

of Canadian citizenship has my name on it, but it doesn’t have 

my address on it. Birth certificate doesn’t have my address on it 

or my picture, my group of birth certificates that I have. Maybe 

the new ones do now, but those little folks aren’t old enough to 

vote. Social insurance number card, that’s stretching it there: no 

photo ID, no address. 

 

Old age security card, student ID card — it’s questionable 

what’s in there. Liquor identification card, hospital medical 

clinic card, credit card or debit card — well my debit card 

doesn’t have my picture on it, nor does it have an address on it. 

And you could find anyone’s wallet or find these cards. I mean 

there’s nothing that would verify it’s mine. 

 

Public transportation card, a library card, a library card for 

heaven’s sake — it doesn’t even have your name on it, Mr. 

Speaker. I can show you my library card from the Palliser 

Regional Library in Moose Jaw. It doesn’t even have my name 

on it. It has my signature on the back, and if you can read my 

signature, you’ll know it’s mine. And I guess you’ll know it’s 

me if I’m at the book polling station. Canadian Blood Services 

card — well, Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t . . . it has my name on 



May 11, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7617 

it, has my blood type on it, doesn’t have an address, doesn’t 

have a picture. 

 

So my whole point of this is, Mr. Speaker, this list goes on, and 

there’s another page of secondary options that you could bring 

with you. So you would have to have a combination of these. I 

spoke to one person, and they said look, we need to know 

what’s required to go vote in a municipal election. We don’t 

need these long lists that say you can use your library card or a 

fishing licence or your health card or your blood donor card, for 

heaven’s sake. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation has not been well thought out. 

There has not been consultations done. And when the minister 

says to me there has been extensive consultations, then why on 

earth would an organization such as SUMA write the letter they 

did on April 19th asking for changes to be made if there had 

been extensive consultations? Why would SUMA, which is a 

respected organization and represents probably about 60 per 

cent of the population in this province, be concerned about 

voter intimidation, be concerned about reducing voter turnout, 

and be concerned about the complications that would arise from 

this legislation? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s fine. You know, I always remember a very 

good friend told me once when I was first elected . . . you 

know, I was all gung-ho about doing all kinds of wonderful 

things. And this person said to me, you know, if you have the 

majority you can pass any legislation you want. And you can. If 

you have the numbers in this House, you can pass whatever you 

like. You can just pound it through, Mr. Speaker, and as an 

opposition, we can voice our concern. We can voice the 

concerns of our constituents. We can write letters to the editor. 

We can table petitions, but the government with the majority 

can pound through any piece of legislation it wants. That’s the 

cold, hard facts. 

 

We all know it. We all understand it. But this person said to me, 

if a government has a majority, they can pass anything they 

like. But if the taxpayers of the province and the citizens of this 

province don’t agree with it, don’t understand it, or don’t 

understand why it’s being done, they will have great difficulty 

accepting it and following it because we’re law-abiding 

citizens. I would say generally the people of this province are 

law-abiding citizens. 

 

So Mr. Speaker, as a just a note of concern to this government, 

you cannot keep pounding through legislation. You cannot keep 

pounding through legislation and expecting people just to sit 

back and quietly accept it because it won’t go on forever. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, clearly this is a piece of legislation that 

needs to have more discussion. There needs to be some 

education done before the legislation is passed, not after the fact 

when people are struggling to understand why they can’t vote 

or being sent home if at all possible to get other pieces of paper 

that will verify who they are. Mr. Speaker, photo ID is required 

in other provinces — yes, it is — but those provinces provide 

free of charge photo ID for all of their citizens, free of charge 

they provide for all of their citizens, photo ID. 

 

This government has done no groundwork on this legislation. 

They have not put in place any of the supporting pieces that 

need to be there to even make this move towards tighter 

requirement for identification to be allowed to vote and, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s why you get into the questions of, where on 

earth did this legislation come from? Why is this even a priority 

for this government? And, Mr. Speaker, that’s why we have 

read into the record a number of times the quotes out of the 

editorial that was in the New York Times. And it talks about that 

the “Republican lawmakers across the United States are passing 

laws requiring citizens to show photo ID before they can 

exercise their right to vote.” 

 

And maybe, Mr. Speaker, I’ll insert one of my own words: 

Republican lawmakers across the United States are passing 

laws requiring citizens to show photo ID before they are 

allowed — before they are allowed — to exercise their right to 

vote. The New York Times states that “The clear intent and 

effect of the photo ID legislation is to lower voter turnout, and 

particularly participation in elections by groups that 

traditionally support the Democrats: the young, the poor and 

[the] African Americans.” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s happening here. Mr. Speaker, so when 

we look at that and we say, okay, the members of SUMA can’t 

identify any types of voter fraud. There hasn’t been a huge 

amount of disqualified voters at the polls or ballots that have 

been spoiled. I mean, we can go back for a number of years and 

we can look at the numbers. It’s all kept. There’s tracking on all 

of it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, well first we have the member from 

Cannington when he was in this House at 75-minute debate. He 

says, and I quote from Hansard, page 6771: 

 

This change, Mr. Speaker, was originated by SUMA with 

a request to the government that these changes be put in 

place for voter ID to become part of the requirements 

necessary to vote in municipal elections. We responded 

positively as a government to that request, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But when asked, SUMA, SUMA said no. Our only request was 

for the extended terms for municipal councillors to go from 

three years to four years, but any voter requirements for voter 

ID originated from the provincial government, or from 

somewhere else that they weren’t aware of. So, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s why the questions, that’s why the concerns. 

 

And I want to state again, Mr. Speaker, once you’ve laid out 

these requirements in the legislation, with details to be included 

in the regulations, it is the government’s prerogative to change 

at any time regulations, and the citizens of this province will 

not know about it until after it is law and in force. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are red flags up everywhere with this 

piece of legislation. There are contradictory statements that are 

being made by the people holding the pen and writing the 

legislation and those that are holding the bag and going to have 

to implement and follow this legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, 

when we look at the comments by the member from 

Cannington, when we look at the comments from the minister 

in estimates and in this House, and when we read the letters 

from SUMA, clearly, Mr. Speaker, this has been 



7618 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2011 

take-it-all-or-nothing dictate that has been given to SUMA and 

to the municipal partners. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I use the term partners lightly because I do 

not believe that they have actually been partners in this and that 

the minister is saying to them you take it all or nothing. And, 

Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation and the process that it has 

followed has left a terrible taste in the mouth of many, and I’m 

sure it will not be forgotten by many, Mr. Speaker. And with 

that I’ll end my comments. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

the motion by the Minister of Municipal Affairs that Bill No. 

162, The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 be 

now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — I so move this goes, this Bill be moved to 

Intergovernmental and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental and Justice. I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with much 

deliberation, I move that this House do now adjourn to go to 

committees. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

made a motion that this House do stand adjourned. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House now stands 

adjourned until 10 o’clock tomorrow morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:56.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7595 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7595 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7595 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7596 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7596 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7596 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7596 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7597 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7597 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7597 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7597 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7597 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7597 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7598 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7598 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7598 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7598 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7599 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7599 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7599 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Indian Gaming Authority Donates to Children’s Hospital 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7599 

 Compensation Coverage for Firefighters 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7599 

 Missing Children’s Month 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7600 

 Masters National Badminton Championships 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7600 

 Snowbirds Begin 2011 Season 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7600 

 Asthma Awareness Month 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7601 

 Member’s Reports 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7601 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Contract Negotiations with Health Care Workers 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7601 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7601 

 Policies Regarding Rent Controls 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7602 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7602 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7603 

 Consultation on Legislative Amendments 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7604 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7604 

 Care of Children 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7605 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7605 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7606 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7606 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7607 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 147 — The Public Interest Disclosure Act 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7606 

 



 

 Bill No. 167 — The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7607 

 Bill No. 159 — The University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7607 

 Bill No. 174 — The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2011 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7611 

 Bill No. 173 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2011 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7612 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 174 — The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7607 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7608 

 Bill No. 173 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2011 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7609 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7610 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ASSEMBLY 

 Bill No. 174 — The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2011 ........................................................................................ 7610 

 Bill No. 173 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2011 ............................................................................ 7611 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 162 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7612 

  Hickie (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................... 7618 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


