




















































Hansard: May 18, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 64A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 18, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7663 

 May 18, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

to introduce through you and to you to all members of 

legislature today, a group from the University of Regina taking 

a local government administration class, seated in your gallery. 

This class is studying local government authority, which is the 

first class of four required for certification to work as a local 

government administrator in our municipalities across this great 

province. Upon graduating from this course, these students will 

be well on their way to obtaining their local government 

administration certificate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members of this class have come from as far 

as Creighton to take part in a week-long session in learning 

about the democratic process of municipal governments, the 

role of the council members in creating policy at the local level, 

and the role of the administrator of the municipality to put into 

effect the policy of council. They’ve joined us today to observe 

the workings of our Assembly, the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these students represent the future of our 

municipal government system in Saskatchewan. Please join me 

in welcoming them to the Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

join with the minister and welcome the students here from the 

local government administration class. Mr. Speaker, we all 

know that this is very important. There are shortages just about 

everywhere you look, and it’s very good to see such a large 

group interested in seeking local government administration as 

a career choice. I want to say congratulations to them. 

 

I wish maybe you could have been here yesterday when we 

were in committee. We were looking at local government 

elections Act, which was an interesting process to go through 

with the department and bringing about some changes. But 

again, congratulations, and I want to join with the minister to 

welcome the students here and success in your chosen career 

path. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone, the Minister Responsible for Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of the honourable Assembly, 

I’d like to introduce four people that have helped us to launch a 

new scholarship initiative this morning. Dr. George Maslany, 

the vice-president, academic, from the University of Regina is 

here. Dr. Harley Dickinson, the vice-dean of social sciences 

from the University of Saskatchewan, as well as Shaheen Lotun 

who is a participant in the Saskatchewan legislature internship 

program, as well as Chris Stoicheff. Chris has just finished his 

term with the USSU [University of Saskatchewan Students’ 

Union]. 

 

There have been several others that participated this morning as 

well, but these four in particular I’d like to just say a special 

thanks and offer our sincere appreciation for their work on this 

initiative. And I’ll ask all members of the legislature to join me 

in welcoming these four individuals to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming Dr. Maslany, Dr. Dickinson, Ms. 

Lotun, and Mr. Stoicheff to the Assembly. They’re not 

strangers to the Assembly, and it’s always good when we have 

guests like this here to participate in important things. And so 

I’d join with the minister and ask all members to welcome them 

once again to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of the Assembly, it’s an honour 

to introduce a school group from the great city of Swift Current, 

Saskatchewan. L’École Oman Elementary School grade 5s 

have joined us today. There’s 48 of them, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 

looking forward to meeting with them after question period and 

answering all of their questions and refuting much of what they 

may have heard from the Minister of Health in his heckling just 

now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to also welcome a number of the teachers and the 

principal that have joined the students. We have Kevin Regier 

who is the principal at Oman there. He was, I think, the 

vice-principal when our kids went to that same school and I’m 

sure he’s bringing that same level of skill and ability to his 

relatively new role there. Also someone that taught out kids, 

Deb Linklater, who is a teacher there, and Marie-Anne 

Corrigal, a teacher at l’École Oman School. They’re 

accompanied by chaperones, well known in our community: 

Val Choo-Foo, Michelle Wall, Cecile Beadoin-Kwan which is 

. . . I’m looking forward to renewing acquaintances with Cecile. 

Deb Steinley, Luanne Cherpin, Deb Bisonette have also joined 

the class from Oman School. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members 

to join me in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

honour today and my great pleasure to introduce one person, a 

friend of mine, long-time friend Jaime Garcia who is going to 

be the next MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] for 

Regina Coronation Park. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Trew: — Yes. Yes. It’s a relief for me too, but you don’t 



7664 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2011 

need to be quite so effusive in your applause. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Jaime won a very hotly contested four-person 

nomination and I know continues to work diligently and very 

hard every day to make all of our dreams come true. He’s a real 

friend of working people and families, so I ask all hon. 

members to join me in welcoming my friend Jaime Garcia. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to welcome some representatives from Cystic Fibrosis 

Canada who are seated in the front row of the Speaker’s 

gallery, and perhaps they can stand when I call their names. 

Joining us today are representatives of the South Saskatchewan 

Cystic Fibrosis chapter: Ms. Mary Ann Rippert, Danielle 

McCallum, and Rita Steiner who is the regional director for 

Saskatchewan for Cystic Fibrosis Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, May is Cystic Fibrosis Awareness Month. Cystic 

fibrosis is the most common fatal genetic disease that affects 

Canadian children and young adults. The effects of cystic 

fibrosis are most devastating in the lungs, and ultimately most 

CF [cystic fibrosis] deaths are due to lung disease. Despite 

progress, there is no cure, and each week in Canada two 

children are diagnosed with cystic fibrosis and one person dies 

from the disease. Only half of all Canadians with cystic fibrosis 

are expected to live into their 40s and beyond. 

 

Cystic Fibrosis Canada is a national health charity with over 50 

volunteer chapters. The organization has their sights set 

squarely on finding a cure and to helping people and families 

affected by cystic fibrosis cope with their daily fight. 

 

It is a Canadian success story, Mr. Speaker — it is one of the 

few diseases where researchers have isolated the cause. Cystic 

Fibrosis Canada is a global leader in CF research, investing 

more dollars in lifesaving cystic fibrosis research and care than 

any other non-government agency in Canada. This research has 

far-reaching benefits to other diseases like chronic obstructive 

pulmonary disease, asthma, and HIV/AIDS [human 

immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune deficiency 

syndrome]. 

 

Research and clinical care funded by Cystic Fibrosis Canada 

continues to be among the best in the world. These advances 

help to improve care and quality of life for people with cystic 

fibrosis. They also present new opportunities for chronic lung 

disease, chronic disease management, and system cost 

containment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the month of May, Cystic Fibrosis Canada 

is organizing many activities and events to raise awareness and 

funds to support vital CF research and care. Cystic Fibrosis 

Canada is committed to finding a cure. Success is the only 

option for them. Individuals can learn about this devastating 

disease and its impact on individuals with CF and their families 

by visiting drowningontheinside.ca. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome these three representatives 

from the Saskatchewan Cystic Fibrosis chapter to the 

legislature today and commend them for the valuable work that 

they are doing. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, seated in the east gallery, I’m pleased to introduce 

a young man here today by the name of Maariu Costa, and I ask 

Maariu to give us a wave here today. Maariu is a grade 12 

student at Sheldon Williams Collegiate and is doing a 

work-study placement with myself. He is gaining, I hope, 

experience in both the legislature and the community as a 

politician. 

 

Maariu is thoughtful, inquisitive, and intelligent, Mr. Speaker. 

He’s also rooted in his own culture and I know that he partakes 

weekly in a sweat lodge ceremony, Mr. Speaker. I have truly 

enjoyed working with Maariu and I believe that he has a bright 

future before him. May I ask all members of this Assembly to 

join with me in welcoming Maariu Costa to his Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition that calls for the protection of tenants from 

unreasonable rent increases through rent controls. The 

petitioners point out that, in the past four years, too many 

Saskatchewan tenants have faced surging rent increases that are 

simply making living in Saskatchewan unaffordable. They 

point out that, since 2007, far too many tenants have suffered 

monthly rent increases of hundreds of dollars with average rent 

increases of over 35 per cent in Saskatoon and Regina, meaning 

many tenants in many cases are paying well over $3,000 more 

each year. 

 

They point out that the majority of Canadians now live in 

provinces with rent control guidelines, including Manitoba, 

British Columbia, Ontario, Quebec, and Prince Edward Island. 

And they point out that rent-controlled Winnipeg, among other 

things, generated more rental units than Regina and Saskatoon 

from 2007 and ’09. CMHC [Canada Mortgage and Housing 

Corporation] data showing that there were fewer than 300 rental 

unit starts in Saskatchewan’s two largest cities combined. 

During this same period, Winnipeg generated 1,500 new rental 

units. The petitioners pray as follows: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly of government take the 

following action: to cause the government to immediately 

enact rent control legislation that protects Saskatchewan 

tenants from unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

These petitions are signed by citizens from Saskatoon and 

Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty 

here in Saskatchewan. And we know that freedom from poverty 



May 18, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7665 

is an enshrined human right by the United Nations and that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security, and our 

income gap between the rich and the poor in Saskatchewan 

continues to grow, and now one in five children in 

Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. Citizens living in 

poverty have long identified affordable solutions such as the 

Saskatoon health disparities report and the Canada Without 

Poverty Dignity for All campaign all call for a comprehensive 

poverty elimination strategy. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the government to act as quickly as possible to 

develop an effective and sustainable poverty elimination 

strategy for the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I do so present. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to present a 

petition on behalf of my constituents who live in the 

neighbourhood of Hampton Village about the need for a new 

elementary school for their children: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes, including education property tax; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to 

neighbouring communities to attend schools that are 

typically already reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

residents of Hampton Village. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of a potash royalty review, because 

the citizens of Saskatchewan are the owners of a 1,000 year 

strategic resource and, as the owners of that resource, deserve 

to receive the maximum benefit of the resource. Additionally, 

Mr. Speaker, the CEO [chief executive officer] of the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan said that there’s a new norm 

going forward in the world markets for potash, and their $732 

million first quarter I think proves that out. The prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take 

the following action: cause the government to begin a 

comprehensive, transparent, and public review of 

Saskatchewan’s potash royalty system with a view to 

maximizing the return from this strategic resource for its 

owners, the people of Saskatchewan, who wish to use 

these additional potash royalty revenues for needed 

investments in health care, child care, education, 

affordable housing, infrastructure, and other social 

programs, as well as public initiatives such as debt 

repayment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by good folks from 

Regina, Rouleau, Maple Creek, Leader, Cudworth, Moose Jaw, 

Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Estevan, Cut Knife, Lloydminster, 

Mervin, North Battleford, Cochin, Liberty, Southey, Cupar, 

Churchbridge, Star City, Watson, Melfort, Nipawin, St. Louis, 

Hoey, Ituna, Melville, Duval, and Yorkton, Mr. Speaker. I so 

present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise yet 

again in the Assembly to present a petition regarding restoring 

funding equity to Regina Catholic schools. Regina Catholic 

schools received $275 less per pupil than Regina public 

schools, amounting to a funding inequity of $2.7 million in total 

for the 2009-2010 fiscal year. And that debt is growing, Mr. 

Speaker, because the problem has not yet been fixed. That 

funding inequity places program delivery and staffing levels at 

risk, and this affects Catholic school divisions all across the 

province, Mr. Speaker. The Government of Saskatchewan has 

denied Catholic school boards in the province representation on 

the government-appointed committee mandated to develop a 

long-term funding formula for Saskatchewan school boards. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the government to address the funding inequity 

between Regina Catholic schools and Regina public 

schools that provides $275 less per pupil funding for 

Regina Catholic school students, totalling $2.7 million, 

and make known that the continuation for another school 

year of funding inequity places program delivery and 

staffing levels at risk in Regina Catholic schools; and in 

so doing, immediately restore funding equity to ensure 

that every student in Saskatchewan, whether enrolled in a 

Catholic or public school, receives equitable resources to 

ensure every student in Saskatchewan has access to a 

quality education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by residents of Regina, 

Yorkton, Leader, La Ronge, Duval, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, 

Kindersley, Esterhazy, Sedley, and Swift Current. I so present. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 



7666 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2011 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again today to present petitions on behalf of concerned 

residents from across Saskatchewan as it relates to the 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to a record that includes the running of deficits and increasing 

of debt at times of record highs in revenues in this province, 

Mr. Speaker, three consecutive years of increasing the people’s 

public debt, well over $1.3 billion. They reference the fact that 

this province continues to utilize an accounting system that is 

inappropriate and out of line with the rest of Canada, 

highlighted again very specifically by the Provincial Auditor of 

Saskatchewan here today in Public Accounts, Mr. Speaker. And 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask 

Party government for its damaging financial 

mismanagement since taking office, a reckless fiscal 

record that is denying Saskatchewan people, 

organizations, municipalities, institutions, taxpayers, and 

businesses the responsible and trustworthy fiscal 

management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Leader, Moose Jaw, Regina, and Swift Current. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Fire Destroys Seed Plant 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the weekend, 

the Young Seeds plant in Mortlach was burnt to the ground in a 

devastating fire. The seed plant was a major contributor to the 

economy of Mortlach and the surrounding area and will be 

missed this growing season. 

 

Young Seeds employed 20 people and provided exemplary 

customer service to local producers and producers from all over 

southern Saskatchewan. Through hard work and determination, 

this local company grew into a dominant supplier of chickpeas. 

Their dedication to customer service allowed them to develop 

and cultivate a loyal and supportive grower base. Over the 

years, Young Seeds also became known for their ability to 

capture good value for their producers, earning their loyalty. 

Young Seeds was able to continually grow their capacity and 

were processing approximately 40 000 tonnes of large kabuli 

chickpeas annually. 

 

The owner/operators, Renee and Colin, thank the community 

for all their support. They also would like to thank their 

growers, the producer base which made Young Seeds a 

successful business. Renee and Colin want to apologize for any 

inconvenience their customers are experiencing, but with that 

steadfast Saskatchewan determination and dedication, they 

promise that Young Seeds will be up and running again as soon 

as possible. 

 

I’m sure all members wish them the best. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Beauval’s Musical Legacy 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I often refer to 

Beauval as the music capital of the Northwest, as this 

community of 1,000-plus people have produced many gifted 

musicians. Local bands such as Just the Boyz, New Horizons, 

and The Outlaws have dominated music venues throughout 

Saskatchewan and Canada for years and years. If you visit 

Beauval, you immediately notice that most everyone can play a 

variety of instruments, can sing and write their own songs. It’s 

an amazing community with talented people like Calvin 

McCallum on the fiddle, Derek Maurice singing the blues, or 

Mayor Fred Roy playing with his band. 

 

It’s an amazing thing to watch, Mr. Speaker, the amount of 

talent, and it all began with a friend of mine that taught and 

nurtured many young people the value of music, friendship, and 

entertainment. That friend is none other than Don Corrigal of 

Beauval. I often refer to him as the godfather of west side music 

as Don has inspired so many young people to take up the guitar, 

take up the fiddle, take up the drums, and sing away. 

 

Don Corrigal began his singing career in the early ’70s with a 

band called Northern Lighthouse. He played in thousands of 

dances, weddings, anniversaries, and concerts. And in fact he 

played at my wedding, as he’s helped many families celebrate 

through music. I want to thank him, his wife, Leda, along with 

their sons — Donny, Conrad, and Darwin who are all gifted as 

well — for all their dedication over the years and the miles 

travelled to promote music. 

 

I want all members of this Assembly to join me in thanking 

Don for his musical legacy and to tell him that his work will 

never be forgotten. His advice to the young people is to learn as 

much music as they can, and please start writing your own 

music, and don’t ever give up in trying to sing, dance, or play 

an instrument. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Blanche Weir Retirement Tea 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A retirement tea was 

held in Perdue Legion Hall on Thursday, April 21, 2011 to 

honour Blanche Weir who retired from the Perdue Housing 

Authority board after 34 dedicated years on the board. On hand 

for the occasion was Chuck Tyndal, the Saskatchewan Housing 

Authority representative, who spoke highly of Blanche’s many 

years of service and presented her with a beautiful hydrangea 

plant. My constituency assistant Ed Young, representing the 

Government of Saskatchewan, presented Blanche with a glass 

clock and thanked her for her many years of service. The 

mayor, Dave Miller, was also on hand to thank Blanche and 

offer congratulations on behalf of the town. 

 

A supper catered to by the United Church women was held 

following the tea for the current board members, spouses, 

Blanche’s family, and a few friends, thus bringing a wonderful 

celebration to an end. Our thanks to Blanche for her 34 

dedicated years on the Perdue Housing Authority board. Thank 

you. 



May 18, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7667 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Regina Catholic Schools Fitness-a-Thon 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday Mosaic Stadium was filled with athletes, only not the 

green and white kind we’re used to seeing. Over 2,100 students 

from many of Regina Catholic schools pushed, pulled, and 

pressed at the fourth annual Fitness-a-thon. The event was held 

from 12:45 p.m. to 2:45 on Taylor Field at Mosaic Stadium. 

The students participated in a 60-minute workout. The workout 

incorporated the physical education curriculum learned and 

practised on a daily basis by Regina Catholic Schools teachers. 

 

This event is a fundraiser for Regina KidSport, and many of the 

students participating in the Fitness-a-thon collected pledges 

from their community, family, and friends. Mr. Speaker, 

leading up to the event, the Regina Catholic Schools 

participated in various forms of fundraising such as collecting 

pledges, selling hot lunches, and donating the proceeds from a 

school dance. The event focused on physical fitness and raising 

some money for Regina KidSport, which received a $15,780 

cheque from Regina Catholic Schools. 

 

Mr. Speaker, KidSport is a Sask Sport initiative that removes 

financial barriers which may prevent youngsters from 

participating in community sports programs. In the end, some 

of the proceeds raised will go back into the very schools that 

were represented on Tuesday, enabling the students to derive 

additional benefits from their physical fitness and fundraising 

work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, we would like 

to extend our thanks and congratulations to the organizers, 

teachers, parents, and especially to all the students who 

participated. Health and fitness is perhaps the most tangible life 

skill we can teach our young people, and I believe we can all 

learn from the example set by our young students yesterday. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Southerland. 

 

Saskatchewan Aboriginal Literacy Awards 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday the 

Dakota Dunes hosted the Saskatchewan Aboriginal Literacy 

Awards. The Saskatchewan Aboriginal Literary Gala celebrates 

excellence in Aboriginal literacy by providing an opportunity 

for learners, elders, practitioners, and educators to come 

together. 

 

The objective of the Aboriginal Literacy Awards are to honour 

and recognize Aboriginal individual and organizational effort in 

the development, enhancement, and promotion of Aboriginal 

literacy in Saskatchewan; further promote Aboriginal literacy 

by acknowledging and celebrating achievements; and help 

fulfill the Saskatchewan Aboriginal Literary Network public 

awareness mandate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, awards were handed out in five separate 

categories. June Pederson of Saskatoon was presented with the 

Elder Award. Edward Mirasty’s success in academics earned 

him the Practitioner Award. One Arrow First Nation earned the 

best Organization Award for its commitment and success in 

education. Shayla Tootoosis won the Youth Award for 

demonstrating a dedication to high academic standards in 

volunteerism. Gail McAdam won the Learner Award for 

demonstrating perseverance and academic engagement in the 

face of personal challenges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the Dakota Dunes Casino 

and the Saskatchewan Aboriginal Literacy Network for 

providing this province with the opportunity to celebrate the 

successes of these individuals. This event was inspiring, and on 

behalf of this House, I would like to thank all of those involved 

for putting on a wonderful evening. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Young Philanthropist Wins Award 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, philanthropists come from all 

walks of life, and as we have learned over the past six months, 

apparently all ages as well. In December of last year, 

10-year-old Connor Kindred had raised about $13,000 to 

sponsor the charity WaterCan’s efforts to develop basic water 

and sanitation projects in two Ethiopian communities. Since 

that time, Connor has more than doubled that amount and his 

efforts have now resulted in approximately $31,000 going 

towards these projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, $10,000 of that money is from a donation by the 

Supreme Master Ching Hai International Association, which 

chose Connor to receive its Shining World Compassion Award. 

 

Connor, a Regina Wascana Plains constituent, became 

interested in helping Ethiopia because his parents are adopting a 

child from that country. His parents Tom and Patti travelled to 

Ethiopia earlier this year and are expecting to return soon to 

bring their new son, Daniel, home to Canada. Clearly when it 

comes to caring for others with love and compassion, the apple 

doesn’t fall too far from the tree in the Kindred family. 

 

The project will mean a secure water source, new facilities, and 

a hygiene education program for the school’s 1,300 students. 

The second project Connor’s fundraising will support is the 

creation of a well in a rural area. It will service not only the 

nearby school, but also the larger community around it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition I would like to 

congratulate Connor on the award he is about to receive, as well 

as thank him for all his incredible philanthropic work. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Housing Programs 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Monday, Prince 

Albert City Council voted in favour of applying to the 

province’s recently announced Saskatchewan advantage 

housing plan by creating two new incentive programs in that 

city. The two programs help both renters transitioning to 



7668 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2011 

homeowners and also provide incentives to developers to 

construct rental properties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a councillor in P.A. [Prince Albert] who also 

chairs the Prince Albert city’s housing advisory committee said, 

and I quote, “It was the right move for the province to introduce 

the program.” The councillor continues, “The province has for 

quite some time known that there is a housing crunch, not only 

in affordability but attainability,” he said. And to continue the 

quote, “We’re certainly seeing that here in the city so we’ve 

stepped up and opted into a program for anyone that’s 

interested in moving out of rental accommodations.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re very happy to see cities moving on issues 

regarding housing concerns. As a government, we are pleased 

that our programs are being trumpeted as a success at the 

municipal level. In particular, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the 

councillor who also chairs the city’s housing advisory 

committee, Ted Zurakowski. Mr. Zurakowski’s strong support 

for our government is very welcome but a bit surprising. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s surprising because Mr. Zurakowski is the 

nominated candidate for the New Democratic Party in Prince 

Albert Carlton. Mr. Speaker, I encourage all opposition 

members and candidates to follow Mr. Zurakowski’s lead and 

support our government’s plan to continue to move 

Saskatchewan forward. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Response to Rent Increases 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we have with 

us today a number of people who have come because they’re 

concerned about the ever-increasing rents in the province of 

Saskatchewan. A number of them are facing a difficult time 

even keeping the roof over their head and in some cases, even 

worse, facing economic eviction because they can’t afford the 

rent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in light of the fact that many families in this 

province are having a difficult time in making ends meet, and in 

light of the fact that rents are going up on average over 10 per 

cent in our communities in the province . . . In some cases we 

have found rent increases and notifications today going out up 

to 60 per cent, being notified that their rent is going up 60 per 

cent. It’s unacceptable. 

 

My question to the minister is this: when will this government 

come to their senses, put in a form of rent control or a cap on 

rent, and deal with the issue that even the Premier has admitted 

is unacceptable? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I would ask our guests, first 

of all remind you that you’re welcome in this Chamber, but just 

ask all guests not to enter into the debate in any form, whether 

clapping or any other form of entrance into the debate. Thank 

you very much. The Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

I want the members opposite to know that CMHC tracks rent 

increases, and in Regina and Saskatoon last year, average rent 

was 6.3 per cent and 4 per cent respectively. Mr. Speaker, that 

is a far cry from the 21 per cent that it was between April of ’07 

and April of 2008. I know, Mr. Speaker, that rents in some 

cases are still too high, but they have stabilized. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what we do have to do is make sure that we 

have more units, and that’s why what we’ve done in this budget 

and in the last year is to make sure that we have put a plan with 

$252 million that’s going to create 4,600 homes and rental units 

in this province, Mr. Speaker. One of the plans is the rental 

construction initiative, and that’s going to give us 2,900 rental 

units. Mr. Speaker, these plans are going to help. We know that 

there’s new homes, and what we do have to do is make sure 

that people that can buy an entry-level home will have an 

opportunity, and if they move out of a home, there’ll be rental 

units there. Mr. Speaker, there’s more work to do, but I assure 

you our government has put a lot of time and thought, and we’ll 

do more when it comes to the housing initiative. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, in light of the fact that the 

Minister of Justice had said, when asked about rent control, he 

indicated that he was interested in looking at a longer period of 

notification before rents were increased . . . In fact he said, and 

I quote, “We specifically then asked some tenants as to whether 

they thought it was beneficial, and the tenants said their 

preference would have been to have rent control.” So in light of 

the fact that the Minister of Justice has suggested that we have 

longer wait time before rents were increased, and the Premier is 

saying that it’s unacceptable, why has the minister chosen to do 

neither? We’re not going to extend the notice time and we’re 

not going to have rent control. 

 

Can the minister tell us what the people in the unit on Portnall 

Avenue, who have had a rent increase notice of 60 per cent up 

to 100 per cent . . . That notice still stands. What does the 

minister intend and expect these families will do in order to 

keep a roof over their head? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, early on in our mandate 

we appointed former MLA Ted Merriman and former Social 

Services minister, Bob Pringle . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — To conduct a review. The 

recommendation of that review was that we not impose rent 

controls, that the effect of rent controls would be a disincentive 

to having more rental product put on the market. Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve supported and we’ve accepted that recommendation. 

 

[Interjections] 



May 18, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7669 

The Speaker: — Order. The Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard 

suggestions that the period of rent notice could be increased 

further. Mr. Speaker, when you talk to tenants, they indicate 

that the six months, if they’re going to relocate, is adequate. 

Their preference is of course not to have a rent increase, and 

certainly we understand that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have worked with the owners of the apartment 

buildings in Portnall place. We have had the Office of 

Residential Tenancies meet with the tenants there. The tenants 

were, Mr. Speaker, improperly served with what was a 

four-month notice rather than a six-month notice. The 

Rentalsman is working with those people, and, Mr. Speaker, we 

believe they will come up with effective solutions so that those 

people can relocate. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly the point. 

People in the rental units are having a hard time keeping a roof 

over their head and are having to be forced out of their homes 

or facing eviction because they can’t afford the money to pay 

their rent. And this is unfortunate. And in a Saskatchewan that’s 

booming and has lots of money, a lot of money — the 

government has a lot of money; the potash corporations have a 

lot of money — why is it that working people, the people who 

do the heavy lifting, the seniors in this province are having to 

face economic eviction because this government will not lift a 

finger to help them? Why are you allowing that to happen? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I know the members 

opposite are well aware that before we put forward the housing 

plan, we actually were working on building units as well. We 

have 860 new units that are already built. We have another 

1,100 that are under way at the moment, 436 units for seniors 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. There’s half a dozen members that are 

making it difficult for even our guests to hear the minister’s 

response. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, there are an extra 436 units 

are available for seniors and an over 300 per cent increase in 

the number of student units that are available in Saskatoon, 

Moose Jaw, and Prince Albert. Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to 

remind the members opposite that we do have the rental 

housing supplement as well. 

 

And under the previous . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Minister of Social 

Services. 

 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the last year the members 

opposite were in government and they looked at the rental 

housing supplement, they spent about $6 million. I want the 

members to know that in 2009-2010 we spent $13,000,700; in 

2010-2011 we spent 22,000,500; and this year we intend to 

spend about $31 million to ensure that rents are available, that 

we can ensure that people can afford to live in a home. Mr. 

Speaker, there’s things that we can be doing, and what we’re 

doing is working with people like the member from Prince 

Albert who’s saying what we’re doing is the right thing to do: 

build more units. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the question to the minister 

is this: in light of the fact that CMHC’s own documents show 

that in the first quarter of this year, in Regina, 44 rental units 

were started . . . Now these are statistics from the federal 

government, and many people who are here in the gallery 

simply don’t believe that you’re doing a good job of getting 

rental units in place and keeping the rent under control. 

 

Now you may be able to convince the people sitting in the 

backbenches that everything’s okay and there’s no problem 

with rent in this province, but I can tell you the families are in a 

very difficult time and facing economic eviction. Can the 

minister tell us why we can’t today get a motion on the floor of 

the Assembly to implement rent control or a cap on rent that 

will protect Saskatchewan families before we leave the 

Assembly, so that these families have a roof over their head as 

we go forward in this province, and that everyone can share in 

the booming economy, not just the CEO of Boardwalk and not 

just the CEO of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I think the members 

opposite pick and choose what they want to actually hear in 

here. One of our members read a member statement from an 

NDP [New Democratic Party] candidate who’s on the housing 

committee in Prince Albert. He is a candidate, but what he is 

saying is our government is doing the right thing, that we’re 

putting money in to new programs to develop new units, Mr. 

Speaker. The councillor said it was the right, it was right for the 

province to move to introduce these programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the incentive that we put forward has only been on 

the website for about a week, and we’ve already had 

tremendous uptake. Mr. Speaker, there are cities right across 

the province — in fact to date we’ve had about 23 different 

localities across Saskatchewan — that are saying, I’d like to be 

in on some of this work. You know what we have? We know 

that there’s partnerships because people want to be involved in 

building their community. They want to build homes for the 

people right across Saskatchewan. 

 

The members opposite want to turn the clock back and go back 

to the days when the people left the province. It’s not 

happening. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 



7670 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2011 

Cost of Living 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 

people are facing ever-growing costs to provide day-to-day 

needs. Affordability is increasingly becoming a problem in our 

province. However here with our Crown corporations, we can 

take steps to help Saskatchewan workers and Saskatchewan 

people make ends meet. To the Minister of Crown Investments: 

will this government commit to ensuring that utility charges 

will be reviewed by the government with an eye towards their 

impact on the cost of living? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments Corporation. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our Crown 

corporations, Mr. Speaker, are involved on an ongoing basis to 

ensure that our costs are competitive with our neighbouring 

provinces, Mr. Speaker, with the provinces across the country. 

We do a review of what other provinces charge for all the 

services that our Crowns offer, Mr. Speaker, and we are very 

competitive. We are in the top three, top two, Mr. Speaker, in 

the country. In some communities of different sizes, Mr. 

Speaker, Manitoba has a lower bundle than we do, Mr. Speaker. 

In other communities, we are lower than Manitoba, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Overall, Mr. Speaker, our Crowns are committed to ensuring 

good services to the people of Saskatchewan at a price that is 

affordable with the mind, Mr. Speaker, of investing in the 

future of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s something 

that the members opposite when they were in government did 

not do. They rode, Mr. Speaker, for many years running down 

the infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, and not investing in the future. 

And that is something we will not do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With the global 

food market being affected by pressures brought on by extreme 

weather, growing global markets, and increasingly using land 

formerly used for food production directed to biofuel 

ingredients, we have seen in the world significant increases in 

food prices. And just last year, Statistics Canada reported food 

prices in Saskatchewan have increased by almost 4 per cent. 

And we know food bank use in Saskatchewan is on the rise. 

 

To the Minister of Social Services: what steps is this 

government taking to ensure Saskatchewan people on fixed 

incomes, especially those receiving social assistance, can afford 

to keep food on their table for their families in the face of these 

unprecedented rises in food costs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, making sure the people that 

are on the low end of income in this province is really 

important to our government. That’s why we started by taking 

114,000 people off the tax roll, Mr. Speaker. We also did things 

like doubling the low-income tax credit, and we nearly doubled 

the number of seniors who are eligible for benefits under the 

seniors’ income plan. They went from approximately 9,000 to 

17,000 people. Mr. Speaker, we’ve doubled the amount 

available to low-income seniors through the seniors’ income 

plan from $90 to $190 . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I have no idea why the 

members opposite don’t want to hear the answers to this 

because this is the kind of information that’s important to 

everybody in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we indexed the rental supplements and the shelter 

rates six times since we’ve become government. We’ve 

doubled the caregiver tax credit, Mr. Speaker. We’ve made sure 

that there’s an increase to income dependant tax and 

supplements to people with disabilities. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 

introduced low-income senior and children’s prescription drug 

plan. Mr. Speaker, we’ve increased funding to CBOs 

[community-based organization] by 14 per cent. Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve increased the amount of money paid to low-income 

families under SAP [Saskatchewan assistance plan] and we’ve 

increased the threshold for those who can qualify. 

 

Mr. Speaker, more things are moving along, but there is an 

opportunity in the province for what people want to come from, 

where they want to be, to make sure that we can ensure that 

everybody benefits from being in our province. Mr. Speaker, 

people that are on the low end of income are very important to 

our government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Gasoline is getting 

more and more expensive, and in fact even the federal 

Conservative government is now looking closely at fuel 

markets to try and understand these increasing fuel costs despite 

an overall drop in crude oil prices. Energy costs have increased 

more than 12 per cent nationally over the last year. Along with 

all the other increases, it is putting the squeeze on 

Saskatchewan families. 

 

To the Minister of Justice: what actions is this government 

proposing to alleviate this and other significant cost increases 

that are outpacing wages, creating a situation where the success 

of our province is felt by fewer and fewer people . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Consumer affairs. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you very much for the question. 

Mr. Speaker, I understand the federal government is carefully 

analyzing cost of fuel, cost of transportation. Mr. Speaker, we 

don’t serve as a regulatory function. We impose tax on gasoline 

and of course we watch this very closely and we have 

discussions on an ongoing basis with the officials in the 

Ministry of Justice and the consumer affairs branch. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it has never been the practice of this government, or 

the members opposite when they were in government, to 

impose caps on fuel prices. We watch. We raise the concerns 



May 18, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7671 

with our federal counterparts because this is largely a national 

issue, and it would be our intention to continue to monitor 

things in the same fashion so that people are not adversely 

affected as the economy plays its way through. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Contract Negotiations with Teachers 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, for Saskatchewan families, 

high-quality education is a top priority, and parents and 

students throughout our province value the work of teachers. 

But the Sask Party government continues to disrespect over 

12,000 Saskatchewan teachers. Those teachers want to 

negotiate a fair contract, but the Sask Party is too busy 

spreading misinformation. 

 

Just the other day, the Deputy Premier said that Saskatchewan 

teachers work less than Alberta teachers. Well the way the 

contracts are structured are different, Mr. Speaker, but it’s plain 

wrong to say Alberta teachers work more than Saskatchewan 

teachers. At a time when teachers are already feeling 

disrespected and undervalued by the Sask Party government, 

why is the government continuing this insulting campaign of 

misinformation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

what’s being disrespected in this province is the NDP disrespect 

for the collective bargaining process. Mr. Speaker, the 

trustee-government bargaining team invited the teachers back to 

the table. They have returned. They are having the negotiations 

at the table. That is the best place that it should be. We will 

allow the teachers to negotiate for themselves — not the NDP, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if only the minister took the time 

to actually speak to teachers like the thousands and thousands 

who came to the steps of the legislature, she would know the 

true story about how many hours teachers in this province 

work. If the minister’s rhetoric, if only the minister’s rhetoric in 

this Chamber matched reality. But actions speak much louder 

than words, Mr. Speaker, and their actions show clearly that 

they do not value or respect teachers. They’ve taken out 

negative ads and they’re spreading misinformation with the aim 

of turning the public against teachers. And they’re praising 

Alberta teachers but criticizing Saskatchewan teachers. 

 

To the minister: how can she possibly claim to be respecting 

teachers and bargaining in good faith when the Sask Party is so 

busy criticizing teachers and devaluing their important work? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, again I will say that the 

negotiations are happening as we speak at the bargaining table. 

That’s where they need to happen. We thank the teachers very 

much for returning to that table. The discussions will happen 

there, not with the NDP and their rhetoric. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

School Textbooks 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, as children in Saskatchewan 

schools crack open the province’s new grade 6, 7, and 8 science 

textbooks, there are various images of our province. There is 

pictures of the Snowbirds; there is pictures of Cree leaders; 

there is pictures of Saskatchewan landscapes. But, Mr. Speaker, 

if you flip another page, there is one more picture in the book. 

On the inside of the front cover, there is the smiling face of the 

member of Canora-Pelly. Now, Mr. Speaker, textbooks are for 

learning and shaping the minds of young children. They’re not 

for self-promotion and promoting current politicians, but that’s 

exactly what this government is doing. 

 

To the former minister of Education: why did he take 

Saskatchewan down a road it has never travelled or should 

never travel by politicizing elementary school textbooks? And, 

Mr. Speaker, what’s next — 8-foot posters of the Premier in 

school hallways? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we’re very 

pleased to hear that the former minister of Education was 

smiling for his picture. That’s good to hear. Mr. Speaker, it was 

put in not as a political figure, but as the minister of Education. 

That is the point of the picture, and I’m sure there’s probably a 

write-up that comes with that picture. So it is as the position of 

the minister of Education that that would have been included in 

that textbook. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, schoolchildren do not have a 

choice as to what textbooks they use. The textbooks are 

directed by curriculum and teachers have to use them. They do 

not need to see some partisan picture of a former minister, then 

the current minister, plastered all over these school books. And, 

Mr. Speaker, the former minister of Education has turned 

something that has always, always in the history of 

Saskatchewan, been non-partisan — the education of children, 

Mr. Speaker. He has gone down a road that this province should 

not have travelled. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we are looking at this being grade 6, 

grade 7, grade 8 that we know of, Mr. Speaker — who knows 

what else out there? — will the Premier commit to having these 

pictures removed and the non-partisan nature of education in 

this province restored by the start of next year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I know the member 

opposite has very energetically tried to portray this as a partisan 



7672 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2011 

picture. I believe it was put in as the minister of Education. A 

lot of schoolchildren, quite frankly, wouldn’t know what party 

that minister was even from. Especially years down the road, 

they’ll probably have to question which party this particular 

minister represented. 

 

But I do believe there has been situations in schools. I mean 

there was the Tommy Douglas film that was shown in different 

schools, Mr. Speaker. There was not an outcry from the 

Saskatchewan Party at that time, so I’m not sure why there’s 

such an outcry right now from the NDP members. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s explanation is 

lacking any type of credibility. For a current minister of 

Education to have his picture plastered all over textbooks — 

and I’m told they go into the high schools also — is 

unacceptable, to politicize education for children in this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now you know, I’m willing to give this a shot. 

Now maybe the minister’s right; maybe it’s not political. 

Maybe the Minister of Finance’s ego is just so big that he 

wanted to have it in every textbook across the province. Mr. 

Speaker, either way it is unacceptable to politicize education in 

this province, and the Premier needs to do something about it 

and remove the pictures. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I’m not going to commit to ripping 

pages out of textbooks. Sorry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, now the member says, 

well okay maybe I shouldn’t be getting upset; maybe this is all 

fine and dandy. But, Mr. Speaker, it speaks to a number of 

issues that this government has politicized. Children’s 

education takes it way too far. Or we can look at the intranet, 

internal Internet services to departments, which feature a link to 

the Premier’s speeches, about 200 of them on YouTube, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And this . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well, you know, yes, 

yes. Well you know what? You’re the Government of 

Saskatchewan, and you need to look at all of us in this 

province. It’s not just supporting people. Time after time all 

we’ve seen from this government is to supporting their friends, 

legislation from friends, and self-promotion. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the education piece is way too far, and this 

Premier needs to take steps to address it. Mr. Speaker, those are 

our children. Those are our grandchildren. And we expect the 

Government of Saskatchewan to provide a non-partisan, stable, 

quality education that Saskatchewan has always been known 

for. Will the Premier take steps to address this issue? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I will say this: if I’m 

going to look on YouTube — and I know the members on my 

side will probably laugh at the fact that I would even go to 

YouTube — I’d rather see a well-delivered, very good speech 

than to have someone attempting to do push-ups and lift 

weights. I can tell you which YouTube site I’m going to go to 

first, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know the members opposite have asked us to rip pages out of 

textbooks. They’re trying to imply that a message from the 

minister of Education is partisan although it does not state what 

government or a political party. It is a message from the 

minister of Education. I think that does come, no matter who 

the minister is, that is a position of respect that I think 

schoolchildren do understand. So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

not committing to ripping pages out of textbooks. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask members to come to 

order. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee of Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 162, The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill 

and that the Bill now be read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Municipal Affairs has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 162. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to . . . 

Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may move to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 162 — The Local Government Election 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — I move that this Bill now be now read the 

third time and passed until its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Municipal Affairs has moved 

that Bill No. 162, The Local Government Election Amendment 

Act, 2010 without amendment be now read the third time and 



May 18, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7673 

passed until its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answer to questions 1,067 and 1,068. 

 

The Speaker: — Answers are tabled to questions 1,067 and 

1,068. 

 

I recognize the member from Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Motion Respecting a Private Bill 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan respecting private Bills and 

petitions for private Bills shall be suspended pursuant to 

rule 108 and, as a matter of urgent and pressing necessity, 

to facilitate the introduction and consideration of a 

proposed amendment to An Act to incorporate The 

Congregation of the Sisters of St. Elizabeth of the Third 

Order Regular of St. Francis of Assisi; and further 

 

That consideration of the said Bill be taken into 

consideration without reference to the Standing 

Committee on Private Bills and that proceedings shall be 

otherwise conducted in accordance with the rules and 

proceedings for public Bills, notwithstanding that the Bill 

shall be committed to a Committee of the Whole after 

second reading and that it may be advanced through all 

stages in accordance with rule 72. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Northwest has 

moved that, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan respecting private Bills and 

petitions for private Bills shall be suspended pursuant to 

rule 108 as a matter of urgent and pressing necessity to 

facilitate the introduction and consideration of a proposed 

amendment to An Act to incorporate The Congregation of 

the Sisters of St. Elizabeth of the Third Order Regular of 

St. Francis of Assisi; and further 

That consideration of the said Bill be taken into 

consideration without reference to the Standing 

Committee on Private Bills and that proceedings shall be 

otherwise conducted in accordance with the rules and 

proceedings for public Bills, notwithstanding that the Bill 

shall be committed to a Committee of the Whole after 

second reading and that it may be advanced through all 

stages in accordance with rule 72. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 907 — The Congregation of the Sisters of St. 

Elizabeth of the Third Order Regular of St. Francis of Assisi 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to move first 

reading of Bill No. 907, The Congregation of the Sisters of St. 

Elizabeth of the Third Order Regular of St. Francis of Assisi 

Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Northwest has 

requested leave to move first reading of Bill 907, The 

Congregation of the Sisters of St. Elizabeth of the Third Order 

Regular of St. Francis of Assisi Amendment Act, 2011. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 907, The 

Congregation of the Sisters of St. Elizabeth of the Third Order 

Regular of St. Francis of Assisi Amendment Act, 2011 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 

Saskatoon Northwest that Bill No. 907, The Congregation of 

the Sisters of St. Elizabeth of the Third Order Regular of St. 

Francis of Assisi Amendment Act, 2011 be now read the first 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, immediately. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has requested leave that the Bill 

be now read a second time immediately. Is leave granted? 

 



7674 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2011 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

[14:30] 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 907 — The Congregation of the Sisters of St. 

Elizabeth of the Third Order Regular of St. Francis of Assisi 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of The Congregation of the Sisters of St. Elizabeth of 

the Third Order Regular of St. Francis of Assisi Amendment 

Act, 2011. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill will amend the private Act of 

incorporation for the sisters of St. Elizabeth in Humboldt to 

remove outdated and now offensive language regarding people 

with intellectual disabilities. We’ve contacted the superior 

general of this order who has readily agreed to this amendment 

and advised us that they do not currently conduct any services 

in this field, and further, that they certainly do not use this 

outdated language in their operations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have assured the order that this step in no way 

suggests that this Assembly or anyone else is suggesting 

inappropriate conduct by the order. It is simply that the 

language used by the legislative drafters to describe the 

mandate of the order in 1961 is no longer appropriate. This was 

readily understood by the superior general, and she understood 

that they were fine with an approach that simply deleted the 

reference rather than amending them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly of all places we must 

acknowledge that language is important and that it must on 

occasion change to avoid sending the wrong message or, worse, 

where it becomes hurtful. This is certainly our intention with 

this Bill, and we have directed that similar changes be made 

where necessary through immediate changes to the few 

remaining regulations that use this inappropriate language. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 907, The Congregation of the 

Sisters of St. Elizabeth of the Third Order Regular of St. 

Francis of Assisi Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Northwest has 

moved that Bill No. 907, The Congregation of the Sisters of St. 

Elizabeth of the Third Order Regular of St. Francis of Assisi 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

appreciate the opportunity to make a few brief remarks in 

support of this Bill. And I just wanted to say that this Bill goes 

a long way to addressing the issue of purging language and 

making sure our language in the legislature is no longer hurtful 

but in fact it respects people and recognizes people in the 

important role that we all play in our communities. And, I 

know, that people first will appreciate this and so will the 

Saskatchewan Association of Community Living. 

 

I was pleased to play a small role in this in terms of my Bill 

625, the respectful language Act, but I just want to say that this 

goes a long way. And I know that the R-word initiative right 

across North America, if we can move that along further and 

further, it’s a good day. 

 

And so this is a good day for all of us here in Saskatchewan. 

And I just want to appreciate all members of the legislature that 

we can show this willingness to come together and work 

together on it to make sure that our legislature is an inclusive 

place, a respectful place for everyone in Saskatchewan. Thank 

you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion moved by the member for Saskatoon Northwest that 

Bill No. 907, The Congregation of the Sisters of St. Elizabeth of 

the Third Order Regular of St. Francis of Assisi Amendment 

Act, 2011 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands committed to the Committee 

of the Whole. I recognize the member from . . . 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave for this said Bill to 

be considered in the Committee of the Whole immediately. 

 

The Speaker: — Member has requested leave that Bill No. 

907, The Congregation of the Sisters of St. Elizabeth of the 

Third Order Regular of the St. Francis of Assisi Amendment 

Act, 2011 be considered in the Committee of the Whole 

immediately. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Committee of the 

Whole. 

 

The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for the Assembly to 

go into the Committee of the Whole. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ASSEMBLY 

 

Bill No. 907 — The Congregation of the Sisters of St. 

Elizabeth of the Third Order Regular of St. Francis of Assisi 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Chair: — The item of business before the committee is 



May 18, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7675 

Bill No. 907, The Congregation of the Sisters of St. Elizabeth of 

the Third Order Regular of St. Francis of Assisi Amendment 

Act, 2011. Clause 1, short title, is clause 1 agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

[Clauses 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to.] 

 

The Chair: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice and 

consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, enacts as 

follows: Bill No. 907, The Congregation of the Sisters of St. 

Elizabeth of the Third Order Regular of St. Francis of Assisi 

Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

I recognize the member from Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker I move that the committee report 

the Bill without amendment. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved that the committee report Bill 

No. 907 without amendment. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Deputy Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 

House Leader that the committee rise, report progress, and ask 

for leave to sit again. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the committee 

to report that Bill No. 907, The Congregation of the Sisters of 

St. Elizabeth of the Third Order Regular of St. Francis of Assisi 

Amendment Act, 2011 without amendment and ask for leave to 

sit again. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a third time? I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 907 — The Congregation of the Sisters of St. 

Elizabeth of the Third Order Regular of St. Francis of Assisi 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read 

a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the member from 

Saskatoon Northwest that Bill No. 907, The Congregation of 

the Sisters of St. Elizabeth of the Third Order Regular of St. 

Francis of Assisi Amendment Act, 2011 be now read the third 

time passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I understand His Honour is here for Royal 

Assent. When shall the committee sit again? I recognize the 

Government Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — At the next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

[At 14:40 His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills.] 

 

His Honour: — Pray be seated. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly in its present session has passed several Bills which 

in the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour and to 

which Bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 

 

Clerk: — Your Honour, the Bills are as follows: 

 

Bill No. 153 - The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 

Bill No. 154 - The Provincial Court Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2010/Loi de 2010 portant 

modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 

Bill No. 165 - The Adult Guardianship and 

Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2011 

Bill No. 164 - The Police Amendment Act, 2011 

Bill No. 166 - The Renewable Diesel Act 

Bill No. 906 - The Bethany College Amendment Act, 2011 

Bill No. 149 - The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

Bill No. 150 - The Superannuation (Supplementary 

Provisions) Amendment Act, 2010 

Bill No. 170 - The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 

2011 

Bill No. 171 - The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2011 (No. 2) 

Bill No. 157 - The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 

2010 

Bill No. 144 - The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 

Bill No. 155 - The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 

Bill No. 169 - The Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission Amendment Act, 2011 

Bill No. 147 - The Public Interest Disclosure Act 

Bill No. 167 - The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2011 



7676 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2011 

Bill No. 159 - The University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010 

Bill No. 174 - The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 

2011 

Bill No. 173 - The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment 

Act, 2011 

Bill No. 168 - The Teachers Superannuation and Disability 

Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 

Bill No. 160 - The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 

Amendment Act, 2010 

Bill No. 172 - The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2011/Loi 

de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les 

victimes d’actes criminels 

Bill No. 161 - The Election Amendment Act, 2010 

Bill No. 162 - The Local Government Election Amendment 

Act, 2010 

Bill No. 907 - The Congregation of the Sisters of St. Elizabeth 

of the Third Order Regular of St. Francis of 

Assisi Amendment Act, 2011 

 

His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly has voted the supplies required to enable the 

government to defray the expenses of the public service. 

 

In the name of the Assembly, I present to Your Honour: 

 

Bill No. 175 - The Appropriation Act, 2011 (No. 1) 

 

to which Bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 

 

His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 

 

[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:45.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move the 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This Assembly stands adjourned until 

tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:46.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7663 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7663 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7663 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7663 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7663 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7663 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7664 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7664 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7664 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7664 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7665 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7665 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7665 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7666 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Fire Destroys Seed Plant 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7666 

 Beauval’s Musical Legacy 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7666 

 Blanche Weir Retirement Tea 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7666 

 Regina Catholic Schools Fitness-a-Thon 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7667 

 Saskatchewan Aboriginal Literacy Awards 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7667 

 Young Philanthropist Wins Award 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7667 

 Housing Programs 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7667 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Response to Rent Increases 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7668 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7668 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7668 

 Cost of Living 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7670 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7670 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7670 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7670 

 Contract Negotiations with Teachers 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7671 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7671 

 School Textbooks 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7671 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7671 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7672 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 162 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7672 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7673 

MOTIONS 

 Motion Respecting a Private Bill 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7673 

  



 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 907 — The Congregation of the Sisters of St. Elizabeth of the Third Order Regular 

 of St. Francis of Assisi Amendment Act, 2011 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7673 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 907 — The Congregation of the Sisters of St. Elizabeth of the Third Order Regular 

 of St. Francis of Assisi Amendment Act, 2011 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7674 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7674 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ASSEMBLY 

 Bill No. 907 — The Congregation of the Sisters of St. Elizabeth of the Third Order Regular 

 of St. Francis of Assisi Amendment Act, 2011 ........................................................................................................................... 7674 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 907 — The Congregation of the Sisters of St. Elizabeth of the Third Order Regular 

 of St. Francis of Assisi Amendment Act, 2011 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7675 

ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7675 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


