




















































Hansard: May 03, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 55A  TUESDAY, MAY 3, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7449 

 May 3, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn, the 

Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you, Mr. 

Speaker, and through you to the other members of the 

Assembly, I’m pleased to introduce five guests seated in your 

gallery. Today with us we have four students from the adult 

basic education class at the Southeast Regional College in 

Weyburn. The students’ names are: Falon Adams, Melanie 

Boyle, Carly Du, and Laura Love. 

 

As well they’re accompanied by their teacher, Anna Fish, who, 

Mr. Speaker, I think each year since I’ve been a member, Ms. 

Fish has brought a group of students to the legislature and has 

once again today. And I look forward to meeting with them 

after question period. And I’d ask all members to welcome 

them to their Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly, I would like to 

introduce a fine group of 39 students and three teachers in the 

west gallery from my old school, the Yorkton Regional High 

School in Yorkton. With the students today, it’s Mr. 

Ostapowich’s grade 10 history class. I’ve had the pleasure of 

meeting with a lot of them previously at the school, and I 

welcome them here today. 

 

It’s always nice to see Mr. Ostapowich. You know, formerly he 

was working in Melville and he always brought students to the 

Assembly. And it’s nice to see he carries on that tradition, 

bringing these Yorkton students to the Assembly. And I ask all 

members to welcome them along with Perry Ostapowich, the 

teacher, and Tom Schlamp and Janet Varga. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

the west gallery is my son, Brent Michelson. Brent, just give us 

a wave. Brent is a graduate of the University of Regina with 

two degrees. He’s part-time teaching now and just waiting on to 

get on to the full-time list, but he’s taken some time out of the 

schedule to be with us today to watch the proceedings. So I’d 

ask everybody to welcome him. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 

you, through you, and to all members of the Assembly, a 

number of ladies who have travelled here from a faraway land 

called Regina Beach. And we’re very glad that they were able 

to join us in the Chamber today, and I hope that they enjoy the 

proceedings. Thank you very much. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

petitions again on behalf of citizens who support maintaining 

quality health care services: 

 

The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth that the Government of 

Saskatchewan ought to recognize the need for timely 

access to comprehensive and quality health care services 

for all communities within the province, including Wakaw 

and surrounding areas, and that the disruption of 

emergency services and in-patient services at Wakaw 

Hospital will not serve the residents in this community 

and surrounding areas; and 

 

That the cuts in access to timely and accurate diagnostic 

and laboratory tests within the community of Wakaw and 

surrounding area will not serve the needs of the residents 

either. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintain quality health care 

services through the commitment of necessary funding to 

address critical retention and recruitment issues. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Swift Current, North Battleford, and 

Leader. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty 

here in Saskatchewan. And we know that freedom from poverty 

is an enshrined human right by the United Nations and that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security. And we 

know that citizens living in poverty have long identified 

affordable solutions. Recent national and provincial initiatives, 

including the Saskatoon health disparities report and the Canada 

Without Poverty, Dignity for All campaign, call for a 

comprehensive poverty elimination strategy. I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



7450 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2011 

I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of my constituents who live in 

Hampton Village who are expressing their concern about the 

need for an elementary school in the neighbourhood. The prayer 

reads, or the petition reads: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes, including education property tax; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to 

neighbouring communities to attend schools that are 

typically already reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

residents of Hampton Village. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of a potash royalty review because 

the residents of Saskatchewan are the owners of a 1,000-year 

strategic resource and deserve to receive the maximum benefit 

from that resource. Additionally, Mr. Speaker, a recent 

announcement was that the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan has income in the last quarter of $732 million 

and that this government has refused, absolutely refused to 

review the current potash royalty system. Mr. Speaker, the 

prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: cause the government to begin a 

comprehensive, transparent, and public review of 

Saskatchewan’s potash royalty system with a view to 

maximizing the return from this strategic resource for its 

owners, the people of Saskatchewan, who wish to use these 

additional potash royalty revenues for needed investments in 

health care, child care, education, affordable housing, 

infrastructure, and other social programs as well as public 

initiatives such as debt repayment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by good folks from 

Kamsack, Esterhazy, and Sturgis. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 

again my pleasure to rise today and present a petition regarding 

restoring funding equity to Regina Catholic schools. In Regina, 

Regina Catholic schools receive $275 less per pupil than Regina 

public schools for the last fiscal year, amounting to a funding 

inequity of $2.7 million. That funding inequity places program 

delivery and staffing levels at risk, which we are now seeing 

programs being cut for the fall return of the children coming to 

school, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan has denied Catholic school 

boards in the province representation on the 

government-appointed committee mandated to develop a 

long-term funding formula for Saskatchewan school boards. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to address the funding inequity between 

Regina Catholic schools and Regina public schools that 

provides $275 less per pupil funding for Regina Catholic 

school students, totalling $2.7 million, and make known 

that the continuation for another school year of funding 

inequity places program delivery and staffing levels at 

risk in Regina Catholic schools; and in so doing, 

immediately restore funding equity to ensure that every 

student in Saskatchewan, whether enrolled in a Catholic 

or public school, receives equitable resources to ensure 

every student in Saskatchewan has access to a quality 

education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the residents of 

Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again 

today to present a petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan 

concerned about the detrimental effect that Bill 160 would have 

on human rights law in the province, if enacted. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

withdraw Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public 

consultations informed by a public policy paper before 

any amendments to the Human Rights Code, the law that 

supersedes all others in our province, are even considered. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, the petitions are signed by residents of 

Regina, Rouleau, Regina Beach, Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, and 

Borden. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from 

across Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of our 



May 3, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7451 

finances by the Sask Party. They allude specifically to the 

billions of dollars of debt growth, consecutive years of debt 

growth under the Sask Party despite record highs in revenues, 

Mr. Speaker, this year alone increasing debt by $548 million, 

Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of La 

Ronge, Air Ronge, Estevan, and Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition in support of the government funding 

the 180 senior centres throughout this province that are 

currently struggling to remain open due to the rising costs of 

utilities, insurance, taxes, and other increasing costs. Mr. 

Speaker, the closure of these centres will lead to the 

deteriorating mental and physical health of seniors which unto 

itself is unacceptable, but it will also come at a price to our 

health care system by adding stress to our long-term health care 

beds and hospital beds. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the Government of Saskatchewan to provide the 

much-needed funding to assist seniors’ recreation centres 

to remain open and active within their communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by folks in Edam, 

Kindersley, Rosetown, Dysart, and Craik. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Paying Tribute to Seniors 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seniors contribute to 

society from a family, social, economic, and cultural standpoint. 

They contribute through work, volunteering, mentoring, and 

tutoring, allowing them to remain active and contribute to 

society. Many seniors live fulfilling, productive lives. They 

participate in activities that put to good use their abilities, their 

experience, and their knowledge for the benefit of each of us. 

These contributions give seniors a sense of worth and 

accomplishment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how we treat our seniors today is how each of us 

will be treated tomorrow. Such denial would be a foolhardy 

endeavour. Aging is a reality that we all face. Being indifferent 

to the contributions that seniors can continue to make to our 

society is a loss. Being unconcerned about the poor conditions 

in which seniors live is an abdication of moral responsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe it is important that we seek to 

appreciate the needs, the hopes, and fears of seniors in our 

society and respond to them. Their sacrifices helped create the 

relative social and economic comfort we now enjoy. Mr. 

Speaker, the official opposition is proud to pay tribute to the 

significant ways in which seniors are continuing to shape our 

society with their experience and knowledge, and recognize all 

they have given to our families, our communities, and our 

workplaces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in honouring those 

who have laid the solid foundation of our great province. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

The People are the Winners 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 41st 

federal election was described by some as the election nobody 

wanted. However, Mr. Speaker, last night’s results show that 

this was the election Canada needed. Last night we saw a major 

shift in the electoral makeup of this country. Some parties were 

defeated while others are enjoying new-found support. The 

biggest winner is Canada’s federal system, as national unity 

won the day. Unfortunately, not everyone can win in an 

election. Last night we saw two party leaders graciously accept 

their defeat. We also saw a changing of the guard of some party 

strongholds. 

 

As we look to the Middle East and North Africa, Canadians 

should be forever grateful for being able to participate in an 

electoral system that chooses ballots over guns and bombs. 

Furthermore, I want to thank all the candidates, staffers, and 

volunteers who made sure that this campaign was a respectful 

one. All parties ensured that the tone was respectful, that 

election day was civil, and that the results were honoured. In 

Saskatchewan, we saw all parties present a strong campaign 

with some seats being tightly contested and the final results 

being a vote for stability. 

 

Human civilization has come a long way to ensure the bloodless 

transfer of power. Mr. Speaker, Canadians truly enjoy the best 

system of government in the world, and the people of Canada 

are the ultimate winners. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Mental Health Week 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Canadian Mental 

Health Association is celebrating 60 years of improving 

people’s understanding of mental health through their annual 

Mental Health Week, May 1st to 7th of this year. 

 

Mental Health Week is an annual national event that takes place 

during the first week in May to encourage people from all walks 



7452 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2011 

of life to learn, talk, reflect, and engage with others on all issues 

relating to mental health. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year’s Mental Health Week theme is Mental 

Health For All. Mental Health Week 2011 will focus on key 

topics that will help the public have a broader understanding of 

mental health, including: kids have stress too, workplace mental 

health, resiliency, and mental health is everyone’s concern. 

 

Today we recognize that good mental health is not just the 

absence of mental illness. These new understandings of mental 

health are prompting a new kind of focus that identifies 

components of mental wellness and mental fitness, and explores 

ways to encourage them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one in five individuals will experience a mental 

health disorder during their lifetime. Mental illness is a pressing 

concern in every Saskatchewan community and we recognize 

the overwhelming effects mental illness has on individuals, 

families, and communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all need to increase our awareness of mental 

health issues. I hope we can all take the time to listen to or 

participate in information sessions during this special week. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Saskatoon Entrepreneur Honoured 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last month the 15th 

annual Chinese Canadian Entrepreneur Awards presented their 

top honour to Wally Mah of North Ridge Development 

Corporation of Saskatoon. Wally started his company in 1982 

with business partner Julius Calyniuk. On April 2, Wally was 

named Entrepreneur of the Year by the Canadian association of 

Chinese entrepreneurs in Markham, Ontario. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Wally’s company started out building a few 

houses a year and it steadily increased to more than 300 units in 

2010, generating annual revenue in excess of $80 million. 

Wally is dedicated to making sure his over 150 employees are 

kept informed of the company’s growth and its commitment to 

giving back to the community by contributing to several local 

and significant charities. He also includes his employees in 

profit-sharing opportunities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s exciting to note that 15 years have passed 

since ACCE [Association of Chinese Canadian Entrepreneurs] 

founded these prestigious awards to recognize both individuals 

and companies for their excellence in entrepreneurship in the 

Chinese Canadian business community. Wally reflects this 

excellence as he works tirelessly and makes an effort to visit 

each one of his work sites. He also values the input of his 

employees who have a great stake in the community with his 

profit-sharing program. Mr. Speaker, on behalf of this House, 

I’d like to congratulate Wally Mah for this award and his hard 

work over the years. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

North American Occupational Safety and Health Week 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, this week marks North 

American Occupational Safety and Health Week. This week 

provides an opportunity to not only heighten awareness for 

employers and employees but for all of us, the importance of 

safety on the job. Mr. Speaker, in 2009 the Workers’ 

Compensation Board reported that 34 people were killed in the 

workplace. Since then, workplace deaths have increased by 11 

to 45 in 2010. Mr. Speaker, this is simply too many deaths, and 

unacceptable. In addition, there were 38,773 injuries reported in 

2010. And these are only the reported injuries, not including, 

for example, our very important farming sector. 

 

Saskatchewan workers are tenacious and hard-working. 

Workplace deaths have increased, and it’s up to all of us to take 

some immediate action to prevent these tragedies. Mr. Speaker, 

with 45 Saskatchewan workers dead in a year, clearly 

government must play a role in regulating occupational health 

and safety standards. We must be progressive and not 

regressive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members in joining me in marking North 

American Occupational Safety and Health Week and call on the 

Sask Party government to confirm the commitment to creating a 

culture of workplace safety so that no one is killed or injured on 

the job. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, there was a 

celebration of Moose Jaw business excellence as the Moose Jaw 

and District Chamber of Commerce hosted the 10th annual 

Business Excellence Awards recently. This prestigious event 

attracts members, associates, family, and friends who came out 

to cheer for 30 nominated community businesses being 

recognized for their quality and distinction in 11 different 

categories. 

 

The event recognized several established businesses like W.J. 

Jones & Son Funeral Home for community involvement, 

Providence Place for business innovation, Parrish & 

Heimbecker for job creation, and Conexus for the Pioneer 

Award. 

 

There were also many newer businesses and business ventures, 

including Radiant Skin, selected as Young Entrepreneur; 

Crescent Park Chiropractic Centre for healthy workplace; the 

New Board Shop for customer service; and Double Shift 

Conditioning as New Business Venture. 

 

The Moose Jaw Warriors were selected as the marketing, in the 

marketing category and also as the Business of the Year. 

Congratulations to Harry Watson of Triple 4 Advertising for 

being named Business Leader of the Year. 

 

It was a gala event of achievement, success, and celebration, 

and a reflection of the entrepreneurial attitude throughout 

Saskatchewan. I ask this Assembly to join me in congratulating 

all the nominees and winners of the Moose Jaw Business 



May 3, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7453 

Excellence Awards. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

North Battleford Sarcan Receives Awards 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to congratulate the 

management and staff at the North Battleford Sarcan location 

who have recently been informed that they have won the SARC 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres] Customer 

Service and Cleanliness Awards for 2011 in the extra-large 

depot competitions. This means that the North Battleford 

location was in the same size category as, for example, 

Saskatoon, Regina, and Prince Albert locations. 

 

The North Battleford Sarcan depot last year handled more than 

11 million containers. It has 13 staff members and is supervised 

by Jim Ramsay. It operates under the authority of The 

Battlefords Trade and Education Centre and has been open 

since 1988 and in its present building since 2003. 

 

At least one of the current employees has been with Sarcan for 

more than 20 years; others have been there as many as 10 and 

15 years. According to Supervisor Ramsay, the staff are “very 

hard-working and enthusiastic, and try hard to please their 

customers.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me today in 

congratulating the good folks at the North Battleford Sarcan 

depot who today can say, we are number one in Saskatchewan 

when it comes to customer service and cleanliness. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Services for Seniors 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The majority of older 

adults live independently and want to continue to do so. Healthy 

living can delay and minimize the severity of chronic diseases 

and disabilities in later life, thus saving health care costs and 

reducing the need for long-term care. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan needs a broad provincial strategy that focuses on 

positive aging and promotes age-friendly policy initiatives. Mr. 

Speaker, to the minister: will he commit today to adopting this 

important type of seniors provincial strategy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to say on the outset to those seniors that are 

here plus seniors across the province, on behalf of our 

government, we want to thank them for all the great work that 

they’ve done within this province over decades, Mr. Speaker, to 

bring the province to where it is today that we can enjoy the 

luxuries that we have in this province, Mr. Speaker. Most of 

that or all of that can be attributable to many of the seniors that 

are here today as well as those across the province that aren’t 

here. 

 

As far as the delivery of health care, Mr. Speaker, and the 

delivery of health care specifically to seniors, we’re always 

looking at how we can improve our health care system to ensure 

that, be it seniors or youth, all people within the province 

receive the best possible care that this government can deliver, 

Mr. Speaker. I think we’re well on the way of doing that, but 

there’s always room for improvement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ve had the opportunity to meet with a number of seniors’ 

groups, and certainly there are specific issues that they’re 

lobbying for and asking for, Mr. Speaker. But when we look at 

the overall services delivered and some of those that are specific 

for seniors, Mr. Speaker, I think we have a pretty good program 

here in the province, one that can be improved on, Mr. Speaker, 

that we have been improving on each and every year, Mr. 

Speaker. But we’re pretty proud of the record that we’ve put in 

place in the first three and a half years of our government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. There’s hardly a 

mention of the word seniors on the government website, so 

that’s the type of attention they are paying to seniors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan continues to rank first in the 

country with respect to the percentage of population aged 65 or 

over at 15.4 per cent, well above the Canadian average of 13.7. 

And it’s predicted that the percentage of seniors aged 65 and 

older in Saskatchewan will rise to 25 per cent in just a few 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a single point of entry to government services for 

seniors would provide the necessary attention and funding 

needed to support seniors. It would also provide a coordinated 

and comprehensive framework of legislation, policy, and 

programs that would see the government able to address the 

needs of this growing population. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: 

will he commit today to establishing a seniors’ secretariat? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, certainly we are, as I 

said, looking at the programs that we deliver to seniors 

throughout the province, and we want to ensure that they know 

the programs that are available through health regions. The 

health regions deliver those programs, Mr. Speaker, but as I 

said from the outset in my first answer, we’re always looking to 

improve services for seniors. 

 

A single-point access is an idea that has been thrown around 

before. It’s one that we’re not opposed to, Mr. Speaker. We 

haven’t implemented it as yet, Mr. Speaker, but we’re not 

opposed to it. We’ll certainly look at that as we move forward 

and look at the pros and cons of such a model, Mr. Speaker. 

There are some provinces that do have that right now; there are 

many that don’t. I do know that this province has never had one 

under previous governments or under this government. It is 

certainly something that we can look at into the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister has a very short 



7454 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2011 

memory. Mr. Speaker, low-income seniors are in need of help. 

There’s a gap in subsidized services for low-income seniors 

with high care needs. Mr. Speaker, sometimes that maximum 

allowable home care does not meet seniors’ needs. Seniors who 

can afford it can supplement home care with private services. 

However seniors who need to top up home care to remain in 

their homes or who need to go into a personal care home cannot 

afford either option. 

 

Mr. Speaker, seniors who cannot afford services necessary for 

their health and safety should not be forced to live at risk. Can 

the minister commit today to providing a financial supplement 

for low-income seniors to access home care at our personal care 

homes? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there are many different 

levels of care delivery for seniors or mainly for seniors, Mr. 

Speaker — be it home care, be it long-term care, be it special 

care homes, Mr. Speaker — and it’s a continuum of care that 

we strive to make sure is in place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we talk about home care and particularly in the last three 

and a half years of our government, Mr. Speaker, I know we 

have, when you look at it compared to other provinces, we 

haven’t been as high as other provinces. But in the last three 

and a half years under this government, home care alone has 

increased by 34 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’re 

putting more into home care than has ever been put into home 

care before. In fact, Mr. Speaker, when we became government, 

there was about $110 million spent on home care. Mr. Speaker, 

in this year’s budget it’s $148 million. We’re moving on that 

issue, Mr. Speaker. More work to do certainly, but we’ve come 

a long ways from where we were just three and a half years ago. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, not only do seniors want to stay in 

their own homes, they want to stay in their own communities. 

But, Mr. Speaker, it’s becoming more and more difficult to do 

so with access to health services disappearing weekly from rural 

communities. Hospital closures in Wakaw, in Kamsack, in Big 

River, in Spiritwood, in Leader, in Redvers now, in Shellbrook; 

reduced ambulance and laboratory services in Coronach, in 

Cudworth, in Neilburg; as well as closures of long-term care 

beds in Wawota and Canora and Esterhazy and Muskeg Lake 

makes it nearly impossible for seniors to remain in their 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when will the minister stop closing hospitals and 

long-term care beds and cutting services and pay attention to 

the needs of rural seniors? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve worked diligently 

in the last three and a half years to ensure we have the proper 

complement of health care providers, be it nurses, be it 

physicians. We’ve increased the number of physicians in this 

province. We’ve increased the number of nurses. We’ve 

increased a number of different areas, health care professionals 

in the province, Mr. Speaker. And in communities that are 

struggling to recruit doctors, we will continue to recruit into 

those areas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But she stood on her feet, and she named a number of facilities. 

And I was trying to add them up as she named them, but I know 

it didn’t add up to 52 hospital closures under the NDP [New 

Democratic Party], Mr. Speaker. That’s what the NDP did. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, if you want to look about long-term care 

facilities in this province, in 16 years of NDP government, they 

closed 1,200 long-term care beds in Saskatchewan. That’s the 

record of the opposition, Mr. Speaker. We don’t ever want to go 

back to those days. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Changes to Canada Pension Plan 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, pensions are a major issue for 

the people of Saskatchewan. About 52 per cent of 

Saskatchewan workers don’t have a workplace pension, and 

that’s a concern since in the next 25 years the number of 

Saskatchewan people 65 and older is expected to climb by 78 

per cent. To improve the situations, groups such as the 

Canadian Labour Congress have pushed the provinces to 

expand the Canada Pension Plan, which will benefit all workers 

after they retire. 

 

The previous Finance minister indicated, as did other provinces, 

that he was on board with expanding the existing Canada 

Pension Plan. But now there’s a new Finance minister, and it’s 

not so clear. Will the Finance minister promise to put the future 

of Saskatchewan people first and commit to supporting changes 

to the Canada Pension Plan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I 

can report to the member opposite and to all the people in the 

province of Saskatchewan that at our most recent Finance 

ministers’ meeting back in December of 2010, we had three 

topics that were being discussed. The first one was the 

framework for pooled registered pension plans, the PRPPs, 

which we know in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we lead the 

nation because we’re the only province, Mr. Speaker, that has 

the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 

 

One of the other topics was financial literacy to make sure that 

people understand the need to start building for retirement. And, 

Mr. Speaker, the third one, it was a modest enhancement to the 

Canada Pension Plan. The Canada Pension Plan is a very 

important plan to many, and we have to look at the options that 

are going to be before us. And, Mr. Speaker, with the federal 

election out of the road as of yesterday, the next meeting of 

Finance ministers is to take place in June, at which point we’re 

going to probably have a number of options under 

considerations for what might be done to improve the Canada 

Pension Plan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



May 3, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7455 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, while several provincial 

Finance ministers had indicated interest in making these 

changes to bolster the CPP [Canada Pension Plan], Ottawa 

chose to step in with the new plan of supersized group RRSPs 

[registered retirement savings plan]. These group RRSPs are 

more expensive, mean lower benefits for workers, and are also 

much riskier. Douglas Peters, a Toronto Dominion Bank 

economist and former secretary of state of international 

financial institutions in the Chrétien cabinet said, and I quote, 

“Increased RRSP contributions will make the financial 

institutions better off while an increase in the CPP contributions 

will make Canadian pensioners better off.” 

 

Since bolstering the CPP will help Saskatchewan people and 

supporting Ottawa’s scheme will help bankers, will the minister 

now commit to supporting Saskatchewan people and improving 

the Canada Pension Plan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

there have been a number of valid concerns raised by everyone 

in terms of whether or not we should enhance the Canada 

Pension Plan and look at the effects of not only the 

contributions that an employee would have to put in but also the 

employer. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the other concerns of course is the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, 

back, as the member indicated, the former Finance minister 

initiated discussion with Ottawa to ensure that we could change 

the plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Pension Plan has been in 

operation for over two decades. It had a limit of $600. It’s a 

voluntary plan. It’s a voluntary contribution plan, Mr. Speaker, 

and what we wanted to do was to enhance that, Mr. Speaker. So 

the federal government has granted that enhancement, and in 

fact it was changed to $2,500 just at the end of 2010. And, Mr. 

Speaker, there have been numerous individuals that have taken 

advantage. And, Mr. Speaker, if there is a subsequent question, 

I’ll give the information to the member opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Just an answer, Mr. Speaker, would be 

enough. The idea of expanding the Canada Pension Plan does 

not just have the support of economists, the Canadian people 

want this as well. A recent Environics poll showed that 76 per 

cent of Canadians support increasing CPP benefits. 

 

Without changes to improve the pension plan now, many 

Canadians could find themselves spending their retirement not 

in freedom 55, not in a freedom 55 ad, Mr. Speaker, but in 

abject poverty. Obviously the government does not want to see 

even more seniors in poverty than that amount already there. So 

will the minister start working with his fellow finance ministers 

on expanding the pension plan, putting in the necessary money, 

and tell the Prime Minister we don’t want his RRSP scheme? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I think I 

made it pretty clear that as a province we want to work with our 

fellow finance ministers representing all of the provinces and 

the territories to build a retirement . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We do want 

to build a strong Canada Pension Plan as well as we’re going to 

look at the pooled registered pension plans. Mr. Speaker, the 

member opposite knows, I’m sure, that to make any changes to 

the Canada Pension Plan you require two-thirds of the majority 

of provinces, representing two-thirds of the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask the member who asked 

the . . . Order. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting how I have 

the fingers shook at me, Mr. Speaker, over from the benches 

opposite. The members opposite want me to indicate whether or 

not we’re prepared to work with other provinces to build a 

retirement plan that includes . . . Mr. Speaker, the Canada 

Pension Plan will change if two-thirds of the provinces, 

representing two . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member from Saskatoon 

Fairview has asked a question. I would ask the member to now 

allow the Minister of Finance to respond to the question. 

Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Two-thirds of the provinces, 

representing two-thirds of the population of the Dominion of 

Canada — if there is agreement by that group, then the changes 

that are projected will be in fact come into force, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re going to have options put on the table, Mr. Speaker, at 

our meeting in June, Mr. Speaker. That meeting will address all 

of the work that has been done since our meeting in December. 

There will be, I’m sure, many options, everything from 

increasing the maximum earnings, Mr. Speaker. There’s a 

whole host of options that we’re going to consider, and we’re 

going to look at what’s best for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Cost of Living for Seniors 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The ability for 

Saskatchewan seniors to afford the increases in the daily costs 

of living have been reduced severely. Increases in housing 

costs, utilities, food, and pharmaceuticals have put extreme 

pressures on seniors who live on fixed incomes. To the 

minister: where are the government plans to help these seniors 

meet their daily expenses? 



7456 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2011 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to the 

members opposite, and to the seniors that are with us today and 

the ones that are listening, we all know that the Saskatchewan 

advantage is because of the work that they’ve been doing. And 

we as government recognize that when we became government, 

and with some of the first work we did was increasing the 

seniors’ income benefits that hadn’t been touched since 1992. 

We more than doubled the amount of money that seniors on 

seniors’ income plan were getting, and we doubled the number 

of people who were getting those benefits as well, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s part of the work that we’ve been doing. 

 

We’ve also allowed 17,000 seniors to have more money for 

things like eye exams and chiropractor services and reducing 

prescription drug plans. Mr. Speaker, we know that the seniors 

are not only an important part of building of our province, but 

they’re an important part of growing our province into the 

future. And this is the work that we started, we’ll be continuing 

under this government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

pretty proud of our record for seniors, particularly the seniors’ 

health plan that helped 115,000 seniors. And she brings up the 

Saskatchewan Income Plan, which is ironic that she does that 

because over the last two years they have cut $4 million from 

that program — 4 million. And she laughs; she thinks that’s 

funny. Sixteen hundred seniors have been cut from that 

program, and there will be more this summer. This is not a 

laughing matter because they’ve made an awful lot out of it, 

and $4 million off the budget is a shameful, shameful record. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: too many seniors are having to 

choose between food and medication, electricity or rent. When 

will this government take the concerns of seniors seriously and 

help them in a meaningful way to make ends meet? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member 

opposite should know the answer to this question, but I’m going 

to remind him. The reason why there’s more people that are not 

on the seniors’ income plan is they don’t qualify any more. Do 

you know why? Because seniors in many cases have more 

money. The reason why they don’t, there is fewer people there 

is because they’re not qualifying. They have money in their 

pockets. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think the members opposite should realize 

that they did not . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would expect that the 

members asking the question would like to allow the members 

who have joined us to hear the answer. I recognize the Minister 

of Social Services. 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, if you want to talk about 

the NDP record with seniors, let’s talk about the fact that the 

number of seniors living in poverty under the NDP tripled in 

their last 10 years of government. The number of seniors living 

in poverty under the NDP went from 7,000 to 23,000 people in 

10 years. And you know what they did for the seniors of the 

province? They sent them a pin to tell them they were a senior. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Support for Seniors’ Housing 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we could talk about food 

banks, but I want to talk housing. Housing was one issue that 

puts particular pressure on our seniors. In Lloydminster the wait 

time for affordable housing for seniors is six months. In 

Saskatoon it’s nine months; 11 months in North Battleford; and 

17 months in Melville. This is from their own answers to 

written questions. Literally hundreds of seniors are struggling to 

meet the simple cost of keeping a roof over their heads. 

 

To the minister: out of the housing plans that were announced 

over the past two years, how many new units for Sask Housing 

will be built for seniors in the next year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the five-point plan for 

housing that we announced not too long ago in the House 

actually had $36 million that could work towards some of the 

senior housing. We have 436 new units for seniors that are 

under construction at this time right now, under construction or 

completed. We have single, low-income seniors in our province 

who have $1,200 per year more now in their pocket right now 

they can use for issues like housing. Mr. Speaker, we have 

spent $40 million as a government since November of 2007 for 

housing specifically identified for seniors. Mr. Speaker, there is 

more work to be done, and I assure you that the work we’re 

doing in housing really does include the seniors in our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Transition and Emergency Housing 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I find that answer 

ironic as well because when we ask questions and bring 

questions, she just refused to answer them. And that was on 

March 30th. 

 

But I do have a different kind of question I want to ask. Many 

of our seniors find themselves victimized, and while many 

jurisdictions have provided safe environments for seniors who 

are leaving abusive situations, Saskatchewan’s taken a back seat 

with no shelters for senior women, no emergency housing for 

people who are in need of additional care for health reasons, 

and no shelters whatsoever for senior men. To the minister: 

what steps has this government taken to ensure that 

Saskatchewan seniors who want to leave a situation where they 

are abused can do so without having to live on the street? 

 



May 3, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7457 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, no one wants to see 

anybody victimized — whether it’s a single person, whether it’s 

a single woman, whether it’s a child, whether it’s anybody else 

— no one wants to see somebody that’s a victim of not having 

adequate shelter. No one wants to . . . [inaudible] . . . victim of, 

being a victim of a crime or inadequate food or poverty or 

anything else, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Through the various ministries we will ensure that there is 

adequate housing and that there are adequate programs in place 

to ensure that people that need transition housing, whether it be 

a single woman, whether it be a person that’s in need. Through 

the Ministry of Social Services and Ministry of Justice we will 

ensure, Mr. Speaker, that those people do not fall through the 

cracks, that they have an adequate and appropriate plan put in 

place for them. And we’ll work through a variety of different 

agencies to ensure that that takes place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for Seniors’ Centres 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 

are approximately 180 seniors’ centres across the province, 

most of them in rural Saskatchewan, with a total membership of 

almost 8,000. The cost of keeping these centres open is 

escalating. Utility rates are increasing, not to mention that many 

of the facilities are older and in need of repairs, such as new 

furnaces, windows, or shingles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Seniors Association has in good 

faith continually met with the minister hoping he would see the 

benefits of providing core funding to these centres so they can 

remain open. To the minister: will he commit today to 

providing the much-needed funding to seniors’ centres across 

the province so they can remain open? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly know the 

issue around the senior centres across the province. And some 

are very, very active and supply great services. Some are 

struggling because of membership. I’ve met with the 

association on this issue a couple of times, Mr. Speaker. And I 

guess, you know, when you look at what we are responsible for 

through the Ministry of Health and the delivery of programs, 

Mr. Speaker, we put in $4.46 billion — the highest budget ever 

put towards health care in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We didn’t feel it was a responsibility of Health to then move on 

helping senior centres with their power bills and their energy 

bills, Mr. Speaker. We didn’t look at that as a core value that 

we need to work towards through the Ministry of Health, Mr. 

Speaker. I will say though that many of these facilities need to 

continue to look at their budgets and how they can make their 

operations viable within their membership that they have. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, healthy, vibrant seniors — it is 

a health issue. The Sask Party’s answer to keeping senior 

centres open is to have seniors do more work. They are told 

they should put on more fundraisers, do more bake sales, hold 

more raffles, or increase membership fees. Mr. Speaker, these 

are 80- and 90-year-old people, many of whom are on fixed 

incomes. They can’t do more work, and many of them can’t 

afford a higher membership fee. 

 

The minister is so out of touch with this issue that in January 

when the Saskatchewan Seniors Association met with him once 

again to ask for core funding for senior centres, he clearly 

hadn’t read the brief he’d been given because he thought they 

were asking for $1 million when they were asking for $360,000. 

To the minister: when he realized he was being asked for 

$360,000, he laughed and said he had never been asked for such 

a low amount of money. If it is such a small amount of money, 

is he going to give it to seniors to keep their centres open? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we thank the 

member for her question. Mr. Speaker, this government places a 

high priority on physical and social activity for the province’s 

valued senior citizens. A broad range of opportunities for 

seniors already exists in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and our 

Ministry of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport has the honour of 

supporting many of them. 

 

For example, through gaming proceeds allocated to the 

community vitality fund, Saskatchewan communities can access 

funding to improve facilities used by their seniors for recreation 

and social activities. In fact our government has just approved 

community vitality program funding for well over 100 projects 

all across Saskatchewan, and we have already begun work on 

making arrangements for a second intake of project 

applications. This government is very proud to help with the 

work of seniors to stay active, Mr. Speaker. We know how 

important it really is. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, senior centres are used for 

health education, workshops, foot care, blood pressure, and 

diabetes clinics. Most importantly they provide a place for 

seniors to go for companionship and fellowship. They 

contribute to keeping seniors healthier and more active and save 

the government money because they contribute to lessening the 

need for long-term care beds and hospital beds. The minister is 

being asked for $360,000 to cover 8,000 senior recreation 

centre members. In a year, it works out to 12 cents per member 

per day — 12 cents. To the minister: does he value 

Saskatchewan seniors enough to provide 12 cents per day per 

member to keep the 180 seniors’ recreation centres open and to 

keep seniors healthy and active? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 



7458 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2011 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, 

this government places as a key priority physical and social 

activity for the province’s senior citizens. I already mentioned 

gaming proceeds going to the community vitality program. I’ll 

never get through the whole list, Mr. Speaker. As I said, well in 

excess of 100 projects have already been approved. A whole 

new group of applications is now being reviewed. I’ll just keep 

going until you give me the windup signal, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Albertown Hall in Hafford will be improved. Balcarres 

arena plant room will be improved. There’s going to be a new 

furnace with air conditioning in Benson. There’s going to be a 

new on-ice furnace in the same facility. Replacement of furnace 

and water heater in Birch Hills. Reconstruction of the 

playground equipment in Stockholm. Installation of low-E 

[low-emissivity] foil ceiling and energy efficient lighting in the 

skating rink in Blaine Lake. I had the pleasure of going, Mr. 

Speaker. Community kitchen and cultural cooking programs in 

Melfort will be improved. 

 

The Speaker: — Members time has elapsed. Order. Order. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crowns and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

149, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill, and that 

the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 

to waive consideration in the Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 149, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 without 

amendment, that the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 149 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 

No. 149, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 without 

amendment be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Crown and Central 

Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee of Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

150, the superannuation amendment Act, 2010 without 

amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

150, The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) 

Amendment Act, 2010 without amendment and that the Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 150 — The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2010 
 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 

No. 150, The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) 

Amendment Act, 2010 without amendment be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



May 3, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7459 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Crown and Central 

Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

170, The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2011 

without amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

170, The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2011 

without amendment and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may move to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 170 — The Corporation Capital Tax 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 170, The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment 

Act, 2011 without amendment be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Crown and Central 

Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

171, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2011 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

171, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2011 (No. 2) without 

amendment and that the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 171 — The Income Tax 

Amendment Act, 2011 (No. 2) 
 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that the Bill be now read the third time and passed under 

its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 

No. 171, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2011 (No. 2) without 

amendment be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Crown and Central 

Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report that it has 



7460 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2011 

considered certain estimates and to present its 12th report. I 

move: 

 

That the 12th report of the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of Crown and 

Central Agencies: 

 

That the 12th report of the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, yesterday I made a 

commitment to come back to the House regarding a point of 

order by the Opposition House Leader. On Monday, May 2nd, 

2011, the Opposition House Leader raised a point of order 

regarding the ministerial statement made by the Minister of 

Energy and Resources. He did so very shortly after the minister 

began speaking. The Opposition House Leader indicated that 

the ministerial statement contained previously announced 

information dated March 7th and did not contain a new idea, 

program, or public policy, but rather something that had been in 

the newspaper for more than two months. 

 

The Deputy Government House Leader responded to the point 

of order by stating that the minister had no opportunity to 

provide information on the new announcement before the 

intervention. It became apparent that the Opposition House 

Leader based his point of order on the basis of the minister 

having provided an advance copy of the announcement to the 

opposition critic. 

 

In accordance with previous rulings of the Speaker, I advised 

the Assembly that the minister did not have the opportunity to 

make his ministerial statement as it is difficult to determine the 

appropriateness of a ministerial statement as it is being 

delivered. I committed to review the details of the specifics of 

the ministerial statement. I have done this and I’m now 

prepared to rule on the matter. 

 

The ministerial statement made by the Minister of Energy and 

Resources can be found beginning on page 7427 of Hansard. 

The minister outlined that the company, Paper Excellence, had 

been accelerating the restart program of the pulp mill in Prince 

Albert — new funding to train new mill workers, new pension 

plan agreements, and a new timeline for major forest activity. 

 

The Opposition House Leader is correct that the Prince Albert 

pulp mill reopening was previously announced in a news 

release and a ministerial statement on March 7, 2011. 

Reviewing the record, I find that the ministerial statement 

appears to announce new initiatives that Paper Excellence itself 

had undertaken. The Speaker could not determine what, if 

anything, in the statement might be a new government program 

or initiative. In future I would ask that ministerial statements 

clearly articulate new government initiatives, direction, policy, 

and . . . Order. Order. Order. Order. Policy and programs. 

 

This case once again highlights the confusion that exists over 

what constitutes a proper ministerial statement. This latest 

example highlights the need for members to clarify and define 

the proper content for ministerial statements through the 

Standing Committee on House Services. 

 

Order. Order. Order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — To ask leave to move a motion under rule 

59. 

 

The Speaker: — I would ask the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview to state the reasons for his . . . and read the motion 

under rule 59. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 

Expansion of Canada Pension Plan 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, since most Saskatchewan 

people have no workplace pension, many seniors live in 

poverty, and especially because of the fact we have a new 

majority federal government about to take office, we must deal 

with this situation. We need to immediately start working with 

other provinces to push for the expansion of the Canada 

Pension Plan, not on the Conservative government’s RRSP 

plan. 

 

Therefore my motion reads as follows: 

 

That this Assembly acknowledge that about 52 per cent of 

all workers in Saskatchewan do not have a workplace 

pension plan, and that between 2010 and 2036, the 

number of people 65 years and older will increase by 78 

per cent in Saskatchewan to 272,000; 

 

It also acknowledges providing a secure future for 

retirement is important for all Saskatchewan workers; 

 

It therefore endorses the gradually and fully funded 

expansion of the Canada Pension Plan a majority of the 

provinces agreed to at the federal-provincial Finance 

ministers meeting in June 2010 in Crowbush, Prince 

Edward Island; 

 

It also urges the Government of Saskatchewan to work 

towards consensus on the expansion of the CPP in the 

upcoming meeting of the provincial Finance ministers. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has not been granted. 

 

 



May 3, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7461 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answer to question 1,048. 

 

The Speaker: — 1,048 has been tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Committee of 

Finance. 

 

The Speaker: — Committee of Finance. I do now leave the 

Chair. 

 

[14:30] 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Executive Council 

Vote 10 

 

Subvote (EX01) 

 

The Chair: — Welcome to Committee of the Whole. The first 

item of business is the estimates for Executive Council, vote 10, 

found on page 65 of the Saskatchewan Estimate book. 

 

Before we begin, I would like to advise the Committee of 

Finance of the process. First I will invite the Premier to 

introduce his officials, followed by calling the estimate, then the 

Premier can make his opening remarks. Will the Premier now 

introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I’m honoured to do that, Mr. Chair. Thank 

you very much for the opportunity. And as I understand it, as 

you’ve just highlighted, we’ll have a chance for some 

introductory remarks after you’ve officially called for the 

estimates. 

 

So to make room for that, it’s an honour to be able to introduce 

my deputy minister, the deputy minister to Executive Council, 

Doug Moen; to my right is Reg Downs, senior adviser to 

Executive Council. To Doug’s left is Dylan Jones, the associate 

deputy minister of intergovernmental affairs, which is a file that 

I have responsibility for within the government organization, 

Mr. Chair. And just behind Dylan is Bonita Cairns who’s the 

executive director of corporate services in Executive Council. 

Also joining me, immediately behind me, James Saunders, 

associate deputy minister, cabinet planning, and beside him 

Graham Stewart from House business, research coordinator in 

Executive Council. I thank the officials in advance for the 

services they’ll provide to committee today. 

 

The Chair: — Executive Council, vote no. 10, subvote (EX01), 

central management and services. The Premier may now 

proceed with his opening remarks. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. We’ll keep these 

brief. At least I’ll endeavour to keep them brief so that we have 

a time for the debate and the discussion and the questions that 

the Leader of the Opposition and other opposition members 

may wish to put forward to myself. 

 

Mr. Chair, I will say this though by way of introduction. These 

are very interesting times in the province of Saskatchewan, not 

only because of the current economic state of Saskatchewan, a 

state that is one of leadership within the country; not only 

because of the relative fiscal health of the province of 

Saskatchewan, again a jurisdiction that is leading North 

America, I would argue, in terms of its fiscal health currently, 

Mr. Speaker; not only because of the prospects we have for the 

future for Saskatchewan. In a world that is desirous of both 

energy security and food security, here we are in the province of 

Saskatchewan with answers to both of those questions in 

prolific proportions. 

 

And so, Mr. Chair, there’s significant opportunity for the 

province to move forward economically, to continue its 

leadership position, and then to make the right decisions as to 

the dividends of that leadership. Mr. Chair, we believe that the 

dividends of this growth — the dividends of the resource 

income we have, of the economic prosperity of the province — 

must be reinvested in today to make sure that we’re making 

quality of life improvements every day, that we’re improving 

health care where we can, that we have social services as 

they’re needed, that we’re investing in education, that we’re 

keeping taxes low, that we pay off the general debt of the 

province so that we can find that virtuous circle where the 

province continues to grow because of that quality of life and 

fiscal health. That’s the first source for the dividends of growth 

and resource wealth that we would argue need to be deployed. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, and I hope we have the debate here 

today about the long-term future of this province. I know that 

there is some commonality in terms of the Opposition Leader 

and myself in the government side in terms of wanting to ensure 

that the resource wealth of the province has long-term dividends 

for future generations. I think we’ll probably hear perhaps the 

discussion today of the opposition idea of a sovereign wealth 

fund, the likes of which exists in Norway and other places 

around the world that really does pave the way for future 

generations in those jurisdictions. I think in principle we’ll find 

some agreement there, though we would argue we need to pay 

off the general debt of the province first before we get there. 

 

But notionally we believe the second deployment of the 

dividends of growth today must be in the economy tomorrow. It 

must be in the innovation agenda. It must be in the education of 

our children. It must be in the closing of the gap in educational 

outcomes between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginals in the 

province. These are the long-term initiatives of the government 

that I’m sure will be a source of debate and discussion. I hope 

they are. There’s different ways to get there, different royalty 

policies perhaps, different taxation policies. We have set our 

course, and the opposition have their own. 

 

And so for these reasons, this discussion today will be 

important because, Mr. Chair, of course in just a matter of 

months this will be a season of choosing in the province, where 

people will have to make a decision about all of these issues 



7462 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2011 

and vest their trust in a political party to form the government 

post November the 7th of this year. I think this debate that 

we’re about to have will very much be a preview of the coming 

debate in the months ahead and of the general election as we 

seek to answer these questions about what do we do with the 

opportunities that exist, both to improve life today and to ensure 

life is improved going forward for future generations. 

 

And then finally, Mr. Chair, this is an important time for us 

because yesterday the people of Canada chose a new national 

government. And it’s quite evident now that we’re going to 

have four years of election-free government at the national 

level. And it’s important now for this province to continue to 

assert its leadership position within Canada as the country has 

discussions about long-term funding for health care nationwide, 

maybe a discussion down the road about equalization. We don’t 

know if that might be coming. Fiscal federalism might be 

discussed in these next four years with this government. 

 

For all of these reasons, for the opportunities of today, for what 

we can build tomorrow in this province, for Saskatchewan’s 

position in Canada with a new federal government, for 

Saskatchewan’s opportunities in the world, this day and this 

debate is important. And we look forward to answering the 

questions that come forward from members opposite, including 

the Leader of the Opposition. And we thank you for the 

opportunity to make introductory remarks, Mr. Chair. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank 

you, Mr. Premier, for your opening comments. And I want to 

thank the staff too of the Premier who are here today to help 

with the estimates. And just want to say, before we start, that 

I’m not quite sure how many of my members will want to ask 

questions, but I appreciate the Premier offering up that he will 

answer questions not only from myself but from other members 

of the opposition as well, Mr. Chairman. So I just wanted to say 

thank you for that. 

 

I want to start my comments, and not totally on topic of the 

estimates, but to say congratulations to the Prime Minister and 

the victory yesterday. I think anyone who has been watching the 

advancement and the role of Prime Minister Harper over the 

last number of years, last night saw the culmination of some 

pretty interesting and good strategy planning on the part of the 

Prime Minister. 

 

And I think, while there is a worry in the country about giving a 

mandate, a strong mandate to the Prime Minister, there’s 

obviously positive things about having a stable government in 

Canada too. And whether that’s Liberal or Conservative or New 

Democrat in the future, obviously in the British parliamentary 

system while the minority government system does work, and 

we shouldn’t fear that, obviously a majority government in my 

mind works even better. So I want to congratulate the Prime 

Minister and the party, the Conservative Party on winning that 

majority. 

 

On the worrying side, many people are sincere when they say 

they worry about lack of pension initiatives that might come as 

a result of that, or changes to the Canadian Wheat Board that 

might be detrimental to farmers. And we’ll be asking a few 

questions of the Premier about that. But fair to say that within 

the system of parliamentary democracy the people are always 

right, and that’s certainly true last night. 

 

I want to also congratulate the Leader of the Liberal Party, not 

on his victory but on his work as Leader of the Opposition: Mr. 

Ignatieff, obviously a proud Canadian who worked very hard 

for the last couple of years. And all of us know what that’s like. 

We don’t always win. Sometimes you have to take a hit and 

obviously last night the Liberal Party and the leader, Mr. 

Ignatieff, took a fairly big hit. 

 

But for those who predict the end of the Liberal Party of 

Canada, I’m obviously not one of them, because they too are a 

very strong institution in this country. And with a solid base of 

seats — obviously not as many as they had planned on — but 

spread throughout the country, obviously the Liberal Party is a 

brand name and will be working hard to earn the respect of 

Canadians and do better in the election four years from now. 

 

Obviously Elizabeth May, the Leader of the Green Party, 

created history with her victory yesterday. And I must say her 

victory against a sitting cabinet minister is very impressive and 

not a small win, but I thought a very large vote; will add an 

interesting aspect to Canadian politics. And so I wanted to 

congratulate her as well. 

 

And of course to the Bloc — and I’m sure the Premier agrees 

with me on this — none of us are sad to see the separatist party 

in Canada reduced greatly. And I’m sure this is another thing 

we can agree on, is that having a separatist party sitting in the 

Parliament of Canada for those of us in Western Canada is a bit, 

seems a bit confusing that how do you have people sitting in the 

House of Commons — but again the public in Quebec has 

every right to elect who they want — but from my point of 

view, and I’m sure the Premier would agree with me, that 

having fewer separatists in the House of Commons is good for 

Canada. 

 

And I want to end my comments about the election by 

congratulating my good friend and colleague, Jack Layton, on 

doing what leaders of the CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation] and NDP have been trying to do for many, many 

decades. In my long history in politics, I can remember many 

federal elections where we dreamed about winning seats in 

Quebec, and winning even 10 seats in Quebec was a dream that 

we shared within the party. 

 

And last night, while torn by the fact that we didn’t win seats in 

Saskatchewan, but watching the results come in and getting 

over 100 seats for the New Democratic Party and forming for 

the first time the official opposition in Canada, it was a night 

that New Democrats have celebrated for the last 20 hours. And 

I just want to say that I wanted to extend to Jack Layton and his 

team a very, very special congratulations on doing just a 

tremendous job. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And also not only to winning 100 seats but record numbers of 

percentage of women that he had running for the New 

Democratic Party is something that we’re working hard on in 



May 3, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7463 

our caucus as well, but not doing as well as Mr. Layton. But I’d 

just say that I think all of us have to do a much better job of 

trying to get that gender balance to 50/50 to be successful. And 

my information is that the New Democratic Party federally had 

40 per cent women and that the election of a large number of 

women to the House of Commons will bode very well for, not 

only for the New Democratic Party, but for Canada as well. So I 

just wanted to say a very big congratulations to the New 

Democratic Party and to Jack Layton and his team. 

 

And also I find it interesting that Saskatchewan, with about 33 

per cent of the vote for the NDP Party, was second highest in 

Canada. Only Quebec had a higher percentage of New 

Democrats voting for them. Quebec had something a little over 

40, then Saskatchewan came in at about thirty-two and a half, as 

did BC [British Columbia] and Newfoundland. And then other 

provinces were down lower than that. But even though we got 

close to 33 per cent, we didn’t get any seats. And in large part, 

obviously we know it’s because we’re the only province that 

doesn’t have totally urban seats. And of course in Manitoba 

where the NDP won 25 per cent of the vote, they ended up with 

two seats because they have urban seats and rural seats. And if 

our constituencies were differently configured where we had 

seats totally urban in Saskatoon and Regina, we would have 

won three or four seats last night. 

 

And I think that’s important to remember because in the review 

that will come between now and the next federal election, those 

members who live in Saskatoon and Regina, who would be 

better represented in their minds by people who live in their 

community of Regina or Saskatoon, I think have to make the 

pitch to the commission looking at boundaries to make sure that 

in Saskatchewan we have people in Saskatoon who are 

represented by people who live in that community if in fact the 

vote represents that. 

 

So, Mr. Chair, I just wanted to say that I did want to 

congratulate those who were involved in the election, and not 

only the winners. But because, as the Premier will know, it’s 

not only those who won last night who offered themselves up 

and did a yeoman service for the people of Canada, but it’s also 

all of those people who put their name forward and lost in the 

election. Because doing the hard work and the months and 

months of running and winning, that’s a special position. But 

spending the months and the dollars and ending up not being 

victorious, that’s also important within the democratic system. 

And I just wanted to thank all of those as well. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the Premier started out by talking about the new 

economic situation in the province, and I couldn’t agree more 

that we are blessed with so much resource in this province. And 

whether it’s oil or gas, uranium or potash or grains that are 

being produced that are in huge demand around the world, this 

is a very special time for our province. And we are really living 

in what is known as a global village where the potash we 

produce is used in India and Brazil and used in China. And 

decisions are made in an instant. If there’s a frost in 

Saskatchewan, it affects the price of peas in India within hours. 

And it really is a very, very interesting position for our province 

because we are in a very, very unique position of being major 

producer of many of the commodities that are in great demand 

around the world. 

 

Where I think we would differ is on the issue of distribution of 

the wealth that comes from those resources and even on how 

they are collected or how much are collected. And if you look 

back the last few months, we’ve been putting forward the idea 

of a review for potash royalties because, as we have talked 

about, last year in 2010 the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan made $1.8 billion in gross revenue.  

 

And we believe that the percentage taken by the people of 

Saskatchewan directly, not refunded to the Potash Corporation, 

I’m sure that the Premier will try to explain that we charge 20 

per cent, but as he clearly knows most of that goes right back to 

the Potash Corporation until they pay for all of their new 

investment plus 20 per cent, that that deal is not in the best 

interest of the people of Saskatchewan. And with the rapid 

increase in the price of potash since the deal was originally 

signed for expansion of potash mines, we think a percentage of 

the windfall profit should be coming directly back to the people 

of Saskatchewan to build more daycares, to build better 

universities. 

 

I don’t need to talk about the roads in the province and all the 

new signs that talk about surface failures on our roads in this 

province. In the old days, a year ago, they were called potholes. 

And believe me, people in Shaunavon and that area still call 

them potholes. And the new signs that talk about surface 

failure, I mean it’s a good spin, but they’re still potholes. And 

people are worried about that and wondering why we don’t 

have enough money to fix the roads in this province. 

 

And that’s why we’re arguing for a better return from our 

potash, so that we can have lower tuition fees for students who 

want to go to university, who may be excluded because they 

don’t have enough money; better roads; better schools. And so 

it really is no disagreement with the Premier that we have a 

wonderful economy that is doing very well and has been, was 

doing very well, as he will admit I’m sure, before he became 

Premier, but there is a difference of opinion on how much 

royalty we should collect from the potash that we produce in 

this province. 

 

And also the whole issue of distribution of wealth in general 

because there are more and more people, as I knock on doors in 

my riding, as I did a little bit during the federal election in 

several other constituencies in the province, a feeling that if 

you’re in the wealthy group, the top 5 per cent in the province 

of Saskatchewan, that it’s an open ceiling to how much money 

you can take from the economy. If you’re a CEO [chief 

executive officer] in a health region, you can get 20 per cent or 

70 per cent and there’s no limit on how much that can be. Or if 

you’re the CEO of a private sector company, it’s no upper limit. 

You can literally get as much as you want. 

 

But the message from the government is if you’re a working 

person, you need to lower your expectations. And I hear that 

phrase creeping into the language of the Sask Party cabinet 

ministers, that working people have to lower their expectations. 

So you end up with a situation of a tale of two cities, where the 

working people are told, lower your expectations, but the 

wealthy are becoming fabulously wealthy. And I don’t say that 

because I’m hearing that from individual members of my 

caucus. That’s what I’m hearing from families as I go around 

the province, and I wasn’t hearing that two years ago. But 



7464 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2011 

believe me, I’m hearing a lot about the fact that working men 

and women, senior citizens, many people in our society, 

farmers who were flooded out last year can’t make ends meet. 

And so I think what we need to do is define a better system of 

sharing the massive wealth that we have in the province. 

 

So I think, with the Premier, I’d like to agree with him. I think it 

is a unique time in our history. We have more wealth here than 

ever before. But I’m not sure that the public agree that they are 

part of the great revenue that’s flowing into the province. 

 

And exactly when you come to the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan, we all know that 95 per cent of the people who 

are shareholders in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

don’t live in Saskatchewan. So when we talk about the fantastic 

returns on shares, most of that is flowing directly out of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So my question to the Premier is on the issue of the potash 

royalty, and I guess we can start with that, whether he has 

considered or reconsidered his position of not having any 

increase in royalties on potash for 16 years, which his minister 

and I believe he himself had commented on and made a 

commitment to the Potash Corporation? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — No. The answer is no, Mr. Chair, and the 

reasons are this. We support on this side of the House the 

changes that the Calvert administration made when Premier 

Calvert sat in this chair. And a number of members opposite 

actually sat in the cabinet of his government. They looked at the 

issue of potash royalties in the province. There was even at that 

point, some years ago, an indication that there would be an 

expansion of potash production in the world. 

 

The challenge that Saskatchewan faced, rightly noted by, now a 

mining executive, Eric Cline, I think, and also by the premier of 

the day, Premier Calvert, and I think shared — I would assume 

at that point anyway; maybe they’ve changed their mind — but 

shared by members of the cabinet. What they understood was 

the truth of the matter on potash taxes which is this: when you 

look at all of the potash tax structure we have, and there 

certainly is a trigger with respect to the profit component of the 

potash tax, but when you look at the overall potash tax regime 

we have in the province today, Mr. Calvert looked at it and 

realized, as is the case today, that ours is the highest potash 

taxes in the world. In fact the next highest regime in terms of 

potash taxes is the Kingdom of Jordan. And we are two times as 

high as them in terms of our taxation rate in potash. 

 

So I haven’t talked to Mr. Calvert about this but I assume, 

based on his public comment and also on our own review of the 

situation — because we actually did conduct a potash tax 

review early on in our term that sought to make sure that we 

have a level playing field for greenfield new mines and 

brownfield expansion mines — what Mr. Calvert would have 

noted, his government would have noted that if we were to 

attract some of that expansion in the province . . . Because yes, 

we have 47 or 53 per cent of the world’s potash, but 47 per cent 

of it is elsewhere in jurisdictions that tax potash at least at half 

as high a rate as we do. So I’m sure the Calvert administration 

decided then that if we were to attract new investment, to see 

the expansion of mines in this province and new mines in this 

province, we had to get more competitive with places like 

Jordan or New Brunswick or Russia or pick your country 

around the world where the other half of the potash is. 

 

So when Mr. Calvert’s administration, members opposite 

looked at this, they decided on a temporary incentive, building 

in a temporary incentive so we can deal with the fact that our 

taxes are much higher than anywhere else and attract 

investment in those companies from around the world, attract 

their attention away from Jordan, away from other jurisdictions 

where half the potash is, to our province. They developed what 

is, I’m oversimplifying it obviously, Mr. Chair, but they 

developed a temporary incentive. 

 

And when asked about it in August, on August 5, 2003, the 

Leader-Post reports that Mr. Calvert said, and I quote, about his 

NDP government’s changes, the same changes that the NDP 

wish to overturn today, Premier Calvert at the time said: 

 

I think it is more significant to have opportunities for our 

young people to go to work in the province first of all 

than to secure revenues for the General Revenue Fund of 

the province. Moreover, having people go to work will 

guarantee the latter. 

 

The Commonwealth, the NDP publication, quoted back to 1998 

actually, former minister Lautermilch on a similar, some similar 

logic here when he said, the lower royalties . . . He would have 

been talking about oil royalties at the time, but the principle 

remains true. Lower royalties will encourage increased activity 

with more capital expenditures, more drilling — because he 

was talking about oil — and increased activity. Close the quote. 

 

So did it work, Mr. Chair? Did the NDP potash tax changes to 

try to make this province more competitive, to try to attract 

expansion of the mines in this province rather than elsewhere, 

did it work? Well, Mr. Chair, the answer is yes, it worked. 

That’s why the Saskatchewan Party supported those changes at 

the time. That’s why we believe we need to continue to be 

consistent in this. 

 

The NDP government made these tax changes, these temporary 

incentives, and what did the potash companies do in good faith? 

They reacted to those changes. They said, we will invest in 

Saskatchewan — $12 billion of investment expansion under 

way in the province of Saskatchewan and potentially the first 

new greenfield mine by the largest mining company in the 

world, by BHP Billiton, at Jansen Lake. 

 

So, Mr. Chair, Mr. Calvert’s logic was this, and the NDP’s 

logic . . . The current member for Saskatoon Eastview, the 

current member for Regina Lakeview, the current member for 

Saskatoon Fairview, the current Deputy Leader of the 

Opposition, the current member for Saskatoon Fairview — I 

said Fairview already — the current member for Regina 

Dewdney, the current member for Meewasin, the current 

member for North Battleford, the current member for 

Elphinstone, they were in a cabinet. They made the decisions. 

And I want to tell them today, they made the right decision to 

change the taxes, supported by the Saskatchewan Party, because 

those changes attracted $12 billion in investment and put people 

to work in this province and have created the very economic 



May 3, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7465 

advantage that the opposition leader has acknowledged exists in 

the province today, that puts us in a unique position. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Now, Mr. Chair, here’s the truth of the NDP tax changes they 

made, ones that we support. These temporary incentives will 

eventually all be earned as these jobs are created. As these 

billions of dollars in mining expansion happens in this province, 

these tax incentives — they are temporary — they will be 

earned. And then we’ll see a return to the — again to 

oversimplify the matter — to full taxation at rates that are two 

times higher than the next jurisdiction in the world that has 

potash, that’s Jordan. 

 

Mr. Chairman, these tax policies have helped create the 

Saskatchewan advantage. So it is our view that since companies 

acted in good faith to all those members opposite and to the 

Saskatchewan Party, who in opposition supported them, we 

ought to act in good faith. We ought not to, in the middle of 

these expansions say, we know we set the rules under the NDP, 

approved under the subsequent Saskatchewan Party 

government. We know we set these rules. We knew you have 

committed billions of dollars of investment as a result of the 

rules that we’ve set, and you’re making those investments in 

our province. But you know what? We’re going to change the 

rules right in midstream. We’re going to change the rules in 

fact, Mr. Chairman, and not just have a royalty review. 

 

Because that is not what the Opposition Leader says outside of 

this Assembly. For example what he says in Melville at an NDP 

meeting there, and I’m going to quote here, “If the NDP forms 

government . . . ” this is April 13, 2011: 

 

If the NDP forms government, promises Lingenfelter, a 

major priority will be implementing a royalty structure 

that could see potash companies returning up to 50 per 

cent of their profits to the treasury. 

 

He says: 

 

You could take up to 80 per cent of the profits and they 

still wouldn’t go anywhere because the profits they make 

are so extreme.” 

 

Mr. Chairman, let’s be clear, the NDP are not talking about a 

review. They’re talking about a tax hike. They’re talking about 

a job-killing tax hike that breaks faith with companies that are 

creating jobs for Saskatchewan families, and one other 

company, BHP Billiton, that’s very interested in helping to 

build the Yorkton area of the province. 

 

I want to be able to say to all of those companies, even though 

they’re vilified by the NDP because every now and then when 

the cycle’s right they make money, I want to be able to say to 

the PotashCorp that the deal you struck with the NDP, we 

honour that deal. You should honour your part and create those 

jobs, and they are. I want to say to Mosaic, you need to honour 

your part of the deal to create the jobs these tax incentives 

brought in by the NDP have incentivized. I want to be able to 

ask them to do that, Mr. Speaker. They are, or Mr. Chair, they 

are doing that. The same is true for Agrium, and I hope one day 

the same will be true for BHP Billiton. 

If that party gets into power and they decide on an 80 per cent 

tax increase, what happens to the $6 billion of expansion or so 

that’s not yet complete in the industry? Do you think they might 

look at the other jurisdictions in the world where the other half 

of the potash exists? I think they might. Do you think BHP 

Billiton is going to come into this province and build maybe the 

largest mine in the world and create thousands of jobs indirectly 

and hundreds of job directly in what will be that largest mine? 

Do you think they’re going to do that if a new government 

comes in and says we’re changing the rules in mid course and 

we’re hiking your taxes 80 per cent? I don’t think so, Mr. Chair. 

And I don’t think we want to risk the Saskatchewan advantage 

with that very, very reckless and dangerous policy. And I use 

those words advisedly. 

 

I also want to put on the record, Mr. Chair, this very important 

fact. The New Democratic leader is not just advocating a 

royalty review for potash, he’s already highlighted a 50 per cent 

tax hike or an 80 per cent tax hike. He has also advocated for a 

review of royalties of oil. We saw what that did in Alberta, Mr. 

Chair. In fact his former company, Nexen — and maybe he was 

part of the presentation as he did government relations for 

Nexen — his former company’s presentation to the Alberta 

government when they considered and then implemented a 

royalty review and then changes, was don’t do these changes 

because our company will probably stop investing like we are, 

and the oil companies will stop creating jobs in Alberta. 

 

That was his advice to the Alberta government: don’t do this 

royalty review; don’t change royalties in mid-course. And now 

he’s saying, Mr. Chair, on December 14th on CKRM radio 

news of 2010, December 14th, 2010: 

 

If I become the premier in November of 2011, I would 

institute a review of all royalties in the province with the 

industry, whether it is potash, uranium, oil or gas because I 

think it’s the responsibility of the government to maximize 

return for the shareholders. 

 

Very interesting, Mr. Chair, because I think that member was 

right when he advised the Alberta government not, not to mess 

with their oil royalties. What happened when they did mess 

with the royalties of course was to the great benefit of the 

province of Saskatchewan when those companies came to this 

jurisdiction. Why? Because our royalty rates were stable. We 

didn’t have to cut them. We just had to maintain some stability. 

 

And until these temporary incentives are earned in a potash 

royalty structure, let’s stay the course. Let’s keep our end of the 

bargain and in that bargain create thousands of jobs for 

Saskatchewan people and see the largest potash mine in the 

world built. We’ll be happy to campaign . . . This is a good 

debate to have, Mr. Chair. We welcome the debate. I thank the 

member for raising this. I look forward to having the debate in 

the upcoming general election campaign as well. 

 

I want to say one other thing that’s particularly alarming about 

the NDP position as it’s taken shape on royalties. Because also 

in that Melville Advance article, April 13, 2011, and I’m 

quoting now, the newspaper says, based on their attendance at 

the NDP meeting, and I’m quoting. The article reports: 

 

“If potash companies objected to the point of shutting 



7466 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2011 

down operations [objecting to the tax hike, objected to the 

point of shutting down operations] and leaving the 

province, that wouldn’t be a problem because 

Saskatchewan has mined potash before,” Lingenfelter 

says. 

 

Nationalization by taxation. Jack their taxes up 50 per cent, 

maybe 80 per cent and if they don’t like it and if they leave, 

says the Leader of the Opposition, it’s okay because we’ve 

mined potash before and we’ll do it again. What he means there 

is, we’ll nationalize the industry again. We’ll have another 

government-owned Crown corporation, and we know the track 

record of that Crown corporation. It was not good, Mr. Chair. 

He doesn’t get into the fact about whether or not the companies 

will be compensated or not, just that if they’re going to leave 

the province, the government’s going to step in and nationalize 

the industry. 

 

Unbelievable, Mr. Chair. Now when this province has all of the 

opportunity in the world to continue to lead the country, we 

need to send out signals that we have put away the 1970s 

permanently, that we will not ever nationalize industries in this 

province again, not through high taxation, not through any other 

means. And so we welcome the debate that we’ve joined here, 

not just today, but in days earlier. 

 

We welcome the frankness and the transparency of the Leader 

of the Opposition’s position. His position is very clear. Review 

the royalties on oil and gas and uranium and potash, and then 

increase the taxes on potash 50 to 80 per cent. If the companies 

leave or shut down their industries because they can’t make 

money here and they’d rather be in other country where the 

taxes are lower, well the government will just take it over. 

 

Mr. Chairman, that is obviously a recipe for economic disaster 

for this province. And we’re going to work very, very hard, 

very hard in the months ahead to make sure that it never comes 

to reality in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to say to the 

Premier that when the deal was struck between the potash 

corporations and the then Premier Calvert, the price of potash 

was slightly under $200 a tonne. And when I look at the finance 

documents of that day, the projection for potash was a decline 

for the next number of years. The issue is that the price of 

potash didn’t decrease. It has now gone up fabulously. And if 

the information I have here . . . There was a press release that I 

was just reading, that in fact the price of potash today — it’s a 

press release from Canpotex — is not at the price that Calvert 

signed the deal at, at $180, but Canpotex Ltd. today said it has 

concluded new sales for potash at $520 for shipment in May 

and June in 2011. 

 

Now the question isn’t whether or not the potash companies 

should be given a refund at the price that was agreed to of $180 

a tonne. And I think there’s common ground here. I think 

there’s common ground where we can agree that the deal that 

was signed at $180 a tonne stands because that’s the deal that 

was agreed to based on the numbers that people had at that 

time. 

 

But what the public don’t understand is why the windfall profit 

between $200 and 525, $300 a tonne, should all go to the 

foreign shareholders of the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan. The public says, yes, keep the deal that the 

government signed when the potash expansion was agreed to of 

$200 a tonne. That’s what they expected to get. In fact they 

expected to get less than that because the Finance department 

was projecting potash to drop off a little bit from the $200, but 

instead it’s more than doubled. 

 

And why is it that the people of Saskatchewan should give all 

of that profit, the windfall profit, to foreign shareholders? 

That’s the question the public’s asking me. And the Premier can 

give that speech to them, that he doesn’t want to take any more 

money because the foreign shareholders deserve all of the 

upside. But the people say back . . . And I’ve tested your theory 

with some of the public. I say, the Premier says that the $200 a 

tonne that the deal was signed at, all the windfall profits are 

owed to the private sector shareholders. And the public say, 

well I don’t think so; I think that’s my potash and I think we 

should get some of it, some of it. 

 

What would be wrong with that? And why isn’t there common 

ground where we can say, okay, the deal that Premier Calvert 

signed at $200 a tonne, we’ll refund that money on the new 

construction because that’s what we agreed to — fair enough — 

but the huge wealth, the windfall profit, that we should take 

some of it for the people of the province who own the resource? 

What would be wrong with that? And why can’t we sit down in 

committee of the legislature and say, look, here was the deal 

signed. We want to honour that commitment. And I’m a 

business person as much as the Premier is. I know how to do 

business. I know how to negotiate. I buy lots of farm land, lots 

of oil stock, shares. I know how to do that. But we’re being 

taken advantage of here as the owners of the resource. We 

deserve some of it, some of the upside windfall. 

 

Now your friends in the UK [United Kingdom], the new 

Conservative government there, the first thing they did with oil, 

because oil in the North Sea is selling for a very big premium, 

your friends from your party, your good friends, what did they 

do? What did they do? They increased royalty on oil. 

 

I’m not urging an increase in oil because we’re actually being 

penalized at the present time for the fact that we have no 

pipeline to the West Coast, and the Premier will know that, that 

West Texas crude is selling for a huge discount. Canadian crude 

is being sold for about $12 a barrel less than the Americans are 

importing oil from the North Sea or from other parts of the 

world because we only have one access for our oil. And rather 

than getting a premium, which we should for safe oil coming 

out of Canada, we’re being penalized — and your members of 

your staff will be able to tell you that — we’re being penalized 

about $10 a barrel because we can only have one sales point for 

our oil. That’s the United States. 

 

And so what I’m trying to do is find a way that we can agree 

that we need to get a bit better deal on our potash. And the 

Premier can argue with me and say that no, it should all go to 

foreign investors, but you’re not on the winning side of that 

argument. Because I know I’ve talked to hundreds of people 

and almost all of them say, we should try to negotiate a better 

deal, as Danny Williams did with the Hebron field in 

Newfoundland. And when Chevron wanted to develop that 

field, he said, well there’s a couple of things I want. I want 



May 3, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7467 

some ownership of the new field, 5 per cent, and I want more 

royalty. And yes, Chevron argued with him. In fact they 

threatened him, and they threatened to leave. That’s what they 

said. And they did leave. They left for all of eight months. And 

then they came back and said, well, Mr. Premier, where do we 

sign the deal? And yes, you can have your ownership position. 

That’s what he did. 

 

Now the Premier argues that Nexen was arguing against royalty 

increase in Alberta. That’s because the royalty changes were put 

in place when oil was $140 a barrel and was being implemented 

when oil had dropped to $50 a barrel because of the 2008 world 

recession. Now had it been a other than Conservative 

government, they would have understood that you can’t 

implement a royalty increase on oil based on $140 a barrel 

when oil had already dropped to 50. That’s not when you put an 

increase in place. 

 

But this isn’t what we’re talking about. We’re talking about 

potash where the present arrangement was made when potash 

was less than 200. It’s now 525, and Bill Doyle says this is the 

new norm. That’s what he says, indicating that it’s going to 

probably stay there or go higher. And all of the profit, the 

windfall profit, the Premier is arguing should go to foreign 

investors. I just don’t agree with that. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Now we can . . . I don’t think we’re going to get to this, but 

there is a position of compromise between the two positions. 

And that is leave the agreement as it was signed at whatever 

number it would come out at. If it’s $200, if it’s 180, they 

would get all of that money refunded until their total expansions 

are paid out — because I agree that’s what we agreed to — and 

that the increase of $300 a tonne, that we would share in that 

windfall profit. 

 

That’s my argument. And I think that would solve your 

problem, because you do have a problem with the public on 

this, and it would solve our problem, and we could agree to that. 

And I think there is a middle ground. And I mean I just put it 

out there as an offer, and you can ridicule it or make fun of it. 

But I think it’s a realistic offer that I think if we got . . . I think 

if we brought Jack Mintz and Sylvain Charlebois, if we set up a 

committee to review this — and I’d do it in a public way — and 

we brought them here, I think what they would say to us is, that 

is not a bad option. And I think even if you brought the potash 

companies to testify and to give evidence, they wouldn’t say, 

we’re going to take all of it and we deserve all of it. They’re 

reasonable people too. And there’s a huge windfall profit, and it 

should be shared by the people who own the resource. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition is 

sounding quite a different tone than he does at an NDP meeting, 

and more on that in a moment. What he said here today though 

is very interesting. He said, well here’s an idea that . . . Here’s 

some compromise position that we should raise with the potash 

companies in terms of their willingness to accept some sort of 

scheme where they might get full repayment of the costs of the 

expansion and then the government takes some bit more, even 

though we know today the structure of potash taxes in the 

province, inherited from the previous administration, 

maintained by this government, has a profit component. As the 

price goes up, the revenue to the government goes up, with the 

temporary incentives that the NDP introduced to provide for the 

incentives on expansion. 

 

But, Mr. Chairman, if this is the earnest position now of the 

Leader of the Opposition . . . And maybe he’s trying to back 

away from what he said in a speech to 20 or so in Melville that 

he would increase potash taxes by 80 per cent, and that if they 

didn’t like it and left the province, he’d nationalize the potash 

mines . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the member for 

Regina Walsh Acres has said — I just heard her — she said, 

what is he talking about? 

 

I am talking about what her leader said at a public meeting in 

Melville, recorded in The Melville Advance, and I thank her for 

the opportunity to repeat it. He said, “If the NDP forms 

government . . . ” and I’m quoting April 13th, 2011: 

 

If the NDP forms government, promises . . . Lingenfelter, 

[and I’m quoting] a major priority will be implementing a 

royalty structure that could see potash companies 

returning up to 50 per cent of their profits to the 

provincial treasury . . . 

 

“You could take [up to] 80 per cent of the profits and they 

still wouldn’t go anywhere because the profits they make 

are so extreme . . . ” 

 

[And it goes on, Mr. Chair.] If potash companies objected 

to the point of shutting down operations and leaving the 

province, that wouldn’t . . . [be] a problem because 

Saskatchewan has mined potash before, Lingenfelter says 

. . . 

 

Like in the good old nationalization days of the 1970s, Mr. 

Chair, that set back the investment reputation of this province 

by decades, maybe longer, Mr. Chair. That’s what they’re 

saying outside of this Chamber. 

 

But if this is his new position now — and he has several 

positions on potash royalties — if this is his new position, the 

potash companies have asked him for a meeting. They’ve asked 

that member for a meeting because of all of his pronouncements 

about the potash structure. We’ve got the letters. They copied 

us. He knows they’ve copied us. They’ve said to the Leader of 

the Opposition, if you think we ought to change the potash 

royalties, we would like to meet with you about that. So if the 

member is earnest, if this is not just about politics six months 

from an election where the NDP are trailing badly in the polls 

and they’re looking for an issue, then I would ask him this: has 

he met with them? Has he responded to their earnest request in 

a letter to say, well why shouldn’t we meet then if he has this 

idea, Mr. Chair? 

 

He asks the question rhetorically, what do we get in return for 

the NDP potash incentives that he now is opposing? We got $12 

billion in expansion, thousands of construction jobs, hundreds 

of permanent jobs, and the Saskatchewan advantage, Mr. Chair, 

that is the talk of the world. 

 

And we also got this, Mr. Chair: we got a tax structure where 

these temporary incentives will be completely earned over time 

and will return to the full rate of potash taxes, which are two 



7468 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2011 

times higher than the next highest potash taxing jurisdiction in 

the world. That’s what we’ll get. It was NDP policy then, 

supported then by members opposite, supported by the 

Saskatchewan Party in opposition, and as I’ve said earlier, it 

worked. 

 

Now he posits this notion. He says, well but prices have gone 

up. That’s unbelievable, Mr. Chair. Well prices have changed, 

so we ought to try to break the deal. Mr. Chair, I wonder what 

he does when he forward sells canola. He’s a successful farmer 

in this province, has been successfully farming for a time. What 

happens when he forward sells, when he does a contract on a 

specialty crop and the price goes up? Maybe canola hits $20. 

Does he just break, can he break the deal and say, you know, 

when we made this deal the price was here, but gosh the price is 

a lot higher, so I want to unilaterally break this deal? 

 

Or what if, as the Minister of Health has pointed out — and I 

hope this has never happened to him personally — what 

happens, Mr. Chair, if he forward sells, he contract sells a 

specialty crop and the price of that crop crashes? And what if 

that company then came to him and said, you know what? The 

price is a lot lower now. We’d like to give you a lot less for 

your canola, Mr. Leader of the Opposition. I think he’d 

probably say, no that’s not the deal. 

 

Well we have a deal in this province today that is creating an 

advantage for us, that is creating thousands of jobs for 

Saskatchewan families, that is attracting $12 billion worth of 

investment into the potash sector, that is making us the story of 

the world in terms of world markets and mining. Mr. Chair, we 

say, let’s not lose that, this advantage. 

 

And you know, Mr. Chair, the hon. member says several times, 

well this is what people are telling me about how much they 

like my idea about nationalization through high taxation. Well, 

Mr. Chairman, that’s not what we’re hearing. The city of 

Humboldt says: 

 

We believe there’s a need for a period of stability to 

support the growth and development of the potash 

industry in our province and allow our communities to 

attract the interest and confidence of new residents and 

new business ventures. Discussions regarding changes in 

royalty and taxation policy should not be brought forward 

in the midst of this significant growth phase. 

 

The city of Humboldt should understands this. We made a deal. 

That deal’s working on behalf of Saskatchewan taxpayers 

creating jobs. Now we ought not to go midstream and break the 

deal, as I’m sure the member would not want companies he 

deals with from an agricultural standpoint. 

 

What about the town of Colonsay? They said this, and I quote, 

in a letter: 

 

This letter is to advise you that I am not in favor of raising 

the royalties on Potash in Saskatchewan. Business  . . . 

[arrangements] to set royalties were made between the 

province [under the NDP, the right changes] and the 

potash companies and I do not think the government 

should renege on those agreements now.  

 

The quote continues: 

 

Our community is seeing growth largely due to the Potash 

Industry and we don’t want to lose residents and future 

housing because of issues between the Potash . . . [ 

industry] and the Provincial Government. We want 

Saskatchewan to remain the place to be for all . . .  

 

And I don’t think raising royalties is a way to encourage this, 

Mr. Chair. That’s what communities that would be directly 

affected by this reckless NDP policy are saying. And, Mr. 

Chair, I respectfully submit to the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition, if he wants to campaign on that potentially ruinous 

policy on nationalizing the potash industry after he’s jacked up 

their taxes 80 per cent and killing thousands of jobs for 

Saskatchewan families, if he wants to campaign on that, we’ll 

be happy, Mr. Chairman, to campaign precisely on that issue in 

the months ahead and in the next general election, Mr. Chair. 

 

I also want to put on the record this again because the Hon. 

Leader of the Opposition is not talking about it any more. In the 

ads that their caucus ran, paid for by public funds, it wasn’t just 

potash royalties that they were going to hike, it was uranium. It 

was uranium. The Hon. Leader of the Opposition doesn’t talk 

about it at all any more. Maybe it’s because companies like 

Areva have said, we wish to clearly state that we would be very 

concerned if there was an about-face to the process that is well 

along or, worse, a royalty or royalty-like tax increase which 

would further hinder the economic viability of those projects. 

 

Mr. Chairman, in the case of Areva, there’s significant activity 

in northern Saskatchewan. In the case of the world’s largest 

uranium mining company, a product of a privatization called 

Cameco, headquartered in the city of Saskatoon, Mr. Chairman, 

I can report to you that just under 50 per cent of the workforce 

in those uranium mines is First Nations and Métis people. And I 

have not yet heard from the member for Cumberland or the 

member for Athabasca about the NDP’s caucus position to put 

at risk hundreds of jobs, half of which, almost half of which 

thankfully are employing Aboriginal people in our province in 

the uranium mining sector because . . . The deputy leader 

shakes her head. Her ads that her caucus funds, taxpayers’ 

money paid for, said it’d increase royalties for uranium too. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, I would also point out again, on CKRM in 

December 2010 the Leader of the Opposition said he was going 

to increase oil royalties as well. He’s going to do, I should say, 

he’s going to do a review of oil royalties. Mr. Chairman, this is 

not the right policy for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I would offer finally, back to the issue on potash, the following 

comment on the issue of the new potash structure we have in 

the province today and implemented by the NDP. And I’m 

reading from an internal briefing document. This document was 

presented to the NDP government in 2005. Mr. Chairman, 

here’s what the officials of the government of the NDP 

government of the day advised the former ministers that sit 

opposite today. It says, “If the government had failed to provide 

tax relief . . .” This is after the fact, after the NDP made the 

changes that they’re now opposing: 

 

If the government had failed to provide tax relief it may 

have encouraged the industry, particularly PCS, to look to 



May 3, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7469 

other jurisdictions for some of its expansion requirements 

even though the expansions available in Saskatchewan 

may be as attractive or even more attractive. 

 

Mr. Calvert got it. Mr. Calvert understood it. And now, Mr. 

Chairman, the position of the NDP is, well the price has gone 

up so let’s break the deal.  

 

I would offer this, Mr. Chairman. I think the Leader of the 

Opposition should want to work with potash companies in the 

same way he’d expect companies that he deals with when he 

forward sells canola or enters into a speciality crop contract. If 

the price changes, he can’t just break the deal especially if the 

deal is good for the province, is creating jobs for Saskatchewan 

families. We stand by the position of the province. We stand by 

the unprecedented growth that is being created by the royalty 

structure currently existing in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Chair: — Mr. Lingenfelter. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say to the 

Premier that obviously he feels this obligation to defend the 

corporations whether they’re royal corporations or potash. I 

think his role is not to defend the boards of directors of 

corporations, but to defend the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And if his argument is that he can’t change royalty because 

somehow that’s not in the best interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan, you’re getting paid by the wrong group. The fact 

is your job and responsibility is to get maximum return for your 

shareholders, not for Bill Doyle’s shareholders. He’s doing 

quite a good job on his own. He does a very good job; that’s 

why he gets the big bucks. And I’m not critical of Bill Doyle. I 

think that he’s doing very, very well for his shareholders. What 

I’m worried about and what I’m hearing from the public of 

Saskatchewan, you’re not doing the best job possible for the 

shareholders who own the resource. 

 

And I think making a commitment that you’re not going to 

change royalties for 16 years, let me tell you this about 

contracts with canola — there isn’t a farmer in the world that 

would agree with you on that. If somebody’s going to contract 

canola for 16 years and somehow feel obliged that you’re never 

going to change it, that’s not a contract. There is no such 

contract with the potash corporation. The fact is that even the 

potash companies know that they could and should be paying 

more. Are they going to offer it up? Well I don’t expect that 

they will. If I was sitting in their chairs, I wouldn’t be coming 

and saying look, we want to pay a little bit more royalty. I’d be 

trying to get even a better deal. 

 

But the key is, what do the public of Saskatchewan need? And 

they deserve more. And what they’re saying is that they want a 

review, and they think the upside of the windfall profits that 

they should get a piece of that. 

 

On the issue of agriculture, there’s just a couple of questions 

that I want to ask. One of them comes from the flooding that’s 

going on across the province and that happened last year, the 10 

million acres or about 10 million acres that either were not 

seeded because of flooding or, once they were seeded, they 

were flooded out. That same area of the province, a large part of 

it with the big snowstorm last weekend, is once again facing 

these kind of circumstances. 

 

I wonder whether or not the flood announcement that, the letter 

you got from the Prime Minister during the election campaign 

— and I have a copy of it here I can quote from, but I’m sure 

you know the one I’m referring to — where they offered up to 

pay 50 cents on the dollar, did that apply to infrastructure only 

and was there a cap on it, or will it apply to flooded acres in the 

province if in fact they don’t get seeded? And of course what 

we really want is the sun comes out and the wind dries up the 

ground and they get it seeded. But is there anything in that 

agreement that would allow for a payment for unseeded acres? 

 

[15:30] 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chair, and I thank the hon. 

member for the question. His preamble though related to the 

previous subject of royalty changes, and so I wish to address 

again some of what was in his preamble. And then I’ll happily 

do my best to answer his question with respect to flooding. 

 

Mr. Chair, I want to state again something I alluded to earlier 

on only in a cursory way in our exchange here this afternoon, 

and that is this: our government did conduct a de facto potash 

royalty review upon assuming office. We had a problem in the 

potash tax changes that the NDP had made, because there was a 

disparate . . . there was an imbalance in terms of the tax 

treatment on greenfield new mines that we want to attract and 

brownfield expansions. And companies quite rightly were 

pointing out and saying lookit, if you want us to expand our 

mines, we need some equity in terms of the treatment of a new 

mine versus a greenfield project. 

 

I can also tell the member that there were other changes made to 

improve on the NDP incentives that were approved by many 

members opposite, though of course in principle, as I’ve said, 

we agreed with them. In fact we improved the system of 

incentives that were implemented by the NDP, introduced by 

the NDP, by putting in a tax floor. This better ensured of course 

that Saskatchewan people were getting their fair share. The 

NDP system that we inherited would have allowed producers to 

lower their tax rate by expanding indefinitely. And so at some 

point, there needs to be a return to full, there needs to be a 

return to full taxation for the end of the temporary incentive. 

 

So as a result, this government introduced a tax floor that said 

basically this: that at least 35 per cent of the producers’ 

production will be subject to profit tax. And that’s the part of 

the tax that of course accommodates the fact that as prices go 

up, so does the revenue to the taxpayers of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I would also say this to the honourable member, if he’s sincere 

now and strikes a much more earnest tone than he did in 

Melville when he wanted to nationalize the industry if they 

walked away from an 80 per cent potash tax hike — that’s what 

he said, and we’ll be talking a lot about that in the months 

ahead — if he’s got a different position today, why hasn’t he 

accepted the invitation of the potash producers to meet with 

him?  

 



7470 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2011 

They sent him a letter on January 28th. The letter concludes 

this, this is their position obviously and the honourable member 

will understand they’re not necessarily in agreement with 

changes, but they say in the conclusion of their letter, those 

projects could — they’re talking about the expansions with a 

royalty increase — they say those projects could be delayed or 

cancelled, which would result in severely impacting GDP [gross 

domestic product] growth and provincial jobs. Changing the 

rules part way through the game would have an adverse effect 

on Saskatchewan as an investment jurisdiction. Then they say, 

“The Saskatchewan Potash Producers Association executive 

would be pleased to sit down with you to discuss this matter at a 

mutually accepted time.” 

 

So if the NDP leader is serious about this issue, if he has some 

earnest proposal to find some midway point between what he 

describes, depicts our position and his, why wouldn’t you meet 

with industry? Why wouldn’t you pitch them on this? When he 

met with BHP Billiton, did he raise this idea that he has today? 

No, Mr. Chair, I don’t think that’s occurred. If it has, I stand 

corrected. 

 

But I encourage that member to accept the invitation of the 

potash industry that he wants to change markedly, if he ever is 

to sit on this side of the House, to sit and meet with them and 

find out about their implications and of the changes that they 

would make, and maybe pitch this new idea that he has. And in 

the meantime, in the meantime, the damage is probably done. 

But he may wish to reconsider his policy now which speaks 

very clearly of increasing taxes between 50 and 80 per cent, and 

as the industry walks away from expansions or their assets, just 

nationalizing them. Just taking them over like some throwback 

to the 1970s or to some state that we don’t want to use as an 

example at all for growth in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

He also again rhetorically asks a question about the 

shareholders that we should represent. Mr. Chair, you know I 

believe strongly that, and I think all members agree and the 

Leader of the Opposition agrees, that our shareholders are the 

people of the province, each and every one of them — seniors 

and moms and dads and kids and Aboriginal and 

non-Aboriginal, north and south. We owe to them this, Mr. 

Chair: we owe to them not just short-term politically motivated 

policies that might provide some immediate political solution to 

either of our parties, and we’re all guilty of that perhaps from 

time to time. 

 

But in these large issues of the future of the province and of the 

economy that pays for the quality of life that we prize in 

Saskatchewan, we owe to them to not succumb to political 

expediency, as I would suggest to you the NDP are, on this 

issue of royalties. We owe to them the long term. 

 

We owe to them the long view that understands that $12 billion 

worth of new investment because of these NDP tax changes that 

were made, supported by us, is a good thing for the province. 

It’s creating not just economic opportunity today but for 

generations to come — 3,900 direct jobs, Mr. Chairman. We 

owe it to the people of this province to act in the manner that 

makes sure we are considering the long term. 

 

And we’re going to continue to do that. These temporary 

incentives will be earned, revenues will return, or I should say 

the amount of tax paid will return to levels that were there 

previously. And in the meantime, the work of the incentives 

will have been done because this province will be transformed 

by new citizens and new people engaged in work and 

employment in the province, and by new investment. 

 

Mr. Chair, with respect to the flood issue, I had a couple of 

conversations with the Prime Minister. And obviously it was a 

little bit difficult for the relationship, the provincial-federal 

relationship to happen as it usually does because of the federal 

election. But I appreciated the fact that the Prime Minister took 

a couple of occasions to call, and we were able to have a chat 

about what was going on in the province. Early on, you know, 

most of the conversation was just a general report on where we 

were at. At that point, even the situation in Swift Current, my 

hometown where I took the call, wasn’t even that well known 

as to how high the water would eventually get. 

 

The second call though took place in what I would call sort of 

the middle of the significant trouble that we’re having in the 

province. And we made the case, as did Premier Selinger quite 

effectively in Manitoba, that we would be grateful and request 

some support from the federal government to help with 

mitigation costs. You’ll remember, Mr. Chair, that our 

government announced early in the year that we were setting 

aside $22 million for things like the temporary water dikes, for 

sandbagging machines, sandbags, for earth works, for berms, 

and we made that available to communities and quite 

successfully. 

 

We also announced some time later that if there needed to be 

more of that, maybe up to $30 million according to estimates 

from CPSP [Corrections, Public Safety and Policing], that we’d 

make that available as well. So the province of Manitoba had 

said to the federal government, and we made the same case, that 

permanent works as a result of this money, a permanent 

infrastructure works — and I would argue even purchases that 

we hadn’t have made, that wouldn’t have made otherwise, like 

the water dikes and the sandbagging machines perhaps — be 

eligible for a 50 per cent contribution from the feds. And we’ll 

most certainly continue to make that case, although obviously 

we have this assurance from the Prime Minister in a written 

form. We’re grateful for that. 

 

We did not talk in detail about unseeded acreage that is a 

potential as a result of a very wet spring. Mr. Chair, you will 

remember last spring when it occurred. Again I had a chance to 

call the Prime Minister and discuss the issue that was very 

severe. It never reached 12 million acres, but at the time, I 

think, we were estimating about 12 million acres of unseeded 

acreage. And within days, they had people on the ground, and 

we were able to announce a federal-provincial, cost-share 

initiative to help with that initiative. 

 

So, Mr. Chair, we’re watching the situation carefully with 

respect to the agriculture situation. And more than watching, we 

took action in the budget as we increased the, through crop 

insurance, we increased the coverage from 50 to $70 an acre for 

any unseeded acreage as a result of flooding. So we’ve taken 

that action. We’re monitoring it, Mr. Chairman. I would say 

that the best indicator of future action is past action. We have a 

relationship with the federal government that produced results 

for producers. Obviously some wanted more. That’s the way it 



May 3, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7471 

always is. But it did produce some help for those who were 

facing the challenge of unseeded acreage. And we’re 

monitoring that situation carefully. 

 

And in the meantime, if I can, just one final point to the Leader 

of the Opposition and through this Assembly to the officials of 

government: the public service of this province have responded 

remarkably well to the flooding situation in various ministries, 

certainly in CPSP, but in Environment, Watershed Authority, 

and Social Services. And we are very well served in this 

province by their dedication and their work with municipal 

leaders and individuals that are facing the calamity of flooding. 

And so we acknowledge and thank them. And in the Crowns as 

well, as the Minister of SaskPower has pointed out, we thank 

and acknowledge them. 

 

And if there’s a follow-up question with respect to coverage on 

unseeded acreage, well I do my best to mention that. Thanks . . . 

or to do that. Thanks. 

 

The Chair: — The Leader of the Official Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Just continuing on a couple of short 

questions on the flooding and the problems associated with the 

10 million acres that weren’t seeded last year. And while the 

Premier is right — there was a small payment made by the 

province and provincial government for the unseeded acres last 

year — if you’re in that area, Elfros and area where in cases 

only 20 per cent was seeded, in some cases with organic 

farmers who were waiting for the ground to get ready before 

they seeded last spring, some of them didn’t seed any, and they 

were expecting more than 25 or $30 an acre. The request was 

for 100. And the Premier knows that it didn’t come anywhere 

near meeting that need, which then backs it up into this year. 

Many of them are having a difficult time getting enough money 

to put the seed in the ground, buy the fuel. Fuel is up 25 per 

cent. Fertilizer is up 30 per cent. 

 

But the biggest hit is the rate increase for crop insurance. And 

what they’re having a difficult time is understanding how on the 

10 million acres that went unseeded, how there can be a 30 per 

cent increase in the insurance rate on that particular land. And 

what we’ve been asking the Premier for, if he would look at it 

— he knows I’ve asked the Minister of Agriculture — but I’d 

ask him here today whether or not there wouldn’t be a way with 

the federal government in Ottawa to find a way that the increase 

for this year only on the acres that weren’t seeded last year, if 

there could be some sort of forgiveness for that increase for one 

year. 

 

Because to add hardship to injury, the fact is they didn’t get any 

crop last year. They did get a small payment from the provincial 

government and federal, and they are thankful for that and I 

don’t want to make it sound like they’re not. But it certainly 

wasn’t the $100 an acre they were asking for. But then when 

they go to do their seeding this year, they’re facing flooding, 

late snowstorms, huge increase in diesel fuel, in fertilizer prices, 

and then crop insurance rates going up on the very land they 

didn’t get any crop on. 

 

And what we’re asking for is whether or not, on their behalf, 

there would be a way that the federal government would agree, 

if a request were made by the Assembly, to forgo the increase 

on the unseeded acres from last year, in 2010. 

 

The Chair: — Before the Premier, recognize the Premier, I 

would ask him to introduce the new official that has joined us 

before he answers the question. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to welcome 

Tim Highmoor, the chief of staff to the Minister of Agriculture 

who’s battling his own personal flood near Saltcoats today — 

not Tim, the minister. 

 

Mr. Chair, I want to offer a couple of comments to the Hon. 

Leader of the Opposition with respect to his questions: one 

specific with respect to those who had acreage flooded out in 

2010 and their implications for 2011, and then a more general 

comment about the changes this government has made to crop 

insurance over the last three years. 

 

Mr. Chair, we want to assure this Assembly that acreage 

flooded in 2010 is not going to penalize any of the payments for 

producers in terms of the 2011 year. 

 

I can say this as well, Mr. Chair. One thing we heard from 

producers loud and clear in opposition — and then worked hard 

to implement in government and have in each of 2008, 2009, 

2010 — we have tried to respond to their request to increase the 

coverage in this province, increase the per acreage coverage 

available under crop insurance. Mr. Chair, the most recent 

changes that the hon. member is critical of I think have been 

supported by APAS [Agricultural Producers Association of 

Saskatchewan]. I think they’ve been supported by SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities]. I think 

they’ve also been supported by the canola growers. 

 

Mr. Chair, because of this, yes there is an increase of about, on 

average, $1.47 per acre in terms of the premium. But there’s 

also been an attendant increase in coverage per acre on an 

average of $42. So we now have average coverage in the 

province of Saskatchewan of about $173 per acre, the highest 

that it has ever been. Yes, it comes with a bit of a premium 

increase, but obviously I think the minister and I think the 

government’s gotten it right because, Mr. Chair, we have farm 

groups saying this is the right thing to do. 

 

As for agricultural producers who are facing unique challenges, 

Mr. Chairman, we have a solid record in this regard as well. 

When we first came to office the cattle industry was under 

significant stress — there are signs of hope today, but it was 

under significant stress — and we began with a loan program. 

And many producers said, you know, we don’t really need more 

loans right now, but the uptake on it was reasonably positive. 

But we came with that loan program, and then later on we also 

came with a per-head payment. We didn’t wait. It was pretty 

clear the federal government wasn’t necessarily interested in it 

at that particular time, and so we went ahead on a unilateral 

basis and we were there again for cattle producers on a per-head 

payment. 

 

Last spring when so many acres were under water, here again 

we were able to reach out to the federal government and build 

on a relationship that isn’t perfect but better than it was under 



7472 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2011 

the previous administration, and get some work done on behalf 

of producers who needed some help with respect to unseeded 

acreage. 

 

Mr. Chair, when it comes to the drought in the Southwest, that 

was largely ignored by the previous administration. We also 

worked with SARM and farm groups to implement some very 

important infrastructure initiatives to help with respect to water, 

to help with respect to the drought in terms of on-farm wells 

and other important water infrastructure that was also 

welcomed by the producers. And here again we should 

acknowledge the federal government’s support and partnership 

with that particular initiative. 

 

Mr. Chairman, that’s a record of action on the part of this 

government. And producers should know this: that we’re going 

to continue to be with, to stand with them as they face what is 

an increasing array of challenges, it seems, in this province, of 

most lately the flooding and the amount of moisture that we 

have in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — I appreciate the comments by the 

Premier, but I do want to reiterate that as the days go by, and 

the fields in many areas of the province not drying as usual, this 

problem continues to grow. But as the Deputy Premier has said, 

we haven’t lost a crop ever in the province in April. Well now 

we’re into May and we can say that again in May. But we 

certainly, I think, need a strategy, and it should be cost-shared 

with the federal government to help those farmers in the area of 

Yorkton and Elfros and Wynyard where the large amount of 

flooding occurred last year, if that area continues to be flooded 

and the crop doesn’t get seeded. 

 

I wanted to ask another question about the agriculture, and it 

relates to a debate that will happen fairly soon, I would expect, 

with the federal government, and that is around the issue of the 

Canadian Wheat Board. Having worked with the Canadian 

Wheat Board and met with them a few months ago — I guess 

it’s about a year ago now when I last met with them in 

Winnipeg — and talking about changes and updates that are 

important within the Canadian Wheat Board, I wonder if the 

Premier could outline what the position of the government is in 

terms of our relationship with the federal government as related 

to the Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

And just so the Premier knows, I think it’s important, that 

regardless of our political philosophy, that we understand the 

Canadian Wheat Board is an instrument and tool of Canadian 

farmers. And I would urge that if any changes are to be made, 

they would only be made with the consent of the farmers who 

are affected because I think this is an issue that goes beyond 

whether you’re Conservative, Liberal, or NDP. And I don’t 

think New Democrats should be calling the shots on the 

Canadian Wheat Board or the Conservative Party. I think it’s an 

institution that should be managed by farmers and decisions 

made about its future should be called by farmers. 

 

So what I would urge the Premier is to outline his position, but 

also urge that coming to a conclusion, that this institution in 

Canada, if changes are to be made going forward, that they only 

be made with the consent of farmers most affected. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Chair. Thank the 

member for the question. Just touching again on the areas where 

the flooding is again acute this year and was very problematic 

last year in terms of agriculture, the hon. member asked about 

the relationship between the provincial and the federal 

government. Again here, as I’ve said earlier on in a discussion 

with the media, we don’t get everything we want from the 

federal government. But what we have had is a productive 

relationship when it comes to agricultural issues, I think to the 

benefit of producers who, as I said early in an answer, would 

probably always wish that programs would be a little bit more 

efficient, maybe even a little bit richer. But by and large we’ve 

seen some results that just wasn’t the case under the previous 

administration for producers. And I think it’s an indicator of 

what might happen down the road should the need arise again in 

this province. 

 

I can tell you, Mr. Chair, and members of the committee and the 

Leader of the Opposition as well, that the ministers’ offices 

have been discussing what might be coming down the road as 

the weeks wear on and the moisture issue is not abating in the 

province. Moreover officials are also continuing to, between the 

provincial government and the federal government, continue to 

be in contact to discuss what might be needed down the road in 

this province, depending on the agricultural situation in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

With respect to the Wheat Board, our party supports marketing 

choice. That’s always been the case. We are a provincial party. 

We do not have a federal affiliate. We fielded no candidates in 

the last federal election, Mr. Chair. But when asked on the 

issue, that’s the position of the party. We do know, again 

there’s been recent elections with respect to Wheat Board 

directors. A preponderance of those directors, I think it’s fair to 

characterize, are not necessarily in favour of choice or changes 

to the board. I guess it’ll be up to the federal government as to 

how they will deal with that situation. 

 

We do all have varying positions, I would say, in the 

Legislative Assembly on the issue. I know, I think the Leader of 

the Opposition is in favour of marketing choice as well. As a 

producer I think he has counselled our shared Member of 

Parliament in southwest Saskatchewan, Mr. Anderson, that the 

government should move on the issue of marketing choice. So 

this is an issue that’s he right to . . . The producers have 

different opinions on it. We’ve taken a position. Ultimately the 

federal government is going to have to deal with this issue now 

that they have a majority mandate. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to turn now to an issue that 

continually is raised throughout Saskatchewan. And it doesn’t 

seem to be restricted to Regina and Saskatoon, but Kindersley, 

Estevan, and that’s the issue of housing and the lack of 

affordable housing in the province of Saskatchewan. And 

obviously there are a number of people who are simply living in 

conditions that aren’t suitable for families. They can’t find 



May 3, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7473 

affordable housing. When they can, they then don’t have 

enough money for other necessities in life. And it comes back 

to this issue of who’s winning from the booming economy in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

There’s no doubt that we have a very strong economy based on 

resources. But when you talk to some of the people who are 

affected by huge rent increases, and I used the example the 

other day of an apartment here in Regina just south of the 

Legislative Building, where rent increases were going up 60, 

70, up to 100 per cent. And many of the residents who lived in 

that building were saying they just didn’t know what to do 

because most of them were on a fixed income, either a pension 

or they were working at near minimum wage. And to pay an 

extra $500 a month in one rent increase, which some of them 

were being told their rent would go up, they were saying to us, 

why can’t you go to the legislature and get rent controls similar 

to what other Canadians have in place? 

 

Because as we know, 80 per cent of Canadians have some form 

of rent control. It’s not a perfect world, but at least it gets a 

number of families through a situation. In Manitoba for 

example, in 2010 rent control was pegged at, or rent increases 

were capped at 1 per cent. And you can talk about new systems 

of rent control where you exclude the construction or newly 

constructed apartments. You can also exclude what are called 

mom-and-pop operations where if some family owns one rental 

unit or two rental units, you can have an exclusion. I think this 

is the case in Manitoba where they exclude three rental units per 

family because that’s not the major issue. 

 

But what I wanted to ask the Premier is, first of all on 

affordable housing and the whole issue of rent control, can the 

Premier outline why his resistance? He has admitted that there 

is a huge issue around rent increases. But can the Premier tell us 

again why he is so adamantly opposed to the new generation or 

the new style of rent control that would exclude new 

construction, so you get the best of both worlds? 

 

In Winnipeg for example, last year they had 800 starts on rental 

units. In all of the province of Saskatchewan without rent 

control we had less than that. And I just don’t understand and 

many Saskatchewan residents don’t understand at the Premier’s 

hesitance even to look at alternatives around rent control. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. You know, in a growing 

economy there are challenges. There are infrastructure 

challenges especially if there was already a significant 

infrastructure deficit, which was the case in the province. It’s 

something we inherited. There are challenges also around 

housing, and there are affordability issues. So just in a general 

way, Mr. Chair, we’ve worked very hard, imperfectly to be 

sure, but we’ve worked very hard to make sure that we were 

addressing affordability issues, that people in this province were 

a part of the growth, the unprecedented growth that we were 

seeing. 

 

That’s why our first major tax change, Mr. Chair, was a move 

to actually increase the basic exemption that dropped 90,000 

people from the provincial tax rolls. That’s why additional 

changes to that basic exemption and the child tax credit will 

mean 114,000 total people that used to pay provincial income 

tax under the previous administration now will pay no 

provincial income tax in the province. 

 

It’s why we were able to make unprecedented investments, Mr. 

Chair, in Social Services for example. It’s why we were able to 

move towards indexing rental allowances for those who are in 

particular need of accommodation help. Mr. Chair, that never 

existed before in the province. And as far as we could tell, it 

existed in two other places in the country, where by region — 

and we had different inflation rates in terms of housing costs in 

different parts of the province — we’ve implemented a system 

with the help of the professional public service whereby those 

rents are now indexed automatically for the inflation that they 

face in those particular regions. There have been a number of 

initiatives in terms of those who are most vulnerable that we’ve 

initiated through Social Services dealing directly with shelter 

allowances, dealing directly with housing. 

 

Mr. Chair, we also released very recently a five-point plan with 

respect to the housing issue that includes Headstart on a Home, 

the expected result will be 1,000 new units. It includes the 

affordable homeownership program, 600 new units; that 

includes rental construction incentives that will result in 2,900 

new units; 34 million in direct public investment in new and 

existing rental units with the expecting result is 160 new units 

and extensive renovations and upgrades to rental units across 

the province. 

 

Mr. Chairman, what we found out in government was that some 

of the public housing was in such a state that it wasn’t suitable 

for people to actually live in. So we made the decision to make 

a significant investment. The Minister of Social Services 

announced a $34 million direct investment, again together with 

the federal government, to make sure that we were taking care 

of the inventory of housing that already exists. This is in 

addition to 860 new public housing units that have been opened 

up across the province in the three and a half years of our 

government for 80 million. It includes 1,100 more that are in 

various stages of development — an increased funding to 

housing programs by approximately 69 per cent since the 

NDP’s last full year in government. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Mr. Chairman, it also represents unprecedented, as least in the 

contemporary history of the province, investment in student 

housing. There is a continuum of housing we need to deal with. 

Housing for those most vulnerable, we need to make sure that 

accommodation allowances fit that group, that are appropriate 

for that group. 

 

Low-income people, we need to be improving supply by 

working with municipalities who have incentives for down 

payments on new units. We have incentives for the construction 

of rental units. Then there’s the new housing, first-time 

homeowner part of the continuum. We have Headstart on a 

Home for that initiative, Mr. Chairman, as well as, again, some 

of the other public units we’re supplying. 

 

And then an important part of the continuum is student housing, 

Mr. Chair. As we know in September the housing situation — 

and it’s still pretty tight right now, although a lot of the students 



7474 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2011 

have left Saskatoon and Regina perhaps for summer jobs 

elsewhere; not all of them, but lots — but we know in the 

school year, the housing challenge is particularly acute in those 

places that have post-secondary institutions, not just our 

university cities but also where SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute 

of Applied Science and Technology] have campuses across the 

province. 

 

Mr. Chair, here our track record is one that I’m quite proud of, 

though more needs to be done. In Meadow Lake, the $2.3 

million expansion for the North West Regional College 

housing, 40 unit complex to accommodate 94 students and 

family members; in La Ronge, six four-bedroom and two 

five-bedroom units will be constructed there; at the SIAST 

Woodland Campus, 2.5 million for 34 two-bedroom 

townhouses and two-bedroom suites with wheelchair 

accessibility; in Saskatoon, the College Quarter, 15 million 

worth of government contribution principally at the University 

of Saskatchewan, 400 new beds or places for students to stay; 

Cress student housing in Saskatoon, 27 new units. 

 

Mr. Chairman, our commitment to student residence, 3,000 per 

cent funding increase since those folks were in office. And 

when those students have more places to stay that are related to 

student housing, it eases the pressure with respect to rental 

accommodations in the centres where there are those 

post-secondary institutions. So, Mr. Chairman, we know there’s 

a challenge. We’re working to meet the challenge with supply. 

 

What we are not prepared to do . . . And you know, Mr. Chair, 

the Hon. Leader of the Opposition characterizes what they’ve 

done in Manitoba as very successful. Others don’t share his 

view. Others worry about the dilapidation of the existing 

inventory where this new generation rent control has a sort of 

an asymmetric treatment, Mr. Chair. They worry about the lack 

of an incentive for landlords to take care of their properties. We 

can get into the debate about Manitoba. And he has 

information, and we have our information. 

 

We’re going to continue to build supply. We’re going to 

continue to work with the municipality sector. We know that at 

the housing summit there was a great deal of support for the 

direction of the government. Yes, the challenge still exists, but I 

can tell you this, Mr. Chair, vacancy rates are up across the 

province, not as high as we’d like them, but they’re up 

province-wide from 1.9 per cent to 2.5 per cent in the last year; 

Saskatoon, 1.9 per cent to 2.6 per cent; Regina, point six per 

cent to 1 per cent. 

 

The truth is this, Mr. Chairman: vacancy rates in the province of 

Saskatchewan are higher now, not high enough, but higher now 

than they were under those members opposite when they were 

the government. And it would have been nice if this province 

had a bit of a head start on the housing challenge that we exist, 

if the previous administration would’ve begun the work when it 

needed to begin, when vacancy rates were even tighter, when 

the housing shortage was even more acute under their 

administration than ours. 

 

But we can’t change the past. We can only work towards the 

future. We’ve laid out a plan to do that, Mr. Chair. We’re still 

consulting and getting input from those who are on the front 

lines of the issues in the municipal sector. And we’re going to 

continue to work to build new houses with the private sector 

and with public funds. We’re going to continue to address 

supply all along the continuum from student housing to helping 

those who are most vulnerable. Thank you, Mr. Chair. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, not to sound ungrateful on 

behalf of the people that are calling our office and saying 

they’ve got huge problems with paying their rent, the fact of the 

matter is there simply is a huge problem with affordable 

housing in the province and part of it is rental, part of it is the 

very units you talk about. 

 

Many of them in fact, the amount of money that you have to 

have in order to buy them, many of these units are $300,000. 

And it may not sound like much to the Premier, but if you have 

to raise 30,000 or $40,000 in cash, that’s just not in the ballpark 

for most young people, for many other families. They just don’t 

have that kind of money. And for many of them, if you’re at 

minimum wage or near minimum wage, you’re never going to 

have 30 or $40,000 in cash because as fast as you save, the 

price of housing is going up even faster. And they can’t catch 

up. They’re on a treadmill. 

 

And not that I don’t agree with the Premier that there are a lot 

of planning going on, a lot of paper, a lot of red tape. But for 

the people who live in the apartment that I was talking about 

where they got notice of a 60 per cent increase, they don’t know 

any of these programs, and they can’t use any of the programs. 

And the fact . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well if the minister 

who says from her seat, they are, if she can go there and help 

them through this, it would be very much appreciated. 

 

Because when I was talking to them, they simply don’t have 

access. They say they don’t know the program, they don’t 

understand it, and they’re facing a 60 per cent increase in rent. 

And even the Premier during question period, I think he used 

the words that this is unacceptable. Well if it is unacceptable, 

what are we putting in place to make sure these people who 

have these rent increases coming in the next few months are in 

a position to pay the increases that are being called for? 

 

And again the rent control . . . We may be the only ones that 

understand rent control in this province, but 80 per cent of 

Canadians have rent control — Quebec, Ontario, Manitoba, 

British Columbia — and it works. Because in Manitoba where 

you have the difference of a cap of 1 per cent or in Regina 

where some people have 60 per cent, that’s fairly significant on 

the income of a working person or someone on a pension. 

 

And I just urge the Premier to really take a serious look at rent 

control or a rent cap to see whether or not again there is some 

common ground that we could protect those who need 

protection from what is gouging. There’s no question about it. 

When somebody’s calling for a 60 per cent increase or 40 per 

cent increase on an existing apartment, I don’t know what other 

term you can use except gouging. Why wouldn’t the Premier 

and his cabinet step in and protect those families? And again, if 

there’s any way that the opposition could be helpful in that, we 

would like to do that. 

 



May 3, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7475 

The other thing on affordable housing: this isn’t the first time in 

the history of the province that we have had a shortage of 

housing. There have been many other times. And I can 

remember, the member for Cypress Hills will remember, when 

Olaf Friggstad was manufacturing farm equipment and there 

was a huge shortage of housing in Frontier. And at that time 

Olaf Friggstad, a good friend of all of ours from southwest 

Saskatchewan, came to the government. He was no New 

Democrat or socialist, but he said, look, what’s holding my 

manufacturing plant up is the lack of housing. Is there anything 

the government can do to help with housing? 

 

And the federal government, provincial government, along with 

the private sector, I think the local community went in, and the 

member from Cypress may remember, but built 30 or 40 

affordable housing. And then major expansions of the plant 

took place. Flexi-Coil later bought out that plant. It was then 

bought out by Case International and they now employ 1,000 

people or 1,200 people in Saskatoon. But it all started in a little 

shop south of Frontier, and in part survived because housing 

was provided, affordable housing, by provincial, federal, and 

local government, along with the private sector. 

 

And what we can’t understand is why after four years of being 

in government, you’re still at the stage of trying to scratch your 

head and figure out a housing program. It really isn’t that 

complicated. There are many models around Canada that would 

stand out where the provincial, federal, local government, along 

with the private sector, just goes and builds a house. It doesn’t 

take that long. And these are affordable housing. In three, four 

months you can get these houses up and operating. They can be 

affordable. They can be under $200,000 a unit. And working 

people can afford it and have the pride of ownership. I’m not 

arguing for government-owned housing, I’m arguing that 

government have a role to play in quickly putting in place 

housing so that many of these businesses can continue to 

expand. 

 

So I just want to ask again whether or not has the Premier 

totally ruled out any form of rent control, or is there still some 

opening if properly lobbied and put forward, we could achieve 

some protection for renters in this province? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I thank the member 

for the question. You know, on the issue of rent control, the 

NDP have looked at this issue extensively both in government 

early on in the ’90s when the hon. member was part of the 

cabinet of the Romanow government and they decided actually 

to do away with rent control that existed in the province. In 

1992, on the 6th of July, 1992, the Hon. Ms. Simard moved 

second reading on Bill No. 61, An Act to amend The Residential 

Tenancies Act where “All rent review and rent control 

provisions will also be repealed.” 

 

Now the hon. member can say, well things have changed since 

then. Things were changing. If you listen to the New 

Democrats, they’ll say things were changing, you know, 

beginning probably six, seven years ago as the economy really 

started to grow. And as I’ve already pointed out in this debate, 

Mr. Chairman, vacancy rates were actually lower. In other 

words the housing shortage was more acute and tighter when 

they were still in office, so remember that, Mr. Chair. The 

housing shortage was more acute as measured by vacancy rates 

when the New Democratic Party was the government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

They looked at rent control again. They did a study on rent 

control on the eve of that ’07 election. The current MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] for Saskatoon Eastview 

told reporters — and now I’m quoting from The StarPhoenix 

article — told reporters “recent consultations with the housing 

industry and representatives of community-based groups who 

work with the poor showed no real appetite exists for 

establishing rent control.” 

 

There’s other comments from the hon. member for Saskatoon 

Eastview who was a critic at the time when the housing 

shortage was certainly as acute as it is today, maybe more so if 

measured by vacancy rates. But more to the point, Mr. Chair, 

there is a official report to the government presented September 

19, 2007, called housing in Saskatchewan, community partners 

meeting, consultation summary, and here’s what it says, and I 

quote: 

 

Although there was a mixed response regarding rent 

controls, the general conclusion was that rent controls 

create uncertainty and will lead to a decline in housing 

availability and quality as rent controls would be a 

disincentive for investment. 

 

So the NDP government of the day accepted that report and 

publicly rejected rent controls. Interesting to note the language 

in this report, and I draw members’ attention to it. It says that 

views were mixed on rent control much as they are in this 

Assembly. Some people think it’s the answer and others are 

concerned about what it might do to long-term supply or the 

state, under the new Manitoba model, the state of the current 

inventory of supply of housing. 

 

So, Mr. Chair, things haven’t changed much from 2007. There 

are still mixed views. The housing vacancy rate, it was more 

acute under them in terms of being a problem than it is under 

us. That part has changed. And we though still agree with this 

particular report that the NDP commissioned and agreed with in 

2007 “that rent controls create uncertainty and will lead to a 

decline in housing availability and quality as rent controls 

would be a disincentive for investment.” Mr. Chair, that’s why 

we’ve focused on supply. That’s why at the housing summit we 

engaged discussion on what’s possible in working with 

municipalities to provide an incentive from education tax 

rebates, for example, on the construction of new rental 

properties, new apartment buildings. 

 

We haven’t seen that kind of construction in a generation across 

the country. Premiers talked about it at the Council of the 

Federation. Not since the end of MURBs [multiple unit 

residential building] have there really been any interest in, 

much interest, certainly significant interest in the construction 

of rental accommodations across the country. So we’re moving 

to provide incentives for that in partnership with the municipal 

sector. We’re moving to make sure we’re helping those most 

vulnerable by indexing shelter allowances, by first of all 

increasing those shelter allowances. 

 



7476 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2011 

We’re moving on the issue of student housing to increase 

supply now and for the long term. The last time there was 

student housing built at the University of Saskatchewan was, I 

think, in the mid-’70s. The hon. member was working hard in 

the . . . was about to be elected soon to the legislature. And 

that’s, well I mean, Mr. Chair, he was doing that and other 

people were doing it. The bottom line is it was a long time ago 

in terms of the measure of when there has been new student 

housing at the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

So we’re addressing this matter on the entire continuum of 

housing. We’re going to do it in a way that we believe is 

consistent with what works in the long term. 

 

[16:15] 

 

I guess again we can get into a debate about what others are 

weighing in on in terms of Manitoba, where reports have come 

out and there’s been some reportage in the daily papers for 

example about some of the discussion where one particular 

professor, who is very familiar with what the Manitoba 

government has done, suggests that Manitoba rent control might 

even drive rents higher. He says that’s because rehabilitation 

programs extend exemptions from regulations ranging from two 

to five years, and when a landlord undertakes capital 

expenditures on a rental unit, the rent is allowed to increase. 

 

Mr. Chair, we believe that addressing the matter of housing on 

the supply side is important. We’re going to continue to work 

with this five-point plan that’s already bearing fruit and results 

for the people of this province, as we see some easing in the 

vacancy rates. I can tell the member opposite that Swift 

Current, a city he’ll know well, has a vacancy rate of 7 per cent. 

You’d have some real concern about the impact of potential rent 

control in certain communities, in certain markets around, in 

terms of the long-term supply of housing. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, we’re not going to be moving down that 

direction. We’re going to continue with this plan that addresses 

supply. It is a comprehensive plan. It’s bearing fruit. It’s getting 

results here in the province of Saskatchewan. This is a 

long-standing issue left completely unattended, I would say, in 

the dying days of the previous administration. So yes, there is 

some catch-up. There is more work to be done, and we’ll 

continue to get the work done. Thank you, Mr. Chair. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, just based on answers 

we’ve received from written questions, I just wanted to indicate 

to the Premier that when it comes to social housing in the 

province, the waiting list for social housing — and this is dated 

in March of 2011 — the increase is 122 per cent. And in 

affordable housing, the wait increase is 99 per cent. The worst 

case is Estevan and Swift Current, according to the answer to 

written questions to your government. Senior housing, the 

wait-list has increased by 48 per cent. Again the worst case is 

Swift Current where it’s 15 months. La Ronge, nine months. 

And these are not my answers or my research; this is research 

of your government. 

 

And so these are hard numbers to spin to the public that things 

are getting much better. And the fact of the matter is that when 

you travel the province and talk to families in communities 

across the piece, they’re finding a very, very difficult time, if 

they can find housing, to afford it. And in many cases, they 

simply can’t find affordable housing. And eventually if it’s not 

. . . [inaudible] . . . in a fairly quick hurry, it will start 

diminishing the opportunities for economic development right 

across the province. 

 

And it’s not rocket science. Solving housing programs, people 

are doing it all over the world. In every province and 

Saskatchewan has had cycles of boom and need for housing. 

And the question is, why is this government baffled as to how 

to solve a housing problem? The answer is, you build more 

affordable housing. And if you’ve got a lack of money, take a 

little bit more from the Potash Corporation so we can do a big 

housing program to build thousands of houses, affordable 

houses in the province, and solve the problem. 

 

But for the minister to have conferences and flusters of papers 

and studies and analysis and then indicate that everything is 

okay when in fact, by your own answers to questions last month 

. . . This is last month. This is after being in government almost 

four years. Here’s what your answer is: social housing, the 

waiting list has increased by 122 per cent. The second answer 

is: affordable housing up 99 per cent. And seniors’ housing, the 

wait time up by 48 per cent. 

 

And again there are solutions that are quick at hand. And in this 

building construction season, in Swift Current for example or 

Estevan, we can solve this problem simply by putting together, 

quickly, housing programs. I don’t think we need a lot more 

strategies and conferences and big think tanks. This is building 

houses. We’ve been doing it for generations. And believe me; 

the rent issue has got much worse, not because of you, but it 

just has got worse over the last four years. 

 

Rent has been going up on average 10 per cent a year, 10 per 

cent a year. And in the units that I was referring to earlier where 

they’re getting a 63 per cent increase on average, some of them 

100 per cent, they have had 10 per cent three years ago, 10 per 

cent increase two years ago, 10 per cent one year ago, and now 

a 63 per cent. So this is a problem of huge proportion for those 

families, and it’s not just one. There’s a number of them across 

the province. I think this one was the highest, but there are 

many where it’s going up 20 and 30 per cent. 

 

And at that time, when asked about the situation, Mr. Chairman, 

the Premier said, and I quote: 

 

I want to say this . . . The fact that the government has 

said we don’t think rent control is the answer — that 

ought not to be a licence or interpreted by anyone in this 

province that now we have a licence to increase rents at 

what are an unacceptable level. 

 

Referring to the situation, and also at that time called for 

extending the notice given to renters. And I just wondered, I 

think at that time, Mr. Premier, you called for a one-year notice 

to be given. And I just wondered whether that is in process, 

although I don’t think that’s going to solve the problem, and I 

don’t think it is the answer. I think at that time you referred to 

. . . In the CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] story, the 



May 3, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7477 

headline is “Notice of rent hikes could be extended . . .” and the 

Premier’s name. I just wonder whether that is in play at the 

present time, or should renters expect that to be announced in 

the next short while? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. That particular example 

the member highlights is obviously one that is unacceptable. 

Anybody hearing that story would understand that’s acceptable. 

In fact I understand from the Attorney General that we know 

anecdotally landlords have reached out to tenants that are 

affected by that because they understand that it’s unacceptable, 

and there’s opportunities for those people to avoid that kind of a 

rate hike. 

 

I did, we did have some discussion with the media the day that 

issue was raised, and the reference that the member has just 

made was certainly in the context of we’re going to have a 

housing summit coming up shortly. Now it obviously has 

passed. And these matters, we’re going to be interested in 

hearing from the non-profit associations, from the community 

groups, and from the municipalities about some of these ideas 

— on time for notice, for example, or even just generally on 

rent control. 

 

And what the minister has reported to the cabinet is that there 

was not a lot of interest on rent control, not just from 

municipalities. We know where the mayor of Saskatoon and the 

mayor of Regina, they’ve weighed in on this issue and said rent 

control is wrong for their cities, Mr. Chair. The mayors have 

said rent control is wrong for their cities. Now we heard from 

other municipalities, and a number of other community 

associations who reported to the minister at the summit that this 

was not the answer. And so the government is not alone in this 

regard. And it’s not real estate developers as sometimes the 

opposition likes to characterize as the ones who are opposing 

rent control. It’s municipal leaders. It’s those who are on the 

front line dealing with this issue. 

 

And when the member for Eastview would’ve travelled around 

in 2007, when vacancy rates were lower and still came to the 

conclusion that rent controls were wrong, she would’ve met 

with the same community groups, the same municipal leaders 

who said to the government then, don’t do rent controls. The 

NDP chose not to do them. What’s changed since then? Well 

they were the government, duty bound to provide good public 

policy for the province of Saskatchewan. Now they’re the 

opposition, and I think now it’s more about politics than good 

public policy. And so they’ve completely reversed their position 

on rent control, one that they worked carefully and diligently on 

to come to in 2007, and now they have reversed the position — 

not born out of the efficacy of the policy, but born rather out of 

their political interests. 

 

We are going to continue with the full spectrum plan that we 

have highlighted for housing in the province. I would just say 

this. The Hon. Leader of the Opposition said, well you know, 

why don’t we have, why don’t we have a plan in each 

municipality to deal with their current state and put up some 

housing units really quickly? Why wouldn’t we have that? 

 

Well I can tell the hon. member this, Mr. Chair, that at the 

housing summit, one of the conclusions the minister has 

reported, one of the bits of advice that we received from 

participants there was that — and one we responded to 

positively to, by the way — was that yes, we need to work with 

municipalities. We have been up till date. We will continue to 

do that to recognize that each municipal area requires a different 

solution and that we will move as quickly as we possibly can in 

government. 

 

Now on the issue of social housing, we have a challenge in this 

province today. I don’t expect it’s new. I expect it faced — the 

previous government — I expect it faced members of . . . the 

ministers of Sask Housing in the previous government. Here’s 

the challenge, and I hope members are listening carefully. The 

challenge is, is that there’s no ongoing income testing for social 

housing in the province. There really isn’t a measure to achieve 

that. 

 

And so the fact of the matter is this, that in social housing we’ll 

have a number of people living there who probably wouldn’t 

qualify. In fact, Mr. Chair, the wait-list that the member refers 

to, the wait-list for social housing — and by the way he did not 

point out the fact that in three of our largest . . . or three large 

centres, Moose Jaw, P.A. [Prince Albert], and Saskatoon — the 

wait-list has gone down in three out of four of our largest cities. 

But still, on that wait-list, it’s not necessarily a clear indicator of 

demand because often people on the wait-list themselves don’t 

qualify. They make too much money. Remember social housing 

is income tested so that those who need it the most get that 

housing, so that MLAs aren’t taking up the space of someone 

else or maybe other, or maybe other professionals who needed 

social housing for a time perhaps, but have advanced beyond 

the need for that and are now making more than what would be 

income tested, making enough that would disqualify them from 

social housing. 

 

And so I’m asking members opposite, and I’m specifically 

asking the Leader of the Opposition, to work with the 

government because I think the minister responsible will be 

bringing forward a report to cabinet — I believe it’s in June is 

the current objective — to try to deal with this issue because we 

know there’s potential spaces that we can free up for people 

who need it that may be taken up right now by those who 

wouldn’t qualify with respect to the income levels that they’re 

now earning. 

 

So here’s a step we can take. We need to do it in a way that’s 

constructive and that affords people the respect they deserve, 

because they’re in that social housing now. They obviously 

qualified at some point. We need to respect that fact. But we 

also need to deal very honestly and in a real way with the fact 

that . . . Well the member from P.A. is shaking his head. I think 

we need to deal honestly with the fact that some people in 

social housing wouldn’t qualify today. That housing is there for 

a reason. It’s there for low-income people. So let’s find out 

what. Let’s find out what’s happened. Let’s find out together 

how many are qualified. 

 

Can we open up some more units for those who truly need it? 

Can we do it in a positive and constructive way that’s respectful 

of those people currently in social housing? I think we can, and 

I think we must because the housing challenge is real. And 

we’ve got to make sure that social housing is available for its 



7478 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2011 

original intent, to help people who are income tested — that 

was the plan under the NDP — who actually qualify for that 

housing. We’re going to do that work. We invite the opposition 

to support us in that work. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I really wonder and what 

most families in the province are wondering, why after four 

years in government we have all these wonderful ideas of how 

to solve the problem. They’re saying, why didn’t you start 

doing this when you were elected in dealing with high rent, lack 

of housing, and wait for the list to get at this incredible wait-list 

in the province for social housing or for seniors or for 

affordable housing? 

 

But on the question, Mr. Premier, of the idea of extending the 

notice of rent to a year, was that a proposal that was taken to the 

conference for discussion? And if so, how did the discussion 

go? And can you get from your minister a report on whether or 

not that was an acceptable idea or you just brought that 

forward? Was it an item that you asked the minister to take to 

the conference, or where did it go? Or did it . . . Was it just a 

statement you made that day and then nothing has happened 

with it since because some people actually bought into the idea 

that at least it would give them an extra six months. That’s 

something. And they actually read the report that you said you 

were thinking about doing it, and it’s not clear to me that there 

was a decision made at the conference that said no, this is a bad 

idea, or they came to the conclusion, yes, it was a good idea. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. We didn’t restrict the 

discussion at the housing summit. Anything was on the table 

from rent control, from new generation rent control in 

Manitoba, from the deadline or the notice requirements for 

people, for landlords wanting to increase the rent. I can report to 

the Assembly that it’s certainly the view of officials and the 

minister that rent control was not being . . . it was not in 

demand as a result of the summit and neither were changes 

related to the notice offered up as recommendations from those 

attending the summit. 

 

I also want to return it back to the wait-list, Mr. Chair, because 

the wait-list is not the only metric in terms of determining if 

there’s a shortage. Remember that there are a number of reasons 

for households to apply for social and affordable housing. And 

wait-lists are an indication often of want, not necessarily need. 

This goes to my point earlier, that sometimes the wait-list is 

populated by individuals who, after getting to the top of the list, 

will find out they’re not qualified because of the income testing 

that’s a part of social housing — not new to our government, by 

the way, but a long-standing practice here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And we think it’s time to take a real look at the 

social housing issue that we have, the number of units we have. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Remember that we have 800 new units built since we took 

office. And the hon. member said, why are you only doing 

something about it right now? Mr. Chair, one of the earliest 

things we did in government was the commission, the task force 

struck of two former MLAs — a former colleague of his, Mr. 

Pringle; a former colleague of mine, Mr. Merriman — who 

travelled the province and met with the municipal sector, met 

with CBOs [community-based organization], and made several 

recommendations with respect to housing. 

 

The previous minister of Social Services, the current Minister 

of Social Services have been implementing much of what was 

recommended in that report. Moreover we’ve been building 

public units, Mr. Chair, for some time before the member’s 

return to the province. We’ve been building new units, and we 

have 800 new units in operation — 1,100 in different phases of 

construction, Mr. Chair. We’ve moved to act, to index the 

shelter allowance for those who are most vulnerable in this 

province — something that they could have done and refused to 

do for a very, very long time, Mr. Chair. 

 

We know this, that the vacancy rates today — and I repeat — 

while they are still too low, are higher than they were under the 

previous administration. The question isn’t what took this 

government so long, because we began acting immediately. The 

question is why were they doing nothing in 2006-07, Mr. Chair. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Obviously the issue is the four-year 

period and the year we’re looking at now, as to what the 

Premier and what his government is doing. 

 

And the fact is that, at the conference held in Saskatoon, it’s my 

understanding that the reason rent control wasn’t discussed is 

the fee charged to individuals was $150, and the people who 

wanted rent control were outside handing out leaflets and 

nobody would go talk to them. That’s the truth of what 

happened with rent control discussion at the conference that the 

Premier paid for, is that the renters who can’t afford their rent 

were excluded from the conference because of the fee charged 

to keep them out. So they took the next best option. I know the 

Queen City rental association or tenants’ association, they were 

leafleting outside, outside of the conference, handing out, trying 

to lobby the government for rent control, not inside where they 

should have been speaking and making the case of why they 

wanted rent control. 

 

Now you can pretend that it’s not an issue of the public, but you 

can’t do it by excluding them from a housing conference where 

they wanted to come to have a voice and to have a say, and 

especially not in 2011. 

 

I think a much better way, even if you didn’t agree with rent 

control, would be to get them in the room, talk to them, and 

convince them why rent control wouldn’t work — not to 

exclude them by having a fee that people who are living near 

the poverty line or at the poverty line and can’t afford their rent, 

to announce a big, fancy conference or hearing and then 

exclude the very people that the housing conference is supposed 

to protect. Now that’s not fair. And what I’m hearing from 

many people who wanted to go to the conference, that they 

couldn’t because they couldn’t afford the $150 per head to go 

in. So they took the next option and were handing out little 

leaflets that they printed up somewhere and trying to convince 



May 3, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7479 

those people going to the conference, they would hand them the 

pamphlet and say please read this and when you go inside to 

explain to the Premier’s staff and the minister’s staff who were 

there, and the people from housing with the best interest, that 

there is a problem and that they wanted rent control. 

 

So when you say that at the conference nobody talked about 

rent control, it’s likely that it’s because the minister excluded 

them with the high fee. And if you want to hear from people 

who want rent control, again why don’t we do something where 

we have a public forum? We could do it together and invite 

people who are living in rental units to come in free. We could 

buy coffee and let them come in and speak their mind. You 

could convince them they don’t need rent control, and then we 

could have a discussion around that. But to pretend that you had 

a hearing where you heard from people and charged $150 a 

head to get in, and then excluding the very people who can’t 

afford their rent, how the heck would they be able to afford 

$150 to go to a day’s conference? 

 

So my question to the Premier is, why don’t we reinvent this 

conference and have it in the inner city in Saskatoon or Estevan 

or Swift Current where renters could come and have a say in 

whether they want rent control or not? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Chair, this is a good forum 

for debate, and I think it’s been a good debate heretofore. I 

think we’ve had an honest exchange and there’s honest 

differences. And so I’m going to assume that the hon. member 

is unaware of the facts of the housing summit when he would 

make the accusations that he just made. Because the hon. 

member will know — or should know, his housing critic should 

tell him if he hasn’t — that non-profit groups were, their 

registration was paid for. Their . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Well let’s read the list. Well let’s read the list. 

 

Let’s read the list: the River Bank Development in Prince 

Albert, the Northern Spruce Housing Corporation in Prince 

Albert, Lighthouse Supported Living in Saskatoon, Quint 

Development Corporation. I wonder if the critic or the member, 

the Leader of the Opposition would agree that Quint 

Development Corporation is likely to represent the views of the 

inner city of Saskatoon. Their registration was waived. The 

Gabriel Housing . . . Well he nodded his head, so I assume he 

accepts that fact. Gabriel Housing Corporation, Regina; Silver 

Sage Housing Corporation in Regina; Cress Housing in 

Saskatoon; Namerind Housing in Regina; the Saskatoon 

Housing Coalition.  

 

I assume they were going to be fairly direct with the minister, 

who by the way met with all of these community-based groups 

and discussed the housing issue, met with them for an hour and 

a half, and there was no consensus or recommendation on rent 

control. Carleton Housing in Lloydminster, Habitat for 

Humanity, KC Charities in Saskatoon, Carmichael Outreach in 

Regina. 

 

And so now this member of the opposition and his critic want to 

tell the province of Saskatchewan about the exclusivity of the 

summit where the most active groups on the housing file in the 

inner city, in Prince Albert and Regina and Saskatoon are 

invited and their registration is completely waived while private 

developers in municipal sector paid, Mr. Chair, and paid $150. 

It’s not, Mr. Speaker, it’s not genuine. That’s the bottom line. 

 

And moreover, moreover the minister met with these groups for 

about an hour and a half, and there was no consensus on rent 

control. And, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chairman, I would say it’s 

important if we’re going to advance this debate that the member 

opposite, that all members of the House deal in fact, Mr. Chair. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier 

was about individual renters and he knows that. He knows that 

he’s misrepresenting what I said, and he’s very good at that. He 

does it all the time. 

 

I was not talking about groups and organizations, and I don’t 

know how many of them attended. I was talking about 

individual renters who wanted to go, and how many 

stakeholders. And also the renters who came here and stood on 

the front steps of the legislature and invited the minister to 

come and speak to them, and there was no one from the 

government who would go and speak to them. Now the 

question is, what are you afraid of? Why are you afraid of 

individual renters? 

 

I never said that groups, organizations weren’t invited. I didn’t 

say that. I said individual renters had to pay $150. And if it was 

free for the organizations, why wouldn’t it be logical that if 

individual members who were renting wanted to go, they would 

be free as well? Why would you exclude them? 

 

And so I want to say to the Premier, and I’m not being 

argumentative, I’m just saying why don’t we want to listen to 

individual renters like Ann, who I referred to in question period 

who is seeing her rent go up by 63 per cent? Why haven’t we 

got a forum where we could get individuals to come and present 

their own case as individuals in a human element and explain to 

us what it’s like to rent and have the rent go up by 63 per cent 

when you’re on a fixed income of $1,200? Why not hear from 

individuals, unfiltered by organizations? What would be wrong 

with that? 

 

What would be wrong with hearing from people like Ann who 

showed me her income of $1,200 and every penny where she 

spent that money? She could be the Finance minister and get it 

better balanced than the present Finance minister. She knew 

exactly. And at the bottom of the line, she had spent her $1,200 

and had left over $4.95, and her rent was going up 500 bucks. 

 

And she would like to, and I’m sure there were many others 

who would like to come and present what it feels like and what 

it’s like to be on a limited income so we understand. It’s easy 

for us to talk about it or it’s easy for organizations to talk about 

it. It’s quite another thing if you’re 85 years old and you’d lived 

in a place for over 20 years and you haven’t moved, to get a 

notice that your rent’s going up 63 per cent. And that’s my 

question to the Premier. 

 

And I’m not, for sure I’m not trying to mislead you, sir, on any 

issue around organizations getting into the conference free. My 



7480 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2011 

question was why were renters excluded if they couldn’t afford? 

And going back, you’ll remember I said individuals who 

couldn’t afford to pay their rent, why were they excluded? For 

sure, if I didn’t explain it well to say individuals, I think by my 

explanation if you read Hansard, you know I was referring to 

individuals not organizations. 

 

But again my question to you, sir, is why were individuals 

excluded because they would have been the best ones to hear 

from as to the impact of high rent? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, the intimation now is that this 

same group that are affected by these very high rate hikes were 

not met with or listened to by the government. And the member 

opposite will know . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well fair 

enough then. The member’s not saying that. I accept that. 

 

But I want to tell him that both the Attorney General and the 

minister responsible met with that group and heard from them, 

exactly as the hon. member would want them to hear, in terms 

of how that did feel to get that rental notice and what options 

these people wanted explored for their very compelling case. 

The fact of the matter is, that meeting did occur. 

 

The fact of the matter is, that two months prior to the housing 

summit, there was a consultation the minister engaged in. 

Twelve . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the member says 

that, the member now sort of shakes his head and said that’s not 

what it’s about. He’s just asked about individuals being able to 

access the Minister of Social Services or my office or any 

member of the government side to make their case either in 

favour of rent control or to portray for the government their 

concerns on the housing issue, and I’m answering the question. 

 

Two months before the housing summit, there was 12 

consultations held. Three hundred and fifty people participated, 

Mr. Chair. Moreover I’m not aware of a single request for a 

meeting from an individual, whether she was . . . in any of her 

files where the minister has not made every effort to make those 

meetings happen. Fact of the matter is, we work very hard to 

make sure that’s the case, imperfectly I’m sure, but we make 

every effort to make sure that’s the case. 

 

And prior to the housing summit, on the very issues the 

member’s raising, the minister engaged in a public consultation 

— 12 meetings and 350 people. And then it culminated in a 

housing summit whereby the individual renter’s plight was also 

represented, or wherein was also represented by 

community-based organizations that wished to attend. And their 

fee was completely waived. 

 

I am very comfortable that we heard both from those 

organizations that represent those individuals, that the minister 

has heard from individual tenants who are facing challenges and 

other stakeholders with respect to the housing challenge, has 

met with them, and the meetings have occurred freely. And 

there’s been an engagement, Mr. Chair. That is the track record 

of the government dating back to its very first housing 

consultation we struck in 2008 with Bob Pringle and Ted 

Merriman after years of neglect by the NDP of the housing 

issue, Mr. Chair. 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I accept the answer from 

the Premier. I don’t agree with it. I think we do need a very 

different form of housing initiative, one that’s rapid fire, urgent, 

and that we get a lot of things done this summer. I don’t see that 

happening. I also think we need, in the interim, rent control. But 

I think we’ve explored this from enough angles, and I think 

we’ll agree to disagree. 

 

And if I could, Mr. Chairman, just notify the committee, I have 

one urgent call to make. And while I’m out for just a few 

moments, the Deputy Leader has some questions that she wants 

to ask. So if you don’t mind, I will vacate, but thank the 

Premier for the answer. 

 

[16:45] 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Deputy House Leader. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you. Thank you very much. Soon, soon, 

Mr. Chair. 

 

Anyway, Mr. Chair, I wanted to look to get some clarification 

from the Premier in some questions that had really come about 

because of estimates. One evening we had spent a fair bit of 

time and the Minister of Government Services had gone to great 

lengths to talk about office space standard that had been 

adopted by executive government in 2010. And I believe it had 

gone to 200 square feet per employee, per FTE [full-time 

equivalent], and that was now the current or new target 

utilization rate for ministries’ overall space allocation for 

general office space in each location. 

 

The minister also went on to talk about working with all 

ministries to review the current space allocations with other 

departments and that we seek out strategies and feasible 

opportunities to reduce space because my mandate is to reduce 

the footprint of government. 

 

But then as we went on through discussions, the minister also 

revealed that there was a commitment, Government Services is 

committed to taking space in tower 3. So this is an as unyet 

built tower in downtown Regina. And at that time, it was about 

a month ago, Mr. Chairperson, and the minister said that while 

they were committed to taking the space for an extended period 

of time, they had no idea who would occupy the space. Does 

the Premier have any idea who will be moving into this prime 

office space in downtown Regina? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chair, let me just say at the 

outset, I welcome the questions from the hon. member. Today 

on the skyline of the city of Regina is something we haven’t 

seen for a very, very long time in the province. It’s a 

construction crane. We’ve seen a number of them in the city of 

Saskatoon here recently, especially on the east side. There’s a 

joke going around that city that the official bird of Saskatoon 

may well be the construction crane. 

 

We hope that that’s catching. We hope that we see a lot more 

construction in Regina and in centres across the province, 



May 3, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7481 

especially when, Mr. Chair, especially when the construction 

means that, yes there’ll be government offices potentially 

located there, but that we would get upwards of 100 brand new 

corporate head office jobs thanks to Mosaic. That’s the right 

kind of construction crane for the capital city of Regina. 

 

Mr. Chairman, it’s why . . . And I know that some of the MLAs 

on the opposite side, from Regina, were welcoming of the hon. 

member’s question and criticism of this project, and that shocks 

me a little bit. This is something I thought there’s certain things 

in politics that you welcome no matter what side of the House 

you sit on. When the NDP cut business taxes, that was a 

welcome thing, and we said so. 

 

Here’s a development, Mr. Chair, that’s going to result in a 

brand new building in downtown, that is going to result in new 

head office jobs for the city of Regina and for the province of 

Saskatchewan. And it’s happening at a very unique time in 

terms of the corporate vacancy rate in our capital city. The 

vacancy rate in Regina is less than 2 per cent. Roughly 70 per 

cent of government leases on an annual basis come due in 

downtown Regina. There are always leases coming due, and of 

course if the vacancy rate is low — and we’ve just had the 

housing discussion — if the vacancy rate is low, guess what? 

Rents are moving up. 

 

Government, if it’s to be responsible even as it’s reducing its 

footprint, needs to make sure that it’s a force for good in 

increasing the supply of square footage out there so that the 

taxpayers aren’t paying ever increasing rates of rent. So this 

particular project is the nexus of a couple of important things. 

One, the attraction of a head office to the capital city — very 

important for Mosaic. Two, a brand new development in 

downtown Regina — a beautiful development, I would say, 

based on what I’ve seen. That’s very important. And three, 

some easing in terms of the pressure on government for costs of 

space even as we reduce the size of government 15 per cent 

over four years. And by the way, I want to report to the House, 

and thanks to our public service, we’re on track to achieve that 

objective. 

 

The bottom line is this: this city’s growing. There’s a demand 

for office space in the city of Regina. This particular building 

will accommodate some of that growth. It’s going to be some 

years out. We know leases are coming due all the time. And so 

while we can’t say this ministry, that ministry, and this ministry 

in three or four years will move into that building, we know 

there will be a demand because we see a 70 per cent turnover 

rate year over year in some cases, Mr. Chair. There will be a 

demand. And in the meantime, we’ve got a brand new head 

office, something I think the Deputy Leader of the Opposition 

and the Regina MLAs will want to welcome. Thank you, Mr. 

Chair. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier didn’t even go 

close to answering the question. And it’s not that we’re being 

critical of the project or disappointed that a tower is going up in 

downtown Regina. It’s good for the city of Regina. It’s good for 

the province of Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, when we have 

had the Premier ever since the election . . . And I would advise 

him maybe reread your platform from the last election 

campaign when you made the commitment that you will 

provide Saskatchewan people with more transparency and 

accountability than any previous government. That’s what 

we’re asking for. 

 

We’re asking to understand why you are looking to lease 50 to 

60,000 square feet of space in downtown Regina. For whom is 

this space required? Who is going to be moving into this prime 

location? What is the need? 

 

First when the minister does a fairly lengthy discussion and 

explanation in estimates for Government Services, talking about 

the whole space standard changes that have been made, and she 

went on to say utilization of the standard has saved the 

government over 36,000 square feet of office space with 

various moves in 2010-11. So you’re talking about saving 

36,000 square feet of space that no longer — I would assume by 

the answer — has to be rented by the Government of 

Saskatchewan to accommodate space because you have 

rearranged and better utilized space. 

 

Then there was another lengthy discussion about lean processes. 

And I realize that lean talks about the processes you use. But 

let’s be honest here. Lean also means that as you streamline 

your processes and save government money and provide better 

service to the people of Saskatchewan, it naturally means you 

will be eliminating some jobs and streamlining processes. 

That’s part and parcel of it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then we have a commitment from this government that 

they will reduce the civil service 4 per cent for each of the four 

years they are government — 16 per cent reduction in the civil 

service, a reduction in space standard requirements for 

government operations, and then we’re turning around and we 

are leasing . . . Well no, we have committed, we have 

committed to leasing 50 to 60,000 square feet of new space. 

 

Now it’s interesting the answer that we got. So what I asked is, 

is Government Services leasing any space in the new tower or 

negotiating for any other government department or agency to 

be in the new office tower in downtown Regina? And the 

answer that we received is, Government Services is committed 

to taking some space in tower 3. They are committed. So that 

commitment’s already been made. 

 

They’re in the process of negotiating a lease at this point in 

time. So now Government Services usually does the 

negotiations for office space. They are the ones that arranges 

space, that moves government departments to appropriate 

space, either in government-owned buildings or through leases. 

But the person from Government Services doesn’t say, we’re in 

the process of negotiating space; he says, they’re in the process 

of negotiating a lease at this point in time. 

 

So do you know, I don’t want to be a conspiracy theory here, 

but you almost wonder if the negotiations is going on through 

Executive Council. Was this commitment to space for a reduced 

government footprint, was this commitment to 50 or 60,000 

square feet in downtown Regina, was that a commitment the 

Premier made to guarantee the go-ahead of this officer tower? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 



7482 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2011 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I need to correct something I 

said in my earlier answer. I had the correct number but in the 

wrong context. But it’s an important fact nonetheless. In 

Regina, about 70 per cent of government’s leased office space 

is located in the downtown. Typically 50 to 100,000 square feet 

of leased office space expires every year. 

 

So let’s walk through this then, Mr. Chair. You’ve got that 

many leases, that much lease space expiring, between 50 and 

100,000 every year, in a market that’s very tight, in a market 

where the vacancy rate is 2 per cent. And so therefore, what’s 

happening to rent? It’s going up. And so in that kind of a 

market, government, even though we are reducing the footprint 

and we are on target to reduce the footprint, we’re not reducing 

the footprint to accommodate 50 to 100,000 less square feet 

every year. We’re still going to need some space. And we still 

need to be a force for good in increasing the supply in the 

market. That case was presented to the government by 

Government Services, that we had a challenge with respect to 

office space. 

 

So the question then is, can we address that issue? Can we 

address the need for a long-term supply and easing of the rent 

costs the taxpayers are responsible for, and attract something 

new to the city and attract a head office, in this case, the 

Canadian headquarters for Mosaic corporation? Could all of 

that be possible in one particular initiative? The answer was, 

yes, it could. The government will take less than 30 per cent of 

the space in this building. Not with new government, but with 

existing government, even trimming down at the level the hon. 

member has correctly characterized, we’re going to need that 

space as that building opens up in 2012. And in the bargain, the 

developer’s going to take a number of, a lot of the space. And 

Mosaic is moving upwards of 100 brand new people to the city 

— new jobs, new corporate head office jobs, to our capital city 

and to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So we were able to meet a number of needs here. One, that we 

want to see the province grow. We don’t want to just mine 

potash; we want to see a bigger corporate presence, bigger 

corporate offices from potash. And three, the government itself 

is going to need to give itself some breathing space in the mid-, 

in the long term with respect to demands for office space. I 

repeat again, typically in a year, 50 to 100,000 square feet of 

government lease expires in the capital city. That is going to . . . 

That is much more than reducing the size of government by 4 

per cent, I can tell you that, Mr. Chair. Moreover, there are 

pressures on rents right now because of a 2 per cent, less than 2 

per cent vacancy rate. 

 

So here we have prudent policy on the part of government to 

make sure it eases the supply question for itself and lowers 

costs to taxpayers. And in the bargain, attract a brand new head 

office to the province of Saskatchewan. And now we have a 

crane in downtown Regina for the first time in a very long time. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Chair, this is an awful lot of 

investment, and a big commitment of taxpayers’ funds to have a 

crane in downtown Regina. And when the Premier made the 

commitment to transparency and accountability, that’s what 

we’re asking for. 

 

He talks about a head office moving to downtown Regina. It’s 

wonderful, Mr. Speaker, but he should add into that we are also 

giving 100,000 per job tax credit or tax incentive for each of 

those jobs that move into downtown Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he was at the sod-turning for this new project in 

downtown Regina, but I can’t find anywhere in any of the 

announcements that the Premier made this statement, “I look 

forward to the day the Government of Saskatchewan is a major 

tenant in this building.” 

 

Even looking at the new space standard that the minister 

explained in estimates that evening of 200 square feet per 

person, per FTE, as the space requirement, the new standard by 

the Government of Saskatchewan, we’re looking at 50 to 

60,000 square feet. We’re talking about 300-plus people 

moving into the downtown office tower. I would say that makes 

us a bigger tenant than Mosaic who the Premier has talked 

about quite, quite a bit, talking about Mosaic’s head office. 

Well I think the Government of Saskatchewan is going to have 

a bigger presence in that building than anyone else. So to have a 

crane in downtown Regina is wonderful, but we are paying tax 

incentives for the head office jobs that are moving there and we 

are also leasing a major portion of this new office tower. 

 

Again I will say to the Premier, this is an awful long 

commitment of a 20-year lease to this space that we’re not sure 

what it’s for and just . . . I hope he’s not just trying to drive 

down the lease costs in downtown Regina, because he talked 

about having new space, government moving. There’s also a 

tight rental market. I hope he’s not just trying to open up the 

rental market and investing in a new building, but we don’t 

really know because we’re still waiting for some transparency 

and accountability by this Premier. 

 

[17:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, now I can see the Premier, he’s over there 

chuckling, having a great time. But the fact of the matter, the 

province of Saskatchewan has got tied into these long-term 

deals before. And the Government of Saskatchewan has been 

tied into 20-year lease agreements that have been extremely 

expensive for the taxpayers. We have paid over and over and 

over again for numerous projects that were long-term 

agreements like this and there is some uncomfortableness with 

the Premier tying taxpayers of Saskatchewan into a 20-year, 

long-term lease for property and space that he doesn’t even 

know what it’s for. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not a real estate agent, but I would say 

if a client came to me and said, well I need 40,000 square feet, I 

would like these attributes kind of attached to the space. Then I 

would go looking for the space. I don’t say, well look at this, 

I’ve got 40 or 50 or 60,000 square feet, now gee I’m going to 

lease it. I’m going to lease it for 20 years, but what am I going 

to put in it? Oh well, we’ll find something. I mean there’s 

enough stuff that moves around. We’ll find something. 

 

Nobody does business that way, Mr. Chair. We all know it. So 

what we’re looking for is some accountability on behalf of the 

Premier and transparency which he committed to the people of 



May 3, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7483 

this province. He is reducing the size standards for office space 

in government. He is reducing the size of the civil service, and 

he is renting more space. Please tell us why. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. We’ll try one more 

time. We’re going to, at the end of the day, the government will 

lease about 60,000 square feet in this building when it’s 

completed — 2012. Remember this now. This is a very 

important fact for the hon. member and answers her question I 

hope, I think. 

 

There is approximately 475,000 square feet of leased space 

coming due between 2012 and 2014. Mr. Chair, we are going to 

need much more than the . . . Assuming that we move, which is 

an option for government to move, the member will note — she 

used to be a minister of Government Services — assuming 

these offices may relocate, there would be a much greater 

demand than the 60,000 feet available in this particular tower. 

We know on a per employee basis the cost for this particular 

space, which will be needed, is lower in this particular facility 

the way it will be configured than in other facilities. We know 

the vacancy rate in Regina for corporate space is 2 per cent. 

 

It’s very interesting what she said here, Mr. Chair, a minute 

ago. She said, well but if the government takes action, like we 

are, to avail itself of more options, 60,000 feet even though 

we’re going to need a half a million square feet in the next 

number of years, and she says if the government does that — 

takes actions to make sure there’s some options so that 

taxpayers aren’t paying ever and ever higher increasing office 

rents — she says, she intimates, well that wouldn’t be any good 

because we’ll be driving down rents in the city of Regina with 

these 60,000 feet. 

 

Now we’re going to increase supply and drive down rents in the 

city of Regina, maybe wreck the market. I don’t know. It 

hearkens back to the member for Saskatoon, the Labour critic 

for the opposition, who made the same case about housing. His 

big criticism about our housing plan was it’s going to result in 

too many houses and that might affect, that might affect price, 

Mr. Chair. 

 

Well first of all, if there’s a housing shortage, it’s very likely 

that it would take a lot of houses for that to happen. But it is 

precisely the point that we need supply options, not just in 

housing, but with respect to corporate offices for the city of 

Regina and for the government. I can assure the member this. 

This space is going to be needed. This space is going to be 

needed, and much more space will be needed if we choose to 

seek other options. 

 

The fact of the matter is that the economy of Regina is growing 

not because the government is growing, because we’re getting 

smaller, Mr. Chair, and hopefully more efficient. The city of 

Regina is growing. The economy is growing here because of the 

private sector. That’s driving a demand for corporate office 

space. We know that puts pressure on government. We’ve seen 

this project not only as leverage for government to provide 

competitively cost office space for our government offices as 

they’re required, even as we shrink government, but also to 

attract a head office. 

We think it is a good project for the city of Regina. We think 

it’s a good project for the province of Saskatchewan. The space 

the government will be taking in the building is much, much 

less than the space, than the leases that will be coming due over 

the same period of time. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I guess 

that’s the Premier’s version of being transparent and 

accountable. He says take my word for it; it will be less. But 

what struck me when the Premier was making his pitch talking 

about the markets in Regina and the lease rates and what will 

come, what leases will run out or be up this year for the 

Government of Saskatchewan, you know, there are so many 

questions that come up. Are you automatically going to move? 

What are your costs of moving? Does that space accommodate 

what you’re looking for? Obviously the Premier has some 

inkling of what’s going in there. 

 

But I’m struck by the feel that the Premier here is picking 

winners and losers, supporting a head office move by 

committing taxpayers’ dollars to that building for an extended 

period of time, 20-year lease. And I’ll tell you. I’ve seen some 

of these 20-year leases — they’re pretty ironclad — that were 

signed by the former Conservative government that the Premier 

actually was mentored by the former premier, Grant Devine. 

And he can shake his head all he likes, but I mean we’ve all 

seen many familiar faces in this building. And there are 

numerous people that get very uncomfortable over some of the 

things that are going on. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, all we have to look at . . . Now the Minister 

of Health, the Minister of Health just reminded me, Mr. 

Speaker, here we have the whole deal with Amicus, and that 

opens up . . . Here we have an under-the-table agreement signed 

out of the Premier’s office. No details are being released. The 

facility was under construction before the Saskatoon Regional 

Health Authority even approved the deal. You know, and I 

mean it raises questions. That’s taxpayers’ dollars. Well the 

Premier’s chuckling over there. Well I’m glad he is because 

taxpayers don’t think it’s funny, Mr. Chair. 

 

And all we have to look at is one other: Parkridge in Saskatoon. 

Here’s a facility that was leased by the former Conservative 

government — another one of these long-term deals, Mr. 

Speaker — 1.2 to 1.4 million paid in rent every year for 

twenty-three and a half years, almost 24 years. Renovations 

would have been done by the health authority, Mr. Speaker. 

Then we end up buying this facility back, selling it to the 

regional health authority. The facility needs nineteen and a half 

million dollars in renovations. And we are well up over $60 

million. Some estimate that the cost for this building are closer 

to 80 over this time period. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier stands and says trust me, 

this is going to be a more reasonable rent than we’re paying in 

other places around Regina, well, do you know, there’s got to 

be a way to put some of the figures on the table so the taxpayers 

of this province who are going to be on the hook for 20 years 

will have some comfort that yes, this is the best deal for the 

Government of Saskatchewan and for the taxpayers of this 



7484 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2011 

province. 

 

That’s who we want the transparency and accountability for. 

I’m sure that’s why the Premier made the commitment in his 

campaign. We’re struggling to see it though, Mr. Speaker, and 

we’re almost running into the next campaign, almost in the next 

campaign, and we are still waiting for some transparency and 

accountability to be shown on a number of these files. It’s 

raised lots of questions and people are asking us, can’t you get 

the answers? Well the Premier won’t give them. He’s put the lid 

on these deals, and it looks like we’re going down the same 

path that we went in the ’80s. 

 

Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the member 

from Wood River is hollering SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato 

Utility Development Company]. Do you know, we always 

know when the government and the Sask Party is getting a little 

anxious because they start hollering SPUDCO. SPUDCO was 

reviewed in this legislature and it was scrutinized, Mr. Speaker, 

and what we need is some scrutiny on some these. 

Transparency was good then, Mr. Chair, and what we are 

looking for is transparency on this deal and accountability that 

the Premier promised to taxpayers of this province. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, the member has raised a number 

of different issues getting to her question which still relates to 

the building. I’ll just repeat, Mr. Chair, that it was going to need 

upwards of 470 to 500,000 square feet of office space over the 

next number of years. Our commitment in this building is to 

take less than 30 per cent of the building. There’s 60,000 feet. 

Mr. Chair, it’ll accommodate our plan to reduce the size of 

government. 

 

It also happened to leverage a brand new building for the city of 

Regina and a brand new head office. And I guess we could talk 

about head offices in Regina and how governments can impact 

them negatively and positively. Witness the Wascana oil or the 

CanOxy offices that we used to have in Regina but were really 

ripped from the city as a result of the efforts of the Opposition 

Leader, lobbying his NDP friends and then having the deal done 

by the NDP government and all of those former SaskOil jobs 

subsequently being taken away to Calgary. 

 

We could talk about that, Mr. Chair. We have a different view 

for the city. We believe we had to have more office, head 

offices in this province, that we ought not to just pump the oil 

and mine the potash, but that we all should, we should be 

attracting new corporate, new corporate head offices to our 

cities. And, Mr. Chair, we’re seeing some progress. This 

particular building is an example of that. 

 

In fact in the royalty changes that we have done and the review 

we’ve done, Mr. Chair, it’s no secret that we actually improved 

the potash tax structure in the province so that we weren’t just 

providing an incentive for new production workers, new 

miners, but also that we’d provide an incentive if people would 

bring their corporate officers to our city and that helped. 

 

The hon. member also depicted tax incentives as somehow 

directed by the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chair. Other 

than those royalty changes, that’s just not true. She’d done it 

once in question period as well. There are local tax incentives, 

but they’re local. The city of Regina feels pretty strongly about 

the project. The city of Regina likes the new jobs in the project. 

The city of Regina likes the added assessment and likes what 

it’ll do to downtown, and they have supported it, not just in 

word, Mr. Chair, but they’ve extended incentives as well, I 

believe, I believe local tax incentives. 

 

The hon. member raises Parkridge. Well first of all let me back 

up. The hon. member decries 25-year deals, leases. Well her 

government did a 20-year deal for the provincial office building 

in Meadow Lake, and her government did a 15-year deal for the 

J.A. Pepper Building in Weyburn. There’s a list here. I guess 

we can go down the list. The fact of the matter is leases that 

long have happened under the NDP. She tried to skip a decade 

— and some people, others tried to skip that decade as well — 

but she tried to skip it and reference only one particular decade. 

The fact of the matter is again the NDP’s words are one thing, 

but their actions and their record say something else. 

 

With respect to Parkridge, with respect to Parkridge, that was a 

25-year deal. Sixteen years of those 25 years, the NDP were in 

office. Every five years of that lease there was an option for 

government to purchase the facility, Mr. Chair. They never 

exercised that option. Moreover if the deal, which they know 

the details of because they were the government, if the deal was 

not right for the province of Saskatchewan, not right for health 

care in the province of Saskatchewan, they had another option. 

They could have just through vehicle of this legislature — it 

would have been clumsy perhaps — but they could have come 

into this legislature and by instrument of this place, they could 

simply break the contract. 

 

Well, well, well the Leader of the Opposition says I guess you 

shouldn’t do . . . that we shouldn’t do that. And that is our 

position generally speaking. But it hasn’t always been his 

position because when he took office in 1991 as a member of 

the cabinet, one of their first orders of business was to do what? 

To rip up the GRIP [gross revenue insurance program] 

agreement with Saskatchewan farmers. That’s what they did. 

 

Now, now, well now the member is chuckling. Now the 

member that asked the questions, the deputy leader is 

chuckling. Her question was on Parkridge, or her criticism on 

Parkridge was its term and this was a bad deal. They were in 

office for 16 years of it. They were more than happy to rip up 

GRIP for farmers, that legally binding agreement. Why didn’t 

they come into this legislature, if that Parkridge deal was 

terrible, and rip up that agreement as well? That’s a question the 

hon. member may want to answer when next she has the 

opportunity. 

 

[17:15] 

 

Mr. Chair, long-term leases have been a fact of the matter in 

this province, a fact of business in this province on the part of 

Government Services and SPM [Saskatchewan Property 

Management] before it and SPMC [Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation] before that, under their government, 

under our government. In our case, there is less than 30 per cent 

of this building to be used by government spaces over the years. 

We know that’s much less than what will be required even on 

the part of a government that’s shrinking in size and hopefully 



May 3, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7485 

getting more efficient. 

 

And, Mr. Chair, I repeat again, that as a result of this 

agreement, we have a brand new Canadian headquarters for 

Mosaic and a brand new development in downtown Regina. 

We’re happy to work with the city of Regina to see its 

continued growth and prospect, as we are with the rest of the 

province. We are proud of our capital city, and we want to 

continue to work with the mayor and council, the business 

people in Regina to add new jobs and create new buildings and 

developments in the downtown. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I could go on at length 

about the Premier’s comments, but there’s a little thing having 

to do with the province being bankrupt after the last 

Conservative government. Now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier, Mr. 

Chair, the Premier will be well aware of that. And while he 

smiles, there are many that are worried about us heading down 

that same path. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, before I turn the questioning over . . . 

 

The Chair: — Order. Order. I’m having a hard time hearing the 

member that’s placing the question. I would ask that the 

Assembly come to order. I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much. Just one quick 

question, just for clarification, right at the beginning of the 

Premier’s comments, he said this investment and the . . . I 

would assume by the long-term lease. And I should never 

assume anything, Mr. Speaker, but I will make that assumption. 

He said that by this investment by government, it secured a 

head office in downtown Regina. Was the Government of 

Saskatchewan the first investor in this project? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — No, Mr. Chair. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, to the Premier. I started 

out my comments by talking about a number of people in the 

province I’ve talked to who are beginning to feel that the gap 

between rich and poor in this province, or even between rich 

and working people, is widening too fast. And it’s not what they 

think the Saskatchewan way or their Saskatchewan is all about, 

where you have a few extremely rich people and then the rest of 

the community who are in the working capacity slipping slowly 

but surely, because their wages are being restricted, and seniors 

who are on very restricted pension plans who feel they can’t 

make ends meet. 

 

And I wanted to talk to the Premier or ask the Premier a few 

questions about the strategy when it comes to paying for health 

care workers, that is, health care workers told to lower their 

expectation, that a 1.5 per cent per year but CEOs rewarded 

with 20, 30, 40, up to 60 per cent increases. 

And I wonder if the Premier gets any sense from people, when 

he’s talking to families around the province — this gap between 

those who have a lot of money and people who are doing the 

heavy lifting and doing the day-to-day work, whether it’s 

women in home care or whether it’s people who are doing the 

teaching of our children in our schools — that there is a 

difference in the way we compensate working people. Those 

who are at high incomes, political staff, get fairly huge 

increases, and then the real working people are very much 

restricted and told to lower their expectation. 

 

And there is a double standard when it comes to rewarding the 

people who do the work. And I’m not arguing that CEOs don’t 

work; they do. I would argue with some of the decisions they 

make. But why is it that a CEO in the health region would need 

a 20 to 60 per cent increase and the home care worker deserves 

only 1.5 per cent? What is the plan behind that? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. While I’ll deal more 

with the specifics of the member’s questions here in a moment, 

I do want to talk just generally about affordability issues and 

specifically, I guess, one element of affordability in the 

province of Saskatchewan for families, and that’s the area of 

taxation. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I’m proud to report to this Assembly that since 

forming government only three and a half years ago, the 

Saskatchewan Party government has cut taxes 13 times. And 

the tax cuts have been meaningful income tax cuts that raised 

the personal and spousal exemption by 1,000 and child 

exemption by 500, education property tax cuts, very meaningful 

tax cuts for agricultural producers but also for those who own 

property in our cities, Mr. Chair. There’s a list of 13 tax cuts. 

 

Because we believe, Mr. Chairman, that while government 

needs to be there for those who are most vulnerable and while 

we need a fair wage strategy for the public sector — and more 

on that in a moment — the best way to ensure that we are 

dealing in the long term, in the most meaningful way with 

affordability issues and the question of are people sharing in the 

prosperity is to leave more money in people’s pockets. And that 

is very different from the strategy of the NDP. When the hon. 

member was in government, we found 17 tax hikes that he was 

a part of, Mr. Chair. Compare that to the 13 in the three and a 

half years since we have formed the government. 

 

We believe that you’ve got to begin at that point if you’re 

government. That’s the most direct impact you can have, other 

than those who are vulnerable which you can obviously have an 

important impact through social programs, but for the people of 

the province the greatest impact their governments can have in 

terms of affordability, in terms of the amount of money they’re 

left with, is to take less from them in taxes while not requiring 

them to do with less in terms of government service. That’s 

been our objective, Mr. Chairman. We’ll have a debate about 

that, but I think we’ve had some success. 

 

With respect to the member’s question, I can say that he’s 

talking about the managers of our health care system, the 

out-of-scope people. Mr. Chair, since we took office three and a 

half years ago, the Minister of Health confirms that 



7486 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2011 

management has not received an increase. And moreover that 

even after the increases that he has been highlighting in 

question period, and the Health critic as well, even after those 

increases are put into effect, our managers are being paid 65 per 

cent of the Western average. Now, of the western average. 

 

Now, Mr. Chair, this is an important point because just as we 

need to make sure we’re competing for the very best front-line 

health care workers, we need to be able to compete with 

appropriate public sector wages in all areas including in health 

care management. Right now we have under way in this 

province, a nation-leading lean process initiated by the deputy 

minister, a former CEO of the health region, and the Minister of 

Health to bring about major efficiencies and better patient care 

through lean techniques. We rely on management and front-line 

workers, but we rely on a complete team to implement those. 

 

And, Mr. Chair, we need to be competitive in terms of what we 

are paying all public employees in the province of 

Saskatchewan. In the case of managers — and you can point to 

a 20 per cent increase here; a higher percentage, 60 per cent 

increase in one particular area — remember, Mr. Chair, that on 

average even after the increases, we’re only paying our health 

care managers at 65 per cent of what other Western provinces 

are paying. We’re still going to have a hard time attracting and 

competing with those jurisdictions that are hiring health care 

managers. 

 

Moreover, Mr. Chair, I would say that when we have settled . . . 

and we’ve settled with thousands of health care workers, and 

the ratification numbers have come in very high — 90 per 

cent-plus. We’ve settled with health care workers at a point, Mr. 

Chair, where they are at over 90 per cent of the average of 

Western Canada. In other words, they’re very close to 100 per 

cent of the average of across Western Canada. So clearly we 

need to do more work in that regard. But some of them, Mr. 

Chair, are getting paid 110, 150 per cent, after the contract 

settlements, of the average of Western Canada. 

 

So we’re actually more competitive in terms of competing with 

the West, for those front-line workers than we are even after the 

increases for out-of-scope. I readily admit that the numbers 

don’t stand out for people — a 20 per cent rate hike for 

somebody or a 60 per cent rate hike for someone else . . . And 

the critic for Health is chirping from her seat. But I hope she 

recognizes, I hope in a lucid moment she’d recognize that we 

need to be competitive. And even after these increases, we’re 

only paying them at 65 per cent of the average of other western 

provinces. 

 

Now, Mr. Chair, I think we have struck a reasonable human 

resource policy in the health sector. We have settled contracts, 

contract after contract. We’re very hopeful we’re going to make 

some more progress on an outstanding contract, Mr. Chair. And 

all the while we’ve implemented some new innovations, some 

lean techniques in health care by that management and by 

front-line workers that has served the province very well, and 

served the health care system very well. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, the exact point that I was 

making, the Premier says that yes, in fact the CEOs of the 

health regions are getting huge increases. Increases like, 

February, the CEO of Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region got a 

$71,000 increase. That’s at the same time as 80 per cent of the 

staff in some sectors that are women are being told a 1 per cent 

increase or 1.5 per cent increase is good enough. And in terms 

of fairness, the people who are getting the 1.5 feel that they 

aren’t part of the booming economy. Because they say, if it is in 

fact booming and some people get a $71,000 increase, why am I 

restricted to a 2 or $3,000 increase? And I think that’s a 

legitimate question. 

 

The health region in Saskatoon, March of this year, received a 

$100,000 wage increase. April of this year, the CEO in the P.A. 

Health Region got a 60 per cent increase — 60, six, zero per 

cent increase. That would take a home care worker 50 years of 

increases at the present rate of increase to get a 60 per cent 

increase. It’s not that they don’t deserve to be paid, but how in 

the world can you explain one member of the health team, 

home care worker, getting a 1.5 per cent increase and the CEO 

getting 60 per cent? And the health care worker who’s getting 

the 1.5 per cent saying, look, even if you now froze the increase 

for the CEO for 50 years, I would just catch up after, I mean 

that’s longer than most people’s career could ever be. And it’s 

just not fair. And these women who work in health care doing 

the heavy lifting, I don’t think they expect 60 per cent increase. 

But when other people are getting 60 per cent increase, they 

really ask the question, am I being respected for the work I do 

every day? 

 

And I know other members of our caucus are getting calls from 

people who want to know why the increase. And I’m sure in 

truth your own backbenchers are getting calls from people who 

say, look in Prince Albert, why is it that the CEO gets 60 per 

cent increase? And I’m not blaming the CEO. Good for them if 

they can talk their way through the Minister of Health and get a 

60 per cent increase. I don’t blame them for taking the money. 

But the question is, when you say that if you didn’t give them 

the 60 per cent increase they would just leave, that’s like saying 

if you don’t give all the profits to the potash companies they’re 

going to leave. If you take more than a nickel on a dollar from 

the potash companies, they’re going to pack their bags and 

leave, that’s what they said. That’s when the profits were 1.8 

billion for the Potash Corporation. This year the gross profits 

are going to be $3 billion. It’ll be less than a nickel on a dollar 

because our take remains the same. 

 

And so what we’re seeing in the province is those who have a 

lot of money getting a lot more money, and those who are on a 

restricted income being told to lower their expectation. And I 

say to the Premier again, let’s use the example of the CEO in 

Prince Albert. Where in the world would we have come up with 

the idea that you had to keep giving increases and an increase at 

the rate of 60 per cent in order to keep this person in the 

position? And this is what bargaining is all about. You bargain 

very tough with health care workers. I understand that. But why 

isn’t the same standard of bargaining applied to the CEOs of 

health regions? 

 

[17:30] 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 



May 3, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7487 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, by the facts, more stringent 

requirements are made of health care managers in the province 

by the health regions. And I repeat the facts. The facts are this: 

that even after the increases that the member has highlighted 

just now are implemented, we pay our health care managers 35 

per cent less than what the average is paid in other Western 

provinces — managers. Managers. 

 

Well he shakes his head. That’s the fact. That’s the fact. And so 

we’ve seen some large increases. But even after those large 

increases, even after those large increases, our managers are in 

the 65th percentile of the average of those being paid in other 

Western provinces. That means we’re paying them 35 per cent 

less. In the case of health care workers with whom we’ve 

settled, they’re in the 90th percentile in many respects, and 

some of them are over 100 per cent, thank goodness. We’re 

paying them more than get paid in other provinces in Western 

Canada. So we’re very competitive. 

 

So more stringency has been applied by the health regions to 

management in terms of what we pay compared to other 

jurisdictions. And that’s what we have to compare it to, Mr. 

Chair, because we need to attract them from other places. More 

stringency is applied. More scrutiny, I would say, is applied and 

has been applied by regions to the managers when you look at 

the actual fact of the matter. But it’s easy in opposition to say, 

well you got a 20 per rate hike here and a 60 per cent hike here, 

and this guy gets $70,000. That argument is, you know, a little 

bit tenuous. You could make the same case. You could have a 

CEO of an oil company get a $70,000 raise, and it might mean a 

relatively small percentage versus the same percentage increase 

for the guy in the pumpjack. 

 

I mean, Mr. Chair, it’s about politics, this is. The truth of the 

matter is this: on average, after the increases, the salary 

increases that the hon. member is decrying are in place, after 

that, we pay our managers on average 35 per cent less than their 

counterparts in other Western jurisdictions. We pay our health 

care front-line workers much higher than that, close to 100 per 

cent for health care workers of the average of other Western 

provinces, in some case higher. And, Mr. Chair, by the way, 

that’s an approach we’ve used to bargaining. 

 

Under the NDP, they had this old, sort of the old, you know, 

socialist philosophy of everybody gets the same rate hike. That 

was their public sector mandates. It didn’t matter if we were 

competitive with other jurisdictions. It’s one, one, and one or 

two, two, and two, and it’s for everybody. 

 

Mr. Chair, we’ve taken a decidedly different approach to it. 

We’ve realized in the province, and we did so with nurses, that 

that kind of across-the-board solution for everybody doesn’t 

necessarily work if you’re not successfully competing with 

other jurisdictions for those health care professionals. So we 

have said as a result that our public sector bargaining mandate 

needs to be a bit more flexible, needs to be a bit fleet of foot, 

needs to understand that we’ll have to compete with Alberta 

and BC and Manitoba and Ontario for those health care workers 

if we want them to come back to the province. 

 

We campaigned on 800 new nurses in the province, something 

the NDP, the current member for North Battleford, said was 

impossible. Or at least he said, he would never set goals 

because he would probably never achieve them. How do you 

get those 800 nurses if you’re not offering them competitive 

wages with other jurisdictions? 

 

So we’ve said, our government has said, these across-the-board 

mandates don’t work in business. They don’t work for the 

non-government sector. Why would they work in government 

where we need to be competitive for these human resources? 

We’re not as competitive for managers right now, even after the 

increases. We’re not as competitive. We’re getting closer on 

front-line workers. It’s the right ratio. 

 

But the member’s going to point to a number of different 

examples of this increase or that increase because it’s good 

politics. The fact is, 35 per cent on average is the amount of 

money we pay, is the discount. In other words, we pay our 

health care workers on average 35 per cent less than other 

Western jurisdictions even after these increases are in effect. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I may have misheard the 

Premier, and if I did I apologize. But I think he said in an earlier 

statement that the CEOs hadn’t received any increases, and I 

just want to refer to The StarPhoenix story of March 11th and 

quote about the CEO of the Saskatoon Health Region. When 

Davies took over the Saskatoon Health Region CEO in June of 

2005, she was paid $183,000 for her first year. In 2006-07, the 

salary range for the job was between 228 and 296. In 2009-10 

she was at the top of the range and paid 312,000. And now this 

year, the wage goes to 400,000. That’s an increase over four 

years from 183,000 to 400,000. And the Premier says still that’s 

not enough. Still that’s not enough. Health care workers over 

that same period of time would have seen a few thousand 

dollars in their pay package. Here we have an individual who’s 

received about $220,000 increase over a four-year period. 

 

Now I wanted to ask the Premier: were all CEOs going up at the 

same rate during that period? Or was your earlier comment, that 

they hadn’t received a rate increase, accurate? Which of the two 

is it? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, I was speaking about a market 

adjustment, a significant market adjustment for managers. Mr. 

Chair, obviously there’s going to be COLA [cost-of-living 

adjustment] increases for managers inside of government. In 

fact inside of government, in fact there’s going to be 

adjustments as well when contracts are settled. Out-of-scope 

managers are also going to receive a similar increase. But it’s 

my information that market adjustments, in the way that other 

jurisdictions have been making sure that they’re retaining and 

attracting managers, has not occurred in the province for the last 

three years. It has occurred now, and that has led to this debate 

and these questions from the opposition. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Again, Mr. Speaker, the Premier tries to 

cover over the massive increase of CEOs over the last four 



7488 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2011 

years since the government has started to put these increases in 

place. And I’m not arguing that they don’t deserve to be paid or 

in fact that they shouldn’t be paid properly. My only point is is 

that usually when you’re doing these kinds of increases, they’re 

done, as I said, to keep people in the province. 

 

And I wanted to ask the Premier, over the last 12 months, how 

many CEOs — the last 12 months before the increase — how 

many CEOs, health region CEOs had left because they were 

going to other parts of Canada or leaving to take better jobs in 

other parts of Canada? How many would have left? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. Well again I want to 

point out to the members of the committee that we have a 

situation in the province where we’re not yet competitive, even 

after these increases for management in health care. We’re not 

yet competitive with other jurisdictions. We had a great CEO in 

the Cypress Hills health region — the current CEO is also doing 

a very good job — but a very effective CEO who came to our 

province from Newfoundland. And, you know, notwithstanding 

the fact there’s a great team there today, I’m sure even that team 

would recognize it would be sure nice if we still had the 

previous CEO. The fact of the matter is we couldn’t compete 

with the wages. The region couldn’t compete with the wages he 

could get for health care management in Ontario. 

 

I can tell you as well, Mr. Chair, and to the members of the 

committee, that a number of health regions currently with 

vacancies for financial officers can’t fill them; they’re having 

trouble filling them. The critic just discounts that point. This is 

the information that our health regions are reporting. There are 

financial officers that are required in the health region. And the 

fact of the matter is we’re not as competitive with respect to 

wages for those financial officers as they can get in the private 

sector, including Regina Qu’Appelle. But I guess, you know, it 

shouldn’t shock us that the member may not be accurate, that 

the Health critic isn’t accurate in what she’s saying from her 

seat. That wouldn’t surprise anybody in this House given what 

we’ve seen from her over the last number of years. 

 

But the point is this, that there are vacancies with respect to 

management in the province of Saskatchewan in health care, in 

health regions, and we’re receiving reports that it’s difficult to 

recruit people if you’re not competitive with the private sector 

in our province or with other health regions in other 

jurisdictions. That’s what we’re saying. In the case of Jim 

Hornell, who was the CEO I mentioned in Cypress Hills, again 

he was doing an excellent job in that particular health region, 

and we simply couldn’t compete with the offer he’s getting 

from Ontario. 

 

So I understand and I was the Opposition Leader for some time 

and sat on the opposition benches, so I understand that this is 

pretty good politics. Someone gets a $70,000 raise. Some other 

manager gets a 60 per cent raise after there has not been a 

market adjustment for some period of time. But again the fact is 

this. Again the fact is this. To the member and to all members 

of the committee, we’re still paying our managers on average 

significantly less than other Western jurisdictions even after 

these increases. So I guess I don’t blame the member for 

wanting to make a little politics of this. I understand that. 

The facts, though, still indicate to us that we need to be more 

competitive with respect to wages for the public service of this 

province, for out-of-scope, for in-scope as well. We’ve made a 

lot of progress on the front line in terms of health workers. But 

there’s more work to be done. 

 

And notwithstanding the fact that this is good fodder for the 

opposition, what this government has done, what the health 

regions are doing is good public policy in health care to make 

sure we have the right complement of management and 

front-line workers. Again with more work to be done, we’re 

making significant progress in that regard, Mr. Chair. 

 

The Chair: — Recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — But this is part of the issue because what 

many families are saying is that the health care delivery system 

isn’t getting better. That’s the problem. We’re paying our 

managers, especially the CEOs, huge increases. And when the 

Premier says these are individuals who haven’t had a market 

adjustment for many years, I just quoted to him that the CEO in 

Saskatoon had had regular very large increases. Not that they 

hadn’t had a market adjustment, unless 40 and 30 per cent 

increases are not market adjustments, but they were getting 

adjustments on a regular basis. 

 

And what many people are worried about is exactly where the 

Premier ended his answer, is that the system isn’t getting better, 

that there are still many doctor vacancies, that waiting lists are 

still longer than they should be, and that in fact there is also a 

growing concern that the CEOs are being rewarded, not by 

giving good health service but by how many cuts they can 

make. That’s what many families are saying, that why the 

CEOs are being rewarded is the same as a HMO [health 

maintenance organization] in the United States, health 

management organization, private health care insurance where 

the less you pay out, the more you get rewarded on your salary. 

And many Saskatchewan families are worrying that what’s 

happening here is we’re getting privatization in the models of 

American health care by rewarding CEOs by how many cuts 

they make, and that’s what they’re worried about. 

 

And we are worried definitely by the doctor shortages in rural 

Saskatchewan and the waiting lists and the fact at the same time 

is that problem isn’t being solved, CEOs are seeing massive 

increases in their salary. And these families who live in those 

rural communities may be just overly suspicious that the 

increase in salary is tied to cutbacks and lack of health care 

because it certainly isn’t based on better health care and . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Well no, but go and talk to the 

families who live in places like Shaunavon where the hospital is 

regularly closed on weekends or Wakaw, and you’ll find that 

they will say their problem . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

[17:45] 

 

The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. There’s a 

couple of side debates going on. I would ask them members if 

they want to carry them on, they can take them behind the bar. I 

recognize the Leader of the Official Opposition. 



May 3, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7489 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — The matter of fact is that we’re hearing 

more and more stories from communities like Wakaw and 

Wawota where the health care service is less than it was four 

years ago. These families are saying why are we paying our 

CEOs twice as much when we’re getting less health service? 

Now don’t shoot the messenger. I’m just telling you what I’m 

hearing when I’m out in rural Saskatchewan. That’s what 

they’re saying. Why is my health care service deteriorating and 

the managers of this system are getting rewarded for that? 

That’s what they are saying. 

 

Now you can say well they don’t know what they’re talking 

about. They have to understand the scales and the 60 per cent 

and the percentiles and all this complicated red tape. But 

believe me, the coffee row in Shaunavon . . . Maybe the 

member from Cypress Hills can go there and explain why the 

CEO gets $300,000 as health care services dwindle and the 

hospital in Shaunavon is closed. Or the Premier can come with 

me to the coffee row and explain it for me, but I’m having a 

hard time explaining it for you as to how wage increases of 100 

per cent increase for the CEOs are legitimate and the home care 

workers get 1 per cent and the health care service deteriorates. 

They don’t get it. 

 

And so I’m saying to the Premier, if you’ve got a good 

explanation for it, give it to me and I’ll try to sell it for you. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know what, Mr. Chair? That’s a very 

generous offer on the part of the Opposition Leader. He said if I 

can give him some answers with respect to the current state of 

the health care system that he’d try to sell it for us. Mr. Chair, 

we may take him up on that offer. We’ll want to work with him 

a little bit in terms of his abilities to sell it perhaps. We want to 

make sure that all of the facts get out, Mr. Chairman, because 

the facts are pretty compelling in this regard. 

 

Let me just start by saying there is a lot of work left to do 

certainly to continue to improve health care for the people of 

this province and more on that in just a moment. Part of the 

reason why there’s a lot of work to be done still is because of 

what this government inherited three and a half years ago from 

the NDP. And we ought not to gloss over that. Three and a half 

years ago, Saskatchewan had the longest wait times for surgery 

in the country. Three and a half years ago, there was a . . . Well 

the member, the deputy leader laughs. I don’t think it’s a 

laughing matter. 

 

We also were short nurses. The SUN [Saskatchewan Union of 

Nurses] said we were short 1,000, up to 1,000 nurses under the 

watch of members opposite. Under the watch of their health 

care oversight, we were short maybe 1,000 nurses, certainly 800 

nurses. We had the longest surgical wait times in the country, 

Mr. Chair. 

 

The College of Medicine was under probation. The College of 

Medicine at the University of Saskatchewan under their watch 

— and I can see a couple of former Health ministers over there 

— was under probation. They for a while had 60 . . . Well she, 

again the deputy leader is smiling and nodding. Here’s the truth. 

For a while they had 60 medical seats at the U of S [University 

of Saskatchewan] College of Medicine. It got down to 55 in the 

’90s while Manitoba next door was training 100 every single 

year. Residency positions were, I think, at 60 — again not in 

proportion to where we should be in terms of our health care 

system. Fifty-two hospitals closed in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman, including the Plains. That’s the 

situation we inherited as a government. 

 

So if the member wants to help us tell about the current 

situation and freely and readily admit as we do to the fact that 

more work needs to be done, let’s start with the fact that there 

are today 228 more doctors added since we formed government 

three and a half years ago, Mr. Chairman, 13 per cent increase. 

That includes 88 more family practitioners and 140 more 

specialists. We promised 800 new nurses working in the 

province. We were unable to meet that target. There are 830 

new nurses working in the province of Saskatchewan today. 

 

We added $10.5 million to the first ever meaningful physician 

recruitment and retention plan; $10 million for the physician 

reimbursement support; 3.5 million for the establishment of the 

physician recruitment agency; 300 new registered nurse 

education seats; 40 new undergrad medicine training seats at the 

University of Saskatchewan; 60 more residency training 

positions. The College of Medicine, not only out of probation, 

but we’re building a world-class Academic Health Sciences 

centre on that campus, Mr. Chairman. After what we inherited 

from the NDP, three and a half years later we’ve made a $200 

million investment, the money has flown despite the 

fearmongering of that member that asked the question. 

 

And the children’s hospital is not just being planned, but that 

project is coming together with the help of the private sector 

and the foundation to make sure that we leave the roll of the 

provinces — which included two, us and PEI [Prince Edward 

Island] — that don’t have a children’s hospital to offer. After 

what we inherited, Mr. Chairman, from the NDP, which is a 

record of the closure, the closure of 1,100 long-term care beds, 

this government has announced and is building 13 new 

long-term care facilities, Mr. Chairman. And in Saskatoon you 

bet we’re working with the Catholic Health Ministry in building 

an excellent new model in seniors’ care, one that is welcomed 

by the seniors who are going to get that better continuum of 

care in that facility. It’s called Amicus. It’s also part of our 

record, Mr. Chair. 

 

Created a new 80/20 cost-sharing formula for long-term care 

homes in the province, $42.7 million for facility capital repairs 

and equipment, $24 million to upgrade equipment for 

diagnostic imaging, the creation of STARS [shock trauma air 

rescue service] so we can provide care to people whether 

they’re in Frontier or Shaunavon or working in a potash mine or 

in an oil field so we can make sure they have the right 

emergency care when they need it, in partnership again with the 

private sector, Mr. Chairman. 

 

So when he goes out and sells this record of ours, he can admit 

certainly, as we have, that there’s more work to be done. But he 

better also be able to point to some important facts here as he 

does this in a coffee shop in Shaunavon or anywhere else. 

 

The net result of our surgical wait times initiative which yes, 

involves a private component — you bet it involves a private 

component within the public system — is bearing fruit. Since 



7490 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2011 

2007 we have seen significant improvements for patients. 

Patients waiting more than 18 months, down 70 per cent, Mr. 

Chair. Patients waiting for surgery more than 12 months, down 

50 per cent, Mr. Chair. Patients waiting more than 6 months, 

down 31 per cent. Waiting more than 3 months for surgery, 

down 23 per cent. 83,500 surgeries performed in 2011-12; 

that’s a 7 per cent increase. $40 million invested for 5,500 more 

surgeries in that surgical wait times initiative, Mr. Chairman. 

 

And I want to tell you, the people that are getting their surgeries 

a lot faster, especially those that have been waiting for a knee 

scope or back surgery, they don’t much care if it’s a new private 

provider within the public system providing it. They’re just 

tired of waiting 18 months as they did under the NDP. They’re 

happy for the surgery in two months, and we’re seeing evidence 

of that kind of progress as well in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Chairman, $5 million in investment in terms of MS 

[multiple sclerosis] liberation treatment now joined by the NDP 

government in Manitoba and by the Yukon Territory. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we know there’s work to be done. We know that 

there are hospitals in our constituencies that aren’t operating at 

an optimum basis because there’s still a doctor shortage. We’ve 

added more doctors — 228 more, a 13 per cent increase. But 

more work needs to be done. That’s why we’ve invested in 

physician recruitment. That’s why we’re adding training seats at 

the University of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Chairman, I will just 

say this: notwithstanding the fact that more work needs to be 

done, I will compare the record of this government in three and 

a half years on health care in rural Saskatchewan or anywhere 

else with 16 years of neglect under the NDP, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, going back to try to get 

some information from the Premier, and I hate to interject some 

facts into the spin and the rhetoric that’s going on, but when it 

comes to doctor shortages, which is what I was asking about . . . 

And I agree that there were doctor shortages. In fact there were 

84 in 2007, 84. As of April of this year the number of doctor 

vacancies in the province is 113. 

 

So I understand that there were issues when we were in 

government. I give that. There were issues, no doubt. It’s right 

here on your own information that there were vacancies in the 

province of 84. That’s an issue. We should do better than that. I 

agree. But when you get up and say how wonderful it is and 

leave out the fact that the number of doctor vacancies has gone 

from 84 to 113, that’s spin. That’s not fact. And that’s the point 

I want to make is that when it comes to doctor vacancies, which 

we talk about on coffee row in many communities in 

Saskatchewan, they’re worried about it. 

 

Now you can give a great speech and rally your troops who are 

sitting behind you, but the fact is that it’s difficult to do that in 

the coffee shop in Shaunavon when the hospital is closed. And 

it’s difficult to do it in Wawota when the nursing home beds are 

being closed. And the members laugh about this, and maybe it’s 

hilarious in your area that health care is going downhill, but the 

fact of the matter is that there are 113 doctor vacancies in 

Saskatchewan, up 34 per cent since you became Premier. That’s 

a fact . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well if it isn’t, then maybe 

the Minister of Health can . . . Oh, there weren’t vacancies 

under your government. Yes . . . 

 

The Chair: — I would . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Chair: — Order. Order. I would just ask that the question 

be directed through the Chair. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Because the minister doesn’t seem to 

know where they are. Cypress Hills, one; Five Hills, eight; 

Heartland, six vacancies; in the North, two; in Kelsey Trail, six; 

in Churchill River, one; in Prairie North, 11. And the list goes 

on and on. And this is off the government website of 113, 113 

vacancies. 

 

And I say to the Premier, can you tell me again why this is a 

good record and why 113 vacancies is easily explained? I know 

it’s easy to explain to your backbenchers because they’re about 

as involved as the 13 Conservative MPs [Member of 

Parliament] who won re-election. The Premier will know that 

these vacancies are real. And when the hospital closes in 

Shaunavon, the member from Cypress Hills know it’s an issue. 

These are important issues. 

 

And when the hospital closes, the Premier can get up and give a 

speech about how wonderful it is, but believe me, the people in 

those communities think that paying the CEO 400,000 a year or 

300,000 a year at the same time as we can’t get doctors in place, 

that’s not working for them. And I don’t know how many times 

the Shaunavon Hospital has been closed in the last year, but 

many, many times. And it’s closing on a regular basis because 

the CEO in the area should be doing a better job and be 

compensated on a basis of how they perform in delivering 

health care, not how many cuts and how many closures they 

make. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I’m happy to try to answer 

the hon. member’s question with respect to the openings, the 

vacancies. The fact of the matter is this. He’s got a couple of 

Health ministers on his benches who would be able to tell him 

that under the NDP, the system didn’t track these . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well it’s true. It didn’t track them. This 

government has set out to track doctor vacancies. You know, 

the Deputy Leader of the Opposition was saying earlier on, well 

she thinks that our government should be more transparent. 

Well here’s a few examples. 

 

We want to be able to track the vacancies, have them publicly 

reported by the health region, and then respond to them with 

more training seats at the College of Medicine and more 

residency positions and improvements in terms of 

foreign-trained doctors, allowing them to practise, from more 

countries, into the province of Saskatchewan. To deal openly 

with the issue, to set targets, Mr. Chair, something that the 

former Health minister in the NDP said they would never want 

to do because you might not make your target. That’s why they 

never set any for recruiting nurses. We’ve taken a different 



May 3, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7491 

approach. We think you should track the vacancies and then 

more than that, maybe you ought to do something about them. 

 

And we know there’s more work to be done, Mr. Chair. That’s 

why we’ve made these investments. We can’t fix this problem 

overnight. And if the member believes that the vacancy 

numbers he has pointed out were the actual vacancies in the 

province of Saskatchewan under his watch, I think he’d 

probably be sorely mistaken. Because the tracking wasn’t 

happening; the goal setting wasn’t happening. 

 

They didn’t set a target to reduce wait times for surgery. They 

didn’t set targets to recruit more nurses to the province. And we 

have seen some closures of facilities in this province that isn’t 

acceptable to any member here, especially members that 

represent those constituencies. And this is not necessarily the 

answer. The long-term answer is more doctors. And we will 

make progress and find answers for those facilities. 

 

But I will say this, even now, before we have enough doctors to 

keep those facilities open all the time, those facilities close for a 

short time. The difference between us and them is that they 

reopen, Mr. Chairman. We didn’t close 52 hospitals. That’s 

what the NDP did in the province of Saskatchewan. And that’s 

why a former NDP member — and I know that members 

opposite love this quote from December 16th, 2009 in the 

Leader-Post — that’s why a former NDP MLA and a 

semi-retired rural doctor, rural physician said, quote . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Well the hon. member for Eastview 

says please, please read it, and I wouldn’t want to disappoint 

her. 

 

An Hon. Member: — In fact, we can table it and send it over. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I’m happy to table it. Here’s the quote: 

 

. . . it is sheer hypocrisy [and I’m reading and quoting] for 

Judy Junor to carp about health care. 

 

She and the present leader of the NDP were both part of 

the cabal [his words, not mine] that spent 15 years 

shredding rural Saskatchewan’s service centres, SaskTel, 

SaskPower and rural highways depots along with 52 rural 

hospitals, firing 660 nurses and leaving 52 rural doctors 

no place to work in. 

 

Mr. Chair, there is more work to be done to recover from that 

record. But this minister, the Ministry of Health and health 

regions and the Government of Saskatchewan, are making 

progress in terms of the personnel requirements of the system, 

in terms of reducing wait times for surgical care, and, Mr. 

Chair, in terms of providing appropriate long-term care for the 

citizens of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

[18:00] 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, again I am fascinated by the 

Premier bragging about a huge increase in doctor vacancies in 

the province and taking that as a major step forward. 

Thirty-four per cent increase in the number of doctor vacancies 

in the province — and he says how wonderful it is and how 

great the improvement is. 

 

We all know that the families in the areas where hospital 

closure is regular on weekends across the province, that it’s a 

huge issue. It’s a very big issue. Wait-lists for surgery, and the 

Premier can say how wonderful it is, but many families are 

suffering and having difficulty with that. 

 

The other thing in the area of health care that I just want to 

touch on, Mr. Chairman, is the issue of privacy and the issue of 

files of families’ health records and the lack of control that there 

obviously is in the province of Saskatchewan — not once but 

many, many times. All of this follows on the heels of the 

Minister of Health attempting to open up the health records for 

fundraising. And people say that this lack of importance that the 

Minister of Health put on records, at a time he was trying to 

open it up and then, thank goodness, backed off — I don’t 

know whether from direction from the Premier or just made up 

his own mind that it was a bad idea — I give him credit for that. 

Because once you get to the point of making a difficult 

decision, bad decision, nothing better to stand up and say, look, 

I was on the wrong path. I have to go a different direction. And 

the minister did that. 

 

But I think the signal was sent that these records could be 

distributed and put in dumpsters all over the province. And 

we’ve had many, many examples where the Privacy 

Commissioner has had to get involved and take action. And I 

wonder if the Premier could tell us what system has now been 

set in place to make sure that not another family’s health 

records goes in a dumpster or is handled in an inappropriate 

manner. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Chair. The hon. 

member started off to wrap up comments with respect to health 

care. Mr. Chair, I think I was very careful to say that more work 

needs to be done in health care, but there’s been progress. And 

the progress is part of our record, and we’re proud of that. 

 

And the fact that people, the number of patients waiting more 

than 18 months is down 70 per cent, that’s progress. But it 

should be at zero. And that’s why we’re going to continue with 

the surgical wait times initiative. That’s why we’re going to 

continue working with private clinics within the public system, 

utilizing regional health care centres where we can to increase 

capacity. We’re going to do all that we can to innovate to make 

sure that number is down to zero. There is shorter wait times for 

surgery. There are more nurses. There are more doctors than 

when we took office, Mr. Chair. These are all points of 

progress. But we know when any facility is closed for any 

length of time in a rural community or anywhere else, that isn’t 

acceptable. That’s why we’re continuing to work on the issue, 

continuing to make the investments in personnel issues. 

 

For example, I was just recently told of a welcome development 

for Leader. I met the people of Leader, I think it was in the fall, 

along with the MLA. Our MLA has been raising questions 

about the Leader facility, the hospital there, and the shortage of 

doctors and its impact on that community. And the mayor and 

the reeves from the area made a good case to the government, 



7492 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2011 

as we’ve heard in other places as well. And I can report to the 

House that the region is pleased to welcome four new doctors, 

including two specialists, to the region. That’s in the Leader 

paper. It’s going to help deal with some of the issues in that 

regard. 

 

So you know, my point is this: my point is, there’s work to be 

done. There’s challenges remaining. But, Mr. Chairman, what 

we found when we inherited government from the members 

opposite was some serious problems that will not be resolved 

overnight. But we’re going to deal with them. We will deal with 

them. We will resolve those problems. And we’ll make the 

appropriate investments, and we’ll bring the appropriate 

innovation to the health care system to achieve them. We’ll do 

things that members opposite are simply unprepared to do. 

They won’t countenance any private involvement at all, even in 

the public system. They said they’re opposed to that even if it 

can reduce wait times for people. 

 

Mr. Chair, I can remember in Yorkton a gentleman approaching 

me and telling me that he had had a skiing accident and finally 

gone to see his doctor and then a specialist. The specialist 

checked out his knee and said you need an operation. And the 

gentleman said, when? And the specialist said, well you’re 

looking at November. And he thought well — this was just last 

fall — he said, well November of ’11; in other words, 18 

months or 16 months from then. And the doctor said, no, 

because of Omni, because of a private provision, I think we can 

do it this November, in a couple of months. The gentleman said 

to me, I don’t even know if I’d be ready for it at that time. 

That’s not to say that everyone’s experience is that gentleman’s 

experience and that there’s not more work to be done. But 

progress is being made, and we will not be restricted by a tired, 

old ideology. People don’t want ideology. They want better 

health care within the public system, and we’re going to provide 

that. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the question with respect to privacy is an 

important one. And we’ve seen these breaches recently. We’ve 

seen them. They’ve been occurring in the province for too long, 

where the people’s private information is obviously not treated 

with the respect and stewardship that should be accorded that 

information, in fact where there are obvious and clear breaches. 

And members of the opposition were very much involved in 

one very, very serious instance after the budget and have raised 

the issue quite properly in the Assembly to get some action. 

 

I can tell members this: that the Minister of Health has 

communicated with the Saskatchewan Medical Association, 

communicated to the SMA, to ensure that they are telling their 

doctors about how serious the matter is. I can tell you that 

we’ve added two temporary investigators to the Privacy 

Commissioner’s office so that the specific investigations in 

these incidents can go forward. 

 

And I can tell you that there is a prosecution currently under 

way, an investigation with respect to prosecution, because 

we’re going to . . . I want to be very clear, the individuals 

responsible for this kind of thing will be held accountable. And 

we’re also looking at some long-term improvements with 

respect to this situation. Because I think for us to send the 

proper message out, when someone is convicted of these 

charges, is found guilty, there needs to be implications. That 

message needs to be sent. 

 

There are other challenges though that can’t be accommodated 

perhaps, even in more aggressive investigation or prosecution; 

for example, a doctor that passes away and is in possession of 

some patient records. We need to work on systems to better 

accommodate the privacy of individuals in all circumstances. 

The Minister of Health and his officials, the Minster of Justice 

and his officials have this as their top priority, and they have 

every support of the government. To the extent there’s 

temporary resources required, they’ll have the support of the 

government to get that done. And that work is under way. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — I thank the Premier, but I wonder whether 

or not there isn’t — and maybe the minister can give you some 

advice on this — but a role for the government to play in the 

Department of Health to not only do instruction and teaching of 

doctors and the Medical Association of how to deal with 

records, but also in terms of storage and eventual destruction of 

records. Aren’t there ways that we should be looking at, as a 

community and a society and a role to be played by the Health 

department, that these records that belong to the people of 

Saskatchewan, that there’s actually a role that should be played 

by government, the Department of Health, at the end of the day 

in being more involved, this being a medical system that is 

publicly operated and publicly funded? And here again it’s 

something that I think other provinces have actually 

implemented. 

 

But can the Premier tell us, is there a plan in place that the 

government through the Department of Health would actually 

get more engaged in the education process, not just penalizing 

but actually having a program of education and mentoring with 

doctors? And in particular, what I understand from the Privacy 

Commissioner is that many of these cases are of doctors who 

have left the province a long time ago. And a new doctor comes 

in and is left with files that they had nothing to do with. And 

they wonder whether it’s their responsibility or how that works. 

 

But I just think there needs to be a much better system of 

training doctors, right from the beginning of their career, of the 

responsibility, and then the Health department possibly playing 

an ongoing role in the storage and destruction of files at a 

certain point if that’s the way they need to be dealt with. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. I appreciate the 

question. Directly to the member’s question, I can confirm that 

Health officials and Justice officials have been focused on a 

three-prong approach on the issue of patient records and 

confidentiality. The three areas they’re focusing on with all 

stakeholders, the issues include storage solutions, include 

trustee education, and compliance. And so these are some of the 

areas that the hon. member has raised in his question. 

 

I can also table for members of the Committee of Finance the 

letter the minister has sent to all physicians and staff which, in a 

very detailed way, lays out the requirements in this regard and 

obligations in this regard. 



May 3, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7493 

But I want, I want to assure members of the committee and 

those viewing, that may be viewing, that the government takes 

this issue very seriously. And ministers in Health and Justice 

have this particular issue as a top priority. Investigations into 

the most recent issues are under way right now, and we’ve 

added some temporary resources to the Office of the Privacy 

Commissioner to deal with it. 

 

And the minister’s taking more direct action in terms of those 

stakeholders. That doctor education that the hon. member has 

suggested is under way. Maybe they have suggestions for how 

it can be improved. We’d sure welcome those and have a look 

at any improvements they might have to what we’re already 

doing. So I’ll table this and wait for the next question, Mr. 

Chair. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — I just want to say to the Premier that that 

approach to the health records is a huge improvement, and one 

that I think the public will very much appreciate. And it’s come 

a long way in the last 12 months from where we were debating 

in question period where we should open them up to the public 

for fundraising. And we were of the opinion at that time that, 

far from opening them up, we should be doing even more to 

keep them private. And I think this is a very, very positive 

move. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, that completes my questioning of the 

Premier. I think our agreed time for adjournment of the 

committee was 6:15. In fact I think we had a little bit of extra 

time because we started a bit early, and I appreciate that. But I 

do want to say, through you, Mr. Chair, to the staff and to the 

members of the staff, many of whom are here, who helped the 

Premier get ready for estimates, and to my staff who prepared 

the information, because without them it’s very, very difficult to 

do the research that’s needed to ask the questions — I’m sure 

the Premier feels the same in getting his answers ready — and 

also to the committee as a whole and to the members of the 

Legislative Assembly, just to thank you for putting up with the 

Premier and I, myself mostly for asking sometimes repetitive 

questions. But this is an important part of the democratic 

process, and I just want to thank all those involved, and thank 

the Premier for his answers today. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

[18:15] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. By way 

of conclusion, I do want to, I do want to correct the record here. 

What was contemplated by the government in terms of, in terms 

of the information, patient information, was not the kind of 

patient information we’re talking about in terms of these 

breaches. That was simply a name and address information for 

the purposes of fundraising. It’s an important distinction. I don’t 

at all take away from the fact that there’s differences in the 

House, and the point had been, the point that was made by the 

opposition, the points they made when we had the debate, the 

points the minister made from our side. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I want to join with the hon. member in thanking 

him, thank all members of the committee for this afternoon, all 

the MLAs who have been here. I want to thank him for his 

questions, and the deputy leader for her questions as well. I 

want to extend a thank you to all the officials that have joined 

us, and some who’ve now left. The chief of staff to the 

Agriculture minister is, I don’t know, maybe donning hip 

waders to help Bob out a little bit, or the Minister of Agriculture 

out a bit, but he’s left. But I want to put on the record our 

thanks to him. 

 

And with the indulgence of members of the committee and with 

the chairman, may I thank the Table officials and through the 

deputy to the Executive Council, thank our public service in the 

province of Saskatchewan, and those who are working hard to 

deliver public service on behalf of us all, on behalf of the 

taxpayers, especially at a time we should be mindful of the fact 

that many are working extra overtime to help and assist those 

that are facing serious flooding issues across the province. We 

use this opportunity to thank them. It’s wholly inadequate, but 

it’s all we have, which is to say thanks to them. And we again 

appreciate the time we’ve had to debate these issues. Thank 

you, Mr. Chair. 

 

The Chair: — Is the committee ready for the question? On 

Executive Council, vote no. 10, subvote (EX01), central 

management and services. Then is subvote (EX01), central 

management and services in the amount of $4,960,000, is that 

agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Is subvote (EX07), Premier’s office, in 

the amount of 572,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Is subvote (EX04), cabinet planning, in 

the amount of 1,001,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Is subvote (EX05), cabinet secretary, in 

the amount of 519,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Is subvote (EX03), communications 

office, in the amount of $1,471,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Is subvote (EX08), House business and 

research, in the amount of 419,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. (EX06), members of the Executive 

Council, in the amount of 112,000. The amount is statutory and 

is not required to be voted on. 

 

Is subvote (EX10), intergovernmental affairs, in the amount of 

3,160,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 



7494 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2011 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 

months ending March 31st, 2012, the following sums for 

Executive Council, $12,102,000. 

 

Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. There being no further business before 

the committee, I would invite a member to move that the 

committee report, rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 

again. I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Chairman, I move the committee 

rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for 

leave to sit again. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Committee of 

Finance. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the committee 

to report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move the 

House do now adjourn for committees this evening. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do adjourn to facilitate the work of committees. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until tomorrow 

afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 18:21.] 

 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7449 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7449 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7449 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7449 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7449 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7449 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7450 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7450 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7450 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7450 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7450 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7451 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Paying Tribute to Seniors 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7451 

 The People are the Winners 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7451 

 Mental Health Week 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7451 

 Saskatoon Entrepreneur Honoured 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7452 

 North American Occupational Safety and Health Week 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7452 

 Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7452 

 North Battleford Sarcan Receives Awards 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7453 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Services for Seniors 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7453 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7453 

 Changes to Canada Pension Plan 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7454 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7454 

 Cost of Living for Seniors 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7455 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7456 

 Support for Seniors’ Housing 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7456 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7456 

 Transition and Emergency Housing 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7456 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7456 

 Support for Seniors’ Centres 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7457 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7457 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 7457 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7458 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 149 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7458 

 Bill No. 150 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2010 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7458 

 Bill No. 170 — The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2011 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7459 

 Bill No. 171 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2011 (No. 2) 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7459 

 



 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Ruling on a Point of Order 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7460 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 Expansion of Canada Pension Plan 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7460 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7461 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Executive Council — Vote 10 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7461 

  Lingenfelter ................................................................................................................................................................... 7462, 7485 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7480 

 

 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


