




















































Hansard: April 07, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 45A  THURSDAY, APRIL 7, 2011, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7145 

 April 7, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my 

pleasure to introduce to you a group seated in the eastern 

gallery from the Regina adult campus of the public school 

board. They are accompanied by teacher Stacee Young, and 

they are 10 good-looking students from the English as an 

additional language group there. They‟re youth aged 18 to 21. 

 

It‟s really good to see them here at their Legislative Assembly, 

and I look forward to meeting with them very soon. I know that 

the member from Rosemont is going to join me. He had been 

very involved in the set-up of that campus. So we look forward 

to meeting with the students. And please join me in welcoming 

these students to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today again to present 

petitions on behalf of people who are supporting the 

maintaining of quality health care services: 

 

The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: that the Government of 

Saskatchewan ought to recognize the need for timely 

access to comprehensive and quality health care services 

for all communities within the province, including 

Wakaw and surrounding areas, and that the disruption of 

emergency services and in-patient services at Wakaw 

Hospital will not serve the needs of the residents in this 

community and surrounding areas, and that the cuts in 

access to timely and accurate diagnostic and laboratory 

tests within the community of Wakaw and surrounding 

areas will not serve the needs of the residents, and that the 

petitioners humbly pray that your honourable Legislative 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

commit to maintain quality health care services through 

the commitment of necessary funding to address critical 

retention and recruitment issues. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions that are signed today are from people from 

Wakaw, Domremy, Bellevue, Osler, and Rosthern. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for protection for tenants 

from unreasonable rent increases. And we know, in the past 

four years too many Saskatchewan tenants have faced surging 

rent increases that are simply making a living in Saskatchewan 

unaffordable and that, since 2007, far too many tenants have 

suffered monthly rent increases of hundreds of dollars, with 

average rent increases of over 35 per cent in Saskatoon and 

Regina, meaning tenants in many cases are paying well over 

$3,000 more each year. We also know the majority of 

Canadians now live in provinces with rent control guidelines, 

including Manitoba, BC [British Columbia], Ontario, Quebec, 

and Prince Edward Island. I‟d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

immediately enact rent control legislation that protects 

Saskatchewan tenants from unreasonable rent increases. 

 

I do so present. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of my constituents who live in the 

neighbourhood of Hampton Village. And it‟s about the need for 

a new school for their children: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes, including education property taxes; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to neighbouring 

communities to attend schools that are typically already 

reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

residents of Hampton Village. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from P.A. [Prince 

Albert] Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition in support of potash royalty review because the 

people of Saskatchewan are owners of a 1,000-year strategic 

supply of potash, but the owners of this resource deserve the 

maximum benefit for the resource; and that there is, as 

described by a CEO [chief executive officer] of one of the 

potash companies in Saskatchewan, a new norm for potash in 

today‟s market. The prayer reads: 

 



7146 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2011 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to begin 

a comprehensive, transparent, and public review of 

Saskatchewan‟s potash royalty system with a view to 

maximizing the return from this strategic resource for its 

owners, the people of Saskatchewan, who wish to use 

these additional potash royalty revenues for needed 

investments in health care, child care, education, 

affordable housing, infrastructure, and other social 

programs, as well as public initiatives such as debt 

repayment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today‟s petition is signed by good folks from 

Saskatoon, Grenfell, Regina, and White City. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

again yet today to present a petition to restore funding equity to 

Regina Catholic schools. Regina Catholic schools currently 

receive $275 less per pupil than Regina public schools, 

amounting to a funding inequity of $2.7 million in total. That 

funding inequity places program delivery and staffing levels at 

risk, Mr. Speaker. The Government of Saskatchewan has also 

denied Catholic school boards in the province representation on 

the government-appointed committee mandated to develop a 

long-term formula for Saskatchewan school boards. And the 

petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the government to address the funding inequity 

between Regina Catholic schools and Regina public 

schools that provides $275 less per pupil funding for 

Regina Catholic school students, totalling $2.7 million, 

and make known that the continuation for another school 

year of funding inequity places program delivery and 

staffing levels at risk in Regina Catholic schools; and in 

so doing, immediately restore funding equity to ensure 

that every student in Saskatchewan, whether enrolled in a 

Catholic or public school, receives equitable resources to 

ensure every student in Saskatchewan has access to a 

quality education. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these petitions are signed by the residents of Saskatoon 

and Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I once again rise to 

present a petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan concerned 

about detrimental effects that Bill 160 will have on human 

rights law if enacted. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

withdraw Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public 

consultations informed by a public policy paper before 

any amendments to the Human Rights Code, the law that 

supersedes all others in our province, are even 

considered. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon, Cabri, 

Regina, and Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. speaker. It‟s my 

pleasure to rise in the Assembly once again today to present 

petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of our 

finances by the Sask Party. They allude specifically to a record 

that includes the running of deficits and increasing of debt at 

times of prosperity in Saskatchewan at times of record highs in 

revenues, a record that includes increasing our debt by $1.3 

billion over three years, and this year alone, Mr. Speaker, 

increasing our debt by $548 million, Mr. Speaker. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask 

Party government for its damaging financial 

mismanagement since taking office, a reckless fiscal 

record that is denying Saskatchewan people, 

organizations, municipalities, institutions, taxpayers, and 

businesses the responsible and trustworthy fiscal 

management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Radville, Weyburn, and Arcola. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

World Health Day: Fighting Superbugs 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The UN [United 

Nations] World Health Organization has declared April 7th to 

be World Health Day. This year‟s theme is Combat 

Antimicrobial Drug Resistance: No action today, No cure 

tomorrow. 

 

Antimicrobial drugs are medicines used to treat infections 

caused by bacteria, fungi, parasites, and viruses. Antimicrobial 

resistance or drug resistance occurs when micro-organisms 

change in ways that renders the medications used to fight them 

ineffective. Substandard doses, not finishing a prescribed 

course of treatment, low-quality medicines, inappropriate 

prescriptions, and poor infection control all encourage the 

spread of drug resistance. And drug resistant infections can kill, 

spread to others, and impose huge costs on individuals and 

society. Unfortunately, we recognize acronyms like MRSA 

[methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus] and VRE 

[vancomycin resistant enterococci], and the R in both of those 

is “resistant.” Superbugs are what we call them now. 



April 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7147 

We live in a world where we are completely dependent on 

antibiotics and other antimicrobial medicines. Antimicrobial 

resistance is not a new problem but it‟s one that‟s becoming 

more dangerous. Urgent and consolidated efforts are needed to 

avoid going back to the pre-antibiotic era. 

 

According to the World Health Organization, lack of 

government commitment to address these issues is a major 

hindrance in controlling the spread of drug resistance. For 

World Health Day 2011, I urge all members of the Legislative 

Assembly to join the World Health Organization‟s call on 

government and stakeholders the world over, including here in 

Saskatchewan, to implement the policies and practices needed 

to prevent and counter the emergence of highly drug resistant 

micro-organisms. Our health and the health of future 

generations depends on it. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Organ and Tissue Donor Awareness Month 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my pleasure to 

inform this House that April is officially designated as Organ 

and Tissue Donor Awareness Month in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, more than 4,000 Canadians are waiting for an 

organ transplant to save their lives. In 2009, 1,803 transplants 

were performed, with many patients remaining on waiting lists. 

Unfortunately 195 Canadians died while waiting for an organ 

transplant. Three-quarters of the patients on the list today are 

waiting for a kidney transplant. 

 

Now the purpose of Organ and Tissue Donor Awareness Month 

is to draw attention to the real need of increasing organ and 

tissue donation capacities. Another function of this campaign is 

to dispel myths surrounding organ and tissue donation. 

 

According to recent statistics, Canadians face unique challenges 

when attempting to enhance our organ and tissue donation 

system. For example, Canada‟s low rate of organ donation in 

comparison to other countries is not because of a lack of 

generosity or altruism but because of better health practices. 

Furthermore Canadians‟ access to excellent health care delays 

the probability of early death, which lessens the pool of suitable 

organ and tissue donations. 

 

Campaigns such as Organ and Tissue Donor Awareness Month 

are important because they identify challenges faced when 

trying to improve on the status quo. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Saskatchewan Cadets Excel 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today in 

honour of a northern Saskatchewan athlete, Natasha Boyes, a 

17-year old attending Churchill Community High School in La 

Ronge. Natasha recently won the Myriam Bédard Award as a 

top female senior at the Cadet National Biathlon Championship 

held in Quebec during the week of March 6th to the 11th of this 

year. 

 

The cadet championships involves the air, army, and sea 

divisions of the cadets in a week-long event with four races, as 

well as training days and a day off. Natasha won both of her 

individual races. Natasha, a flight sergeant in her air cadet 

squadron in La Ronge, was competing in her fourth cadet 

nationals. She is the first person ever to win the cadet title for 

all three age groups. Natasha also competed as part of 

Saskatchewan female relay team and patrol group team, which 

although they did not win medals, did Saskatchewan proud. 

 

Incidentally, Mr. Speaker, a Saskatchewan male team with 

members from Oxbow, Nipawin, Langham won a silver medal 

in the patrol race, which was a remarkable accomplishment 

against the powerhouses from Quebec, Ontario, and Alberta. 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan was named the 

recipient of the Sports Etiquette Award based on nominations 

by other teams and support staff. This is an honour for our 

province in that it really reflects the spirit of friendly 

competition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to please join me in 

congratulating Natasha Boyes on her accomplishments. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier, the member from 

Swift Current. 

 

Saskatchewan Country Music Awards 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the 

weekend, Swift Current was proud to host the 22nd annual 

Saskatchewan Country Music Awards. The SCMAs featured 

seminars and songwriters‟ workshops, a gospel showcase on 

Sunday morning, Mr. Speaker, the president‟s banquet and the 

Saturday night, of course, were the awards ceremony at the 

Living Sky Casino. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the big winner was Codie Prevost. He picked up 

six awards for Entertainer of the Year, male vocalist, Single of 

the Year for “Rollin‟ Back to You,” Album of the Year — Get 

Loud, Video of the Year, Song of the Year, and backup band. 

His band also won that. 

 

Some of the other winners included Blake Berglund, very much 

a rising star in the province, and he won that award. Donny 

Parenteau was the Aboriginal Artist and All-Star 

Band-Specialty. Aven Grace won Country Gospel Album of the 

Year. And Shaunavon‟s own Catherine Lewans was the Female 

Vocalist of the Year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one other award winner that I‟d like to highlight is 

Glenna Switzer. She‟s from Swift Current. It was Glenna‟s 

vision that Swift Current would host these awards one day. It 

didn‟t have a chapter of the SCMA [Saskatchewan Country 

Music Association] in Swift Current or the Southwest until 

Glenna came along. Now it‟s the largest chapter in terms of 

membership in the SCMA. And because of Glenna‟s hard work 

and the work of her volunteers, one of the most successful 

SCMA awards weekends was held in Swift Current, Mr. 

Speaker. All of the events were sold out and enjoyed by all. 

Saskatchewan country music is in a good place, Mr. Speaker, 

because of the SCMA. We congratulate them on a great 

weekend and we wish them well in the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 



7148 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2011 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Saskatchewanderer Competition 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s billed as the 

best summer job in Saskatchewan, travelling the province‟s 

highways and byways. The Saskatchewanderer is to spend the 

summer months telling Saskatchewan‟s story. With blog entries 

and video updates, this young person will market our province 

to Canada and to the world with an Internet campaign. 

 

But the Internet landscape can be as unforgiving as 

Saskatchewan is intriguing, Mr. Speaker, and now this 

government has disqualified the most popular applicant after an 

old video briefly surfaced, showing him using inappropriate 

language to cheer on the Riders during a showdown with the 

Eskimos. Sounds like a double standard coming from a 

government led by someone with an embarrassing video past of 

his own, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We‟re not taking sides in the Saskatchewanderer competition. 

We‟re sure any of the finalists would make an excellent 

representative of our province. But being on the side of 

fairness, we do expect this government won‟t hold a young 

person who wants the best summer job to a higher standard than 

the man holding the top job had to make when an embarrassing 

video surfaced of him joining in inappropriate comments about 

our former lieutenant governor and mocking Ukrainian 

Canadians. 

 

We hope, Mr. Speaker, this isn‟t a new standard in the new 

Saskatchewan: one set of rules for politicians with a video past 

and another set of rules for young people who get a little too 

enthusiastic in cheering on the Riders. But if that‟s the 

Premier‟s new Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we‟d prefer to 

wander back to the old Saskatchewan of 2008 when he 

expected that you apologize for a mistake; you don‟t lose your 

job. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Facebook Posting 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, once again the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] leader‟s actions don‟t match his words. Last 

week his NDP candidate for Thunder Creek posted the 

following on his NDP Facebook page, and I quote, “Mr. Wall is 

now advertising for escorts on government websites. It‟s truly a 

Sask-first policy.” When asked about this, the NDP leader told 

reporters that this was inappropriate and he would be speaking 

with his candidate about it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, either that didn‟t happen or his candidate 

didn‟t listen to him because that comment is still posted on 

Ryan McDonald‟s NDP Facebook page. Once again the NDP 

leader says one thing and does another. The NDP leader 

admitted this was an inappropriate message. Why is it still up 

on his candidate‟s Facebook? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

Rent Relief 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

earlier this week, on April 4th, the Premier was brought back to 

reality with an issue that thousands of Saskatchewan renters are 

facing. The Leader of the Opposition asked about renters of an 

apartment building facing increases as high as 100 per cent in 

the rent. 

 

Seniors and students often live on fixed incomes and with 

modest means. These are people who do not receive earning 

increases, but rather rent increases every six months. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition asked the Premier what he 

thought about this issue facing tenants of this apartment 

building and thousands of other Saskatchewan renters: “Can the 

Premier tell us, not what he‟s planning to do in terms of 

meetings, but what is he doing to put in a form of cap or rent 

control to protect these tens of thousands of families?” 

 

The Premier‟s response, Mr. Speaker? Well on the face of it, 

the people of Saskatchewan got a straightforward answer. The 

Premier said, and I quote, “Mr. Speaker, these rent increases 

facing these folks in the gallery are unacceptable.” But with the 

greatest respect, it appears the Premier doesn‟t know what the 

word unacceptable means. If the Premier believes these types of 

rent increases are unacceptable, he leads a government with the 

power to do something about it. 

 

In the face of these type of rent increases, the people affected 

can only throw up their hands in despair. The Premier has the 

power to deliver relief. If it‟s unacceptable, he can do 

something about it. And it‟s past time that he did so. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Rent Controls 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, Monday of 

this week we had a number of renters from a Regina rental 

apartment come to the building because they were upset that 

their rents are going to be going up 60 per cent, 70 per cent, and 

as much as 100 per cent between now and August 1st. And at 

that time, the Premier indicated that this was a situation that 

should be rectified. 

 

My question to the Premier is, after three days of thoughtful 

reflection on this unacceptable situation, can he inform the 

Assembly, and more importantly the families in Saskatchewan 

who are being gouged, what is his resolve to protect families in 

Saskatchewan from these kind of rent increases? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, in the House on Monday, 

and when we received the information last week, we know that 

their landlord that we‟re talking about is actually a rogue 

landlord and is an anomaly. Most of the landlords in this 

province really are looking at making sure that they . . . 

 



April 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7149 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I recognize the 

Minister Responsible for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This situation 

is not the type of situation that‟s going on right across the 

province. The average rent increase in Regina at this time is 6.3 

per cent. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I think the minister should be given 

the same response and courtesy to respond as the member 

placing the question. I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The rent issue 

and the vacancy increase in this province has actually improved 

under our government. It went from 1.2 per cent to 2.5 per cent. 

We know there‟s more work to be done. The information that 

we had on this increase is going to be taken to the summit on 

April 19th to the 21st. There‟ll be an opportunity for people 

who are involved in the housing area to discuss it, and I‟m 

looking forward to their discussion at the summit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, this will be small comfort to 

the families facing a 100 per cent increase, that it‟s going to be 

discussed at a summit, this summit occurring only months 

before the end of the four-year term of the government where 

they‟ve done nothing to protect renters, families renting in the 

province. 

 

On Monday the Premier said that these kind of rate increases 

were unacceptable. And they are unacceptable; on that we can 

agree. But what isn‟t acceptable is the Premier not taking a 

decision that would protect the families, a decision that would 

be a cap on rent through rent control at 2 per cent or the rate of 

inflation. 

 

The minister now says that this was a rogue owner of the 

apartment increasing rents 100 per cent. I wonder if the Premier 

could define for us what is the definition of a rogue owner of an 

apartment? Is it a 20 per cent increase, defined as 15 per cent, 

100 per cent? At what level do you call the owners of 

apartments taking advantage of families, at what level of 

increase? And why can‟t we just move to protect families by 

putting in rent control immediately so families are protected? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, it would appear that the 

member across the way needs a little history lesson. In 1992 

there was rent control, and you know who eliminated? The 

members across the floor decided rent control should not be in 

place. And they had the opportunity right up to 2007, when the 

rent increases in Saskatoon in 2007 was 21 per cent. And you 

know what the members opposite did? They did not have rent 

control and said they decided to bring forward a consultation 

proposal to us when our members went across the province 

asking what we should do. There was no thoughts about rent 

control, not at all. They did not indicate they would be doing it. 

 

What they thought we should do is have consultations and 

discussions. That is exactly what we‟re doing, Mr. Speaker. We 

know that rent control is not going to solve the problem. What 

we need is to have more homes and have people with more 

money in their pockets to buy the homes. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the minister tries to explain 

this situation away where families in the province are seeing 

rent increases that they simply can‟t afford. And what they‟re 

telling us is they see that the government of this province has a 

lot of money, that CEOs and people who run companies, many 

of them who live out of the province, have a lot of money. But 

when asked whether or not these people who came to the 

legislature have enough to pay the rent, the answer comes back 

pretty resounding that most families, many families in the 

province, are having a more difficult time making ends meet 

even though there‟s an abundance of wealth in this province. 

And that isn‟t right. 

 

The question to the Premier again: can he not make up his 

mind, move to rent control to protect families in this province 

in the same way that 80 per cent of Canadians in this great 

country have rent control and protection from gouging that 

occurs when rents increase 20 per cent, 60 per cent, and 100 per 

cent. Why can‟t we have a Premier that will move in that 

direction and do it immediately? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, between April of 2000 and 

April of 2008, there was a 21 per cent increase in rents in 

Saskatoon. And who was in government at that time? The 

members opposite. They had the opportunity, once they had 

cancelled rent control, to bring it back in. Did they decide to do 

it? No, they did not, Mr. Speaker. In fact right after that, the 

member from Saskatoon Centre made a submission to the task 

force on housing affordability. And he didn‟t even mention rent 

controls because even at that time, the members opposite knew 

what the issue was, was the supply, the number of units that we 

have on the market . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. It‟s even becoming difficult for 

the Speaker to hear the response. I recognize the Minister of 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, in areas that the members 

talk about, like Winnipeg where they say that there is more 

units going up, rental units, those are the areas where it‟s not 

covered by rent control. There are loopholes in agreements 

where we actually do see new places where they . . . and 

otherwise there . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. There‟s a half-dozen 



7150 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2011 

members on the opposition benches that are not allowing the 

minister to respond. I ask the minister to finalize her comments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — There is an increase in rental units in 

Winnipeg, is where there‟s a loophole where they are not 

covered under rent control. Mr. Speaker, what happens are, the 

apartments that have rent control, people aren‟t spending more 

money on them. They‟re not fixed up. 

 

And we have to have an ability to have more homes for people 

in this province. That‟s what our housing plan is doing. We 

have five points in our plan. It‟s an opportunity to make sure 

that people not only have homes that they can rent but 

affordable homes for them to move into. That is the goal of our 

government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Arrangements for Office Space  

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, this government and this Premier 

raised the standard for transparency and accountability when in 

2007 this Premier committed to be the most transparent and 

accountable Government of Saskatchewan ever, Mr. Speaker. 

But now we see that his minister is locking Saskatchewan 

taxpayers into a 20-year lease of some of the most expensive 

property in downtown Regina. She‟s refusing to tell taxpayers 

not only what we‟re going to be on the hook for, but she won‟t 

tell us why the additional space is needed. 

 

To the minister: where is the planning, and why is she giving 

. . . saddling taxpayers with a 20-year commitment when she 

hasn‟t a plan in place? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

government has a number of leases that are coming due, and we 

need more office space anyways. We were able to put together 

a transaction that not only provides good office space at a 

competitive rate, it attracts new building, a new . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 

attracts a new building, a new head office, and new head office 

jobs to Regina. Now contrast that with the NDP government 

who actually passed a law so that the leader of the NDP could 

move Nexen‟s head . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Now 

that the leader of the NDP could move the head office, Nexen‟s 

head office and his job, out of Regina. Now we bring head 

offices back to Regina. The NDP, they rip head offices out of 

Regina. Under the NDP, people packed up, moved away. Under 

the new Saskatchewan, people are moving back home. Thank 

you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

[10:30] 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister should sit 

down for a few hours and read her briefing book. And she 

should maybe look into the issues with Viterra that is leaving 

this city, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people have seen deals like this 

before. And they were hung with the price of paying 1.2 to $1.4 

million a year for over 23 years to lease Parkridge nursing 

home in Saskatoon. Then the government paid $8 million for 

the facility that is reported to need over $19 million in repairs. 

So, Mr. Speaker, get out your calculator and add it up. It‟s over 

$50 million that taxpayers have paid in this long-term lease for 

a building that‟s worth $5 million. To the minister: is this what 

Saskatchewan taxpayers are heading for — another Parkridge 

— with this 20-year long-term lease you‟re committing 

taxpayers to? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, once again the NDP say one thing, but then they do 

another. Yesterday, the minister opposite told the NDP . . . 

stated that the NDP never denied access to the cost of 

government leases. She said, and I quote, “I don‟t ever recall 

denying anyone access to square footage of a building and what 

the costs were.” Mr. Speaker, we have found 10 examples of 

the NDP government refusing to give out lease costs when they 

were asked in committee meetings with a freedom of 

information request. In fact on June the 2nd, 2004, the member 

opposite was asked the lease cost of Crop Insurance offices. 

She refused to answer the question, saying that financial 

information is confidential. Mr. Speaker, this information is 

confidential for commercial reasons. We are following the 

long-standing policy of government. And the NDP? It‟s 

following its long standing of saying one thing and doing 

another. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll tell this minister one 

thing I never did. And I have to remind her: she‟s the minister; 

I‟m not. Mr. Speaker, I never committed, Mr. Speaker, I never 

committed to a 20-year lease . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I‟d now ask the 

members to allow the member to place her question. I recognize 

the member. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I never committed to a 



April 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7151 

20-year lease when I had no idea of costs and it was still in 

negotiations. And, Mr. Speaker, I never signed a lease for space 

that I couldn‟t justify the need for, Mr. Speaker, and that‟s what 

we‟re seeing here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has a very poor track record 

when it comes to transparency and accountability. All we have 

to do is look at the loan guarantee for Amicus, the Minister of 

Advanced Ed‟s failed merger of St. Pete‟s and Carlton Trail, 

the failed carbon sequestration deal that the Premier sat on and 

never told anyone that it was failed till after a year, Mr. 

Speaker. And then now we have the history of Parkridge that is 

starting to rise when we see deals like this being put forward. 

 

To the Premier: why would anyone believe anything this 

government has to say when this Premier has failed on his most 

important commitment to Saskatchewan taxpayers and avoided 

transparency and accountability? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, here we have a deal with 

respect to this particular building where the government 

identified a number of leases that are coming due for office 

space in the capital city and need to identify space for the 

future. We needed to identify space that was available on a 

competitive basis. We‟ve done that, Mr. Speaker. And in the 

bargain, we are attracting a brand new head office to the city of 

Regina, head office for Mosaic, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the hon. member‟s question was about disclosure. I‟ll tell 

you what, Mr. Speaker. There‟s a reason why the people of this 

province support the party in government today. The reason is 

because, first of all, better government than they got over there. 

Mr. Speaker, they also support this side over that side because 

they remember — well I have to be careful about parliamentary 

language — they remember SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato 

Utility Development Company], Mr. Speaker, where that 

government didn‟t divulge the truth to the people of this 

province for five years. They remember Murdoch Carriere. 

They remember a record of a government where they ran from 

their record and let down the people of this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I spent some time last evening 

and this morning going through the various press clippings 

from when the announcement was made. And, Mr. Speaker, 

here we have a government that is leasing and committed to 

leasing for 20 years 50 to 60,000 square feet of this office. But 

nowhere in any of the releases and even when the Premier was 

at the sod-turning did he say, well government is going to be a 

major partner in this building, a major tenant in that building. 

Never said nothing in the public, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government is so weak on transparency and accountability. 

But, Mr. Speaker, he is so quick to talk about commitment to 

public investment, and he crows about this being a public 

investment or private investment in the city of Regina. 

Taxpayers are giving it a property abatement in the city of 

Regina. The Government of Saskatchewan has given them tax 

breaks when it comes to moving employees there, and the 

Government of Saskatchewan is leasing a third of the building. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when is this Premier going to walk his own actual 

talk and expect the private sector to step up instead of 

backstopping with taxpayers money? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Now 

the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Now 

the member opposite said, you know, this minister should look 

at her briefing books and look at her information. Well I‟d like 

to remind her about her ministerial information. From 1998 to 

2007, government policy of the day stated, this is the NDP 

minister‟s briefing notes: 

 

Saskatchewan government has a 25-year tradition of 

honouring the real estate industry‟s request that rental 

rates for individual leased buildings be kept strictly 

confidential. Release of partial information could indicate 

and result in market conditions that are not correct. 

 

I hope this jogs the member‟s memory, but I also have some 

wonderful information that I would like to table. This is all the 

freedom of information and also Hansard that the member 

seems to have forgotten, so I would be more than happy. 

Because you know what? I don‟t know, are the NDP against 

having new head offices, new jobs coming to Regina? As an 

MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] for Regina, I‟m 

more than pleased to have new jobs, new offices, new 

development. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

College Merger 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, on March 28th, the Minister of 

Advanced Education pledged to keep this Assembly and 

Saskatchewan people informed on the investigation into the 

mess of his failed merger. The minister said, “Day by day we‟ll 

report on every dollar for taxpayers.” 

 

To the minister: it‟s been 10 days of silence. Where‟s the 

update? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I‟ll begin as we do by putting all of these questions in 

context. And that is, the Canadian University Guide says this: 

there‟s never been a better time to consider Saskatchewan as 

the place to attain a great post-secondary education, Mr. 



7152 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2011 

Speaker. That‟s important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have is the Provincial Auditor, this is 

quoted from The StarPhoenix: “The Provincial Auditor has 

signed off on the government‟s plans for looking into potential 

irregularities raised in connection with the now-dead merger.” 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we have the Provincial Auditor signing 

off.  

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have, Mr. Speaker, on St. Peter‟s, and 

certainly there are questions about St. Peter‟s, we now have 

KPMG that has been engaged, Mr. Speaker, and next week 

they‟ll be beginning their work at St. Peter‟s College. Mr. 

Speaker, what we‟re committed to is ensuring that taxpayers are 

guaranteed that every cent‟s going to be accounted for, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, we do that with full co-operation 

with the appropriate authorities. Thanks very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I know the minister is about a 

year behind on reading his emails, but I can tell him that I‟m 

still receiving calls and emails on this issue. People are 

concerned. They don‟t trust the minister who created the mess 

to actually get to the bottom of it. 

 

Now we know that this minister funnelled millions of dollars to 

St. Peter‟s for capital projects. One of the concerns that‟s been 

raised with me several times is that a chunk of this capital 

funding has been used for operating expenses, and some of it is 

simply unaccounted for. 

 

To the minister: has he been made aware of any public funds 

that have been misused or are missing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, what we see is that last June there was a proposal, Mr. 

Speaker. We then hired an independent third party. That third 

party, Mr. Speaker, then went out and made a recommendation 

that we have since made public, and that is no, this merger 

should not go forward. 

 

In the midst of their work, Mr. Speaker, they raised, and I‟ll 

repeat for everyone, a series of questions and concerns. Mr. 

Speaker, in co-operation with the Provincial Auditor and with a 

number of independent audit firms, we are tracking, Mr. 

Speaker, and ensuring that every public dollar‟s going to be 

accounted for, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, as far as the 

questions that continue, there are processes in place so that the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan will be ensured that these dollars 

can be accounted for, Mr. Speaker. That process is under way. 

It‟s ongoing and, Mr. Speaker, it has the full support of the 

ministry. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if I‟m hearing about the misuse of 

capital dollars for operating, surely the minister has heard the 

same news. This minister, Mr. Speaker, promised that day by 

day he would release details as things are being discovered. 

Instead he refers to a process and some end date along the road 

that no one knows about. He‟s dragging his heels, and the 

people of Saskatchewan deserve better from this minister and 

from this government. Mr. Speaker, again, I know the minister 

has challenges keeping track of what comes into his office, but 

I‟m still receiving information. And I fully expect he is too. 

 

Another concern I keep hearing over and over again is that the 

minister did absolutely no due diligence before putting a man 

with a criminal history of defrauding the firefighters burn fund 

in charge of this merger. In fact I‟ve been told by several 

different people, what I‟ve been told by several different people 

is that the fired CEO doesn‟t even have a pardon, but the 

minister just believed him when he said he did. 

 

To the minister: what due diligence did the ministry actually 

undertake before putting this individual in charge of millions of 

dollars of taxpayers‟ funding? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, importantly, and I‟ll 

reiterate, we‟ve said it before that if the member opposite or 

members opposite have any information, Mr. Speaker, they can 

be forwarded to the Ministry of Justice. And, Mr. Speaker, that 

certainly continues here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, importantly, importantly what we‟ve done is 

responded to an independent process. That independent process 

said no, the colleges are not ready to merge, Mr. Speaker. That 

was the decision that we then followed. This was done 

independently. There were a series of questions, and again I‟ll 

reiterate, Mr. Speaker, a series of questions and concerns. Mr. 

Speaker, we‟re working with Justice. We‟re working with the 

Provincial Auditor and a number of independent firms. We‟re 

going to account, we‟re going to account for taxpayers‟ dollars 

because we want to make sure that these dollars are being spent 

on our post-secondary students. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister asks us to 

forward concerns. We‟ve been doing this for over a year, 

forwarding concerns, as have Saskatchewan people. What does 

he do? He claims he doesn‟t receive the email. He shrugs them 

off, saying that it‟s just ideological concerns. Well, Mr. 

Minister, it‟s not. There are problems, and you need to come 

clean. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s clear there are so many questions and 

concerns and rumours about that minister‟s failed merger mess, 

and how can people trust the minister to get to the bottom of it? 

That‟s the minister who put a man with a criminal record of 

fraud in charge of his pet merger project and funnelled millions 

of taxpayers‟ dollars to that project. Now word is leaking out 

that some of those public funds were misused and some is 

unaccounted for. But the minister expects us just to trust him. 



April 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7153 

Well the people who are still calling me definitely do not trust 

him. 

 

To the minister: will he commit to tabling a weekly update on 

the investigation‟s findings, and will he table the final report as 

soon as it‟s completed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I‟ll just review this. Mr. 

Speaker, these discussions regarding this partnership and 

merger began while the members opposite were actually in 

power, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what we did was set up a 

process to ensure that an independent third party, that an 

independent third party, Mr. Speaker, would actually undertake 

that work. Mr. Speaker, based on the recommendations, we 

made a decision. Mr. Speaker, the decision was no to the 

proposed merger. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we then saw as well was a number of 

questions and concerns that came forward, Mr. Speaker. And 

so, importantly, what we have done is we‟ve pledged to work 

full-fledged with the Ministry of Justice, with the Provincial 

Auditor, and with independent accounting firms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will continue to provide regular updates, Mr. 

Speaker, as information comes forward. Mr. Speaker, we 

support the independence of the work that‟s under way because 

we‟re going to make sure that we can account for all these 

dollars, Mr. Speaker, that are, and I repeat, Mr. Speaker, they 

are in question because, Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure that 

taxpayers‟ dollars are directed towards post-secondary students 

within the province. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 

 

[10:45] 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 623 — The School Bus Drivers (Saskatchewan) 

Appreciation Day Act 
 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that Bill No. 623, The School Bus Drivers (Saskatchewan) 

Appreciation Day Act be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved first 

reading of Bill 623 . . . Order. The member from Athabasca has 

moved first reading of Bill 623, The School Bus Drivers 

(Saskatchewan) Appreciation Day Act be read the first time. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of 

the Assembly, I would like to move a motion for allowing a 

member to be absent. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to move a motion regarding absence of a member. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Leave of Absence 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker: 

 

That leave of absence be granted to the member of 

Saskatchewan Rivers for Thursday, April 14th, 2011 to 

Tuesday, April 19th, 2011 inclusive to attend the Fifth 

Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians Outreach 

Program in Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island on 

behalf of this Assembly. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Government House Leader has 

moved that: 

 

By leave of this Assembly: 

 

Absence be granted to the member for Saskatchewan Rivers 

. . . 

 

Order. Order. I‟d ask members to come to order so the Speaker 

can read the motion. Order. The motion by the member from 

Cannington: 

 

By leave of the Assembly: 

 

That leave of the Assembly be granted to the member for 

Saskatchewan Rivers for Thursday, April 14th, 2011 to 

Tuesday, April 19th, 2011 inclusive to attend the Fifth 

Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians Outreach 

Program in Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island on 

behalf of this Assembly. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 



7154 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2011 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, leave to move a motion. 

 

The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has asked for 

leave to move a motion regarding leave. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave‟s been granted. I recognize the 

Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you. I would move: 

 

By leave of the Assembly: 

 

That leave of absence be granted to the member for 

Walsh Acres for Thursday, April 14th, 2011, to Tuesday, 

April 19th, 2011 inclusive to attend the Fifth 

Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians Outreach 

Program in Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island on 

behalf of this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Are members ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Opposition House Leader that: 

 

By leave of the Assembly: 

 

That absence be granted to the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres for Thursday, April 14th, 2011 to Tuesday, April 

19th, 2011 inclusive to attend the Fifth Commonwealth 

Women Parliamentarians Outreach Program in 

Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island on behalf of this 

Assembly. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 972 to 1,009. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 972 through 1,009 are tabled. 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 906 —The Bethany College Amendment Act, 2011 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m happy to be 

able to sponsor a Bill on behalf of Bethany College in Hepburn, 

which is in my constituency. 

 

Bethany College has a rich history in our province. They were 

first established as a school in 1927. Bethany is an accredited 

institution that has offered Christian education for thousands of 

students throughout their history. They contribute to the 

community. The village of Hepburn‟s population grows 

exponentially whenever classes are in session, and Bethany also 

allows their facilities to be used for community functions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the point of this Bill is to clarify language within 

the existing Act that governs Bethany College. The college has 

not paid education property tax. However, the Bill that 

currently governs them is ambiguous on the issue of education 

property tax, so this new legislation, the wording has been 

changed to clarify the language surrounding that. And because, 

Mr. Speaker, they have not paid education property tax in the 

past, there is no financial implications for the local school 

division. 

 

I want to thank Bethany‟s new president, Howie Wall, for his 

dedication to Bethany and to its students and for his leadership 

and help to make sure that this Bill has become a reality, Mr. 

Speaker. And with that, I move that Bill No. 906, The Bethany 

College Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 

Martensville that Bill No. 906, The Bethany College 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — Pursuant to rule 100, this Bill stands referred 

to the Standing Committee on Private Bills. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Rent Controls 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. At the 

end of my comments I will be moving the motion: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan urges the 

Saskatchewan government to immediately implement 

rent controls to protect people from uncontrolled rent 

increases that have in some cases been up to 100 per cent. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, over this session I‟ve stood many days and 

presented petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan residents that are 

seeking some type of security and stability in the housing 

market by seeing this government apply rent controls, some 

form of rent controls, Mr. Speaker. 



April 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7155 

And, Mr. Speaker, you know, some will wonder, why? Well I 

want to give you a couple of examples of people I‟ve heard 

from in Moose Jaw that are very concerned and how this lack 

of affordable housing has impacted families and individuals in 

my constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I received a letter, and I believe this one was also 

sent as a letter to the editor, and I‟m quoting the letter: 

 

Some of my clients live in the buildings that have been 

sold and are facing outrageous rental increases. The 

reason? To bring Moose Jaw‟s “rents up to market 

value.” 

 

That‟s fine, but two of these buildings in particular are 

not up to par with the standards of most modern 

apartment buildings. They are old and shabby, and one 

has a history of bedbugs. 

 

But they house a sector of our society that NEEDS 

affordable housing. So to purchase these buildings and 

then increase rents by over 67% brings the term 

„slumlord‟ to mind. 

 

The new owners „generously‟ offered to „help‟ by 

offering to assist tenants with applying for the Sask 

Rental Housing Supplement [Mr. Speaker]. Most are 

already on it. Even with the rental supplement, which was 

created to give them some relief from their EXISTING 

rates, they still cannot meet the new rent increases. 

 

And I guess the question was posed to me, Mr. Speaker: 

 

How can a person with a monthly income of $688.00 plus 

$175.00 [and that‟s] (the rental supplement) [portion],go 

from paying $460.00 a month to $725.00? It leaves them 

[all in] $138.00 . . . 

 

For all of their other expenses — for food, for clothing, for 

anything they might need. And, Mr. Speaker, I have case after 

case. 

 

A woman who came to my office who had her low-rental 

apartment increased by $250, which brought her rent to over 

600. She only receives a little over $700 from social assistance 

with all her expenses, including personal needs, food, rent, 

telephone, clothes. So, Mr. Speaker, it‟s a difficulty. How do 

these people live? And it just goes . . . There‟s numerous cases, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another case that I received, this person‟s rent went from $385 

a month to 625 in one jump, Mr. Speaker, and it forced many 

people out of the building. And the new landlord‟s made a 

number of changes. The front door is locked all the time — no 

keys. No one that they could find in the city had access keys for 

EMS [emergency medical services] or the police. The building 

manager lived here in Regina. And there was a number of other 

issues. Nothing had been done to the building; no 

improvements had been made. But these people‟s rent went 

from 385 to 625. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, do we just stand back and say, well that‟s the 

market and that‟s the way it goes? There is opportunity for this 

Premier to do something. And there is opportunity for this 

government to do something once they actually sit back and 

listen to people and realize the impact and the instability that 

this creates right across the market when people can‟t find a 

home. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it spreads to all kinds of areas. It isn‟t just 

the immediate instability, but it‟s also long-term outcomes for 

children who are in unsettled situations. And we know that can 

have an impact in school, can have an impact on health of not 

only the children but the adults. Mr. Speaker, the issues go on 

and on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also . . . This in Moose Jaw has spread to the 

issue of high rents at a trailer court where a new landlord 

immediately doubled the lot rent. So, Mr. Speaker, this doesn‟t 

include people that have already paid the mortgage on their 

trailer or their mobile home. But now they‟re seeing the rental 

pad increase, the increase of the rental pad go up substantially 

and causing stress. In fact one couple said they had put their 

trailer up for sale and were moving to Medicine Hat. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that‟s not what we want. We don‟t want 

people chased out of the province by issues with lack of 

affordable housing and no initiative on behalf of this 

government to implement rent controls. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m sure the members opposite have heard these 

issues in their constituencies also. I would bet that they aren‟t 

just in New Democratic member MLAs‟ constituencies. I 

would assume these members have heard it. So I would ask 

them, go back, talk to their constituency assistants, see what 

phone calls they have received, and then sit down and have a 

look at the options for the government and what can be done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, rent control is just part of the solution to this 

issue, and it‟s only one aspect of the policy that we have been 

discussing that will address this housing crisis. It is a crisis in 

affordability as much as it‟s a crisis in housing . . . affordability 

as much as housing availability, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we often talk about next-generation rent controls which are 

needed to protect people in the province against unreasonable 

and unjustified rent increases. And, Mr. Speaker, when we talk 

about next-generation, we often get the same response from 

people that, well this just kills off anyone willing to build rental 

accommodation in the province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you look at a report that was done, it 

was An Analysis of Manitoba’s Rent Regulation Program and 

the Impact on the Rental Housing Market, and it was done by 

Hugh Grant of the department of economics, Faculty of 

Business and Economics at the University of Winnipeg in 

January of this year. And it did an assessment of the Manitoba 

circumstance and what has happened. And I want to quote from 

this report, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Grant did. And is says that: 

 

Many of the criticisms of rent regulations are ill-founded 

on both theoretical and empirical grounds. Well-worn 

myths about rent regulations — that they reduce the 

quantity and quality of rental accommodation — derive 

from a simple textbook model of “rent controls” applied 

to first-generation programs that existed in the 1950s. 



7156 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2011 

So, Mr. Speaker, instead of people automatically reverting to, 

well this doesn‟t work, because they‟ve heard it somewhere, 

they really need to have a look at the new options that are out 

there, the other rent control initiatives that have been put in 

place in provinces right across Canada and have been very 

successful. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I was talking to a sister of mine that lives in 

Vancouver, and we were talking about some of the increases in 

housing costs in the city of Moose Jaw and the lack of 

affordability and rental accommodation which is causing 

problems. And she just said to me, well don‟t you guys have 

rent controls? And so then we ended up going into a long 

discussion on what rent controls were in British Columbia, how 

they work, and that everyone assumes they are there, protect 

renters, and to make sure that there is stability in the market. 

 

[11:00] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we see the people that came to the 

gallery the other day and talked about 100 per cent increase in 

their rental accommodation here in the city of Regina, it brings 

to mind a comment that Mr. Grant makes in his assessment of 

the Manitoba rent regulation program. And he talks about 

economic eviction. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what is economic eviction? And it‟s that 

rents and costs have increased that a person cannot stay there. 

And by the sheer cost of the accommodation that they‟re 

currently living in, they are evicted from that property because 

they cannot sustain their lifestyle in that property. So they have 

to downsize. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve heard this across the province. People 

have downsized. We‟ve heard of families that have moved into 

one-bedroom apartments so they could better accommodate 

rental increases and be able to afford the other necessities of 

life. We have heard of families that are making choices, not 

only if they will stay in an apartment or rental unit of some 

type, but also, how do you decide what to do with your limited 

disposable income? Is it food? You know, Mr. Speaker, I 

wouldn‟t consider spending income, an income dedicated to 

food and the necessities of life as disposable, and I don‟t think 

anyone else would. But these people are down to the point 

where they are trying to best manage their life as they can and 

provide for their families. And, Mr. Speaker, they‟re getting no 

support from this government, and this government in fact has 

kind of scoffed at the whole idea. 

 

It was interesting. Mr. Speaker, I know the members opposite 

will stand up, and they will talk about their housing plan and 

how wonderful it is, and affordable housing. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

I spent some time looking at the issue of the Headstart program 

that was announced by this minister. And the fact of the matter 

is that there are some grants, and it can be up to $5,000 a door. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this family, whomever the party is or the 

family is that‟s interested in purchasing one of these homes, 

still has to go to a financial institution and apply for a mortgage 

just like you or I would or anyone else. So then you are open to 

the terms and conditions that will apply for qualifying for a 

mortgage through a financial institution. And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s 

pretty staggering. 

And you can go on to any number of real estate websites in the 

province, and they have calculators for mortgages. So I went on 

and did a variety. Okay, if I was looking at a $180,000 house — 

that‟s the price range for this government‟s Headstart program, 

180,000 to a $300,000 home — it depends on how much you‟re 

putting down on that house. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s also questionable as to how much a 

down payment . . . If a family is struggling, how on earth do 

you justify setting money aside when you‟re making difficult 

decisions as to what necessities you will purchase that week, 

that month, and which you will set aside till next month or next 

week? Mr. Speaker, it‟s pretty difficult to save yourself a down 

payment for a home. 

 

So it could go anywhere from 5 per cent up to 20 per cent was 

what I did when I looked at these mortgages and just to see 

what the payments would be. Well, Mr. Speaker, the payments 

are anywhere from 800 to well over 1,000. And that does not 

include — and I want to say to people — that does not include 

interest or taxes. Quite often we will see home payments 

calculated on P-I-T [principal, interest, and taxes], and these 

were just calculated on the principal. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I was just using some ballpark numbers. 

And that‟s still pretty staggering for many people across the 

province. It‟s out of reach for many families across the 

province. And, Mr. Speaker, I truly believe that this 

government needs to be serious, look at the next generation of 

rent controls that are out there, the options that are out there. 

And the Minister of Justice stood up the other day, and even 

though his Minimum Wage Board recommended an increase 

indexing minimum wage, the minister made the comment, well 

we don‟t want to get out in front of everybody; we want to 

make sure that we are, you know, in the same range as other 

provinces and not stepping out there and causing problems. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we‟re behind other provinces in this. Other 

provinces have had rent controls in a variety of forms that have 

worked well, have provided stability in the market. They 

haven‟t stifled rental Bills and construction in those provinces. 

And, Mr. Speaker, all of the documentation is there. 

 

This government needs to set aside its ideology and look at rent 

controls because it is the thing that‟s going to help people in the 

immediate term while we are waiting for this government to put 

forward a more long-term housing strategy. And we sure hope 

that they come forward with that soon, because the kind of 

hodgepodge of announcements that‟s been made over the last 

six months . . . I think Headstart actually was announced a year 

ago, and reannounced again just lately after the budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while that‟s another fairly lengthy debate about 

the shortfall of the government programs that they have 

announced and many concerns that are being expressed by 

people in the community, I would urge the government to sit 

down and truly look at next-generation options that are out 

there, get their minds out of the ‟50s and really look at the new 

options that are there. So, Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan urges the 

Saskatchewan government to immediately implement 

rent controls to protect people from uncontrolled rent 



April 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7157 

increases that have in some cases been up to 100 per cent. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan urges the 

Saskatchewan government to immediately implement 

rent controls to protect people from uncontrolled rent 

increases that have in some cases been up to 100 per cent. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to 

stand today. It‟s a pleasure to stand today to speak to this 

motion. It‟ll come as no surprise that I won‟t be supporting it, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was first elected to Saskatoon City Council in 

2003 and by 2005, we saw property values in Saskatoon 

increasing dramatically. We had lots of condominium 

conversions that were taking place, Mr. Speaker. Rents were 

rising dramatically. Our occupancy rate was less than 1 per 

cent. The government of the day then, Mr. Speaker, came to us 

to speak to a moratorium on condominium conversations, but 

the one thing that they didn‟t speak to us about was rent 

controls. They were ready to implement some kind of 

moratorium with respect to those conversions, but they weren‟t 

ready to even consider rent controls at a time of unprecedented 

rent increases, Mr. Speaker, and an unprecedented vacancy rate 

in the city. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they didn‟t do anything about it at that time. They 

were happy to criticize our city council, Mr. Speaker, at the 

time about conversions, but they weren‟t ready to do anything 

with respect to rents despite the demands that were being made 

upon them. And it was in their power to intervene at the time, 

Mr. Speaker. And now they criticize our government for not 

doing something that they weren‟t prepared to do when they 

had the power, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what are the effects, Mr. Speaker? In terms of rent 

increases, that limits the owner‟s ability to improve his property 

and it restricts his return on investment. And it‟s only with 

return on investment, Mr. Speaker, that property owners can 

reinvest in their property to improve them for the benefit of 

their tenants. And quality deteriorates, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve 

already had too much property in the city of Saskatoon where 

people live in substandard conditions, Mr. Speaker, and rent 

controls will only add to that issue; controls will add to that 

problem as well. There won‟t be any further investment in 

existing stock, and property owners won‟t build any new 

properties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, owners have a right to a return on investment, and 

members opposite that own rental property won‟t deny that. 

And that‟s what you get when you have no return on 

investment. You have people that won‟t invest in their 

properties, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, don‟t take my word for it. There‟s many 

people that have quoted, many people that have been quoted on 

this topic in the past. And I‟ll want to read a few into the 

record. “I think rent controls have proven that they never work 

in the end. They sound wonderful at the front end, but the 

problem is that you have no one who will invest money into 

apartments into the future.” And that‟s a quote from Mayor Don 

Atchison. “Is rent control going to allow developers to build 

more apartments to fill the need? That‟s not the answer.” And 

that‟s from Mayor Pat Fiacco who goes on to say that rent 

control does not allow new apartments to be built. So I think 

the approach has to be looked at very carefully. 

 

And in the Leader-Post, under an article entitled, “Opposition 

to rent control,” this was said by Jason Hall, who speaks for the 

Regina and Partners Landlord Association, of “the impact of 

rent control „is far more negative than positive.‟” And in the 

same article, he goes on to say that “Losing the ability to adjust 

rents would lead to fewer rental units on the market.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, what do the NDP have to say about rent control, 

and what have they done in the past? Well in 1992, Mr. 

Speaker, the New Democrats and their Leader of the 

Opposition, when in cabinet, went to abolish rent controls. 

 

In 2000, a StarPhoenix article entitled “Government‟s refused 

to cap rising rents” had this to say about the NDP: 

 

Justice Minister Chris Axworthy said he hasn‟t heard any 

such request to bring in rent control, but he said the 

government isn‟t interested following a sour experience 

during a previous round of imposed caps and reviews. 

 

And what was that experience, Mr. Speaker? Decreased supply, 

lack of investment in new stock, and property deterioration. 

And that‟s clear from the record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And more recently, Mr. Speaker, on the eve of the last election, 

the New Democrats decide there‟s no need for rent control. And 

we have this from The StarPhoenix of August 30th, 2007: 

 

Junor told reporters recent consultations with the housing 

industry and representatives of community-based 

organizations who work with the poor showed no real 

appetite exists for establishing rent controls. 

 

And in another article on the same issue, the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview is quoted as saying, and I quote: 

 

Junor said she will be looking at rent controls as a 

possible solution to prevent evictions but pointed out that, 

in a booming market, there are always people that want to 

get in and make money. 

 

And she goes on to say: 

 

“And that‟s how the marketplace works. You can‟t fault 

people for that,” she said. “They have that ability. It‟s a 

free society. It‟s a democracy.” 

 

Now that comes right from the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the consultation summary of the NDP‟s 



7158 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2011 

own housing in Saskatchewan document had this to say: 

 

Although there was a mixed response regarding rent 

controls, the general conclusion was that rent controls 

create uncertainty and will lead to a decline in housing 

availability. The quality of rent as rent controlled would 

be a disincentive for investment. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the New 

Democrats‟ record on poverty and cost of living. Now I know 

they don‟t like to talk about the 16 years that they were over 

there, Mr. Speaker. We hear it all the time. But I think that they 

need to be reminded, and I think that the people of 

Saskatchewan need to be reminded, of their record. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the NDP, they failed to increase the seniors‟ 

income plan for 16 years. And 13 of their 16 years, they failed 

to increase shelter rates. And on poverty, in 2006, poverty 

reached its highest point in nearly a decade. Children living in 

low-income, single-parent families doubled between 1998 and 

2006. 

 

Mr. Speaker, food bank usage peaked in 2006. In 2004 food 

bank usage increased by 37 per cent in one year. Food bank 

usage rose 54 per cent between 2002 and 2007, Mr. Speaker. 

Food bank use has decreased by 9 per cent since 2007 since this 

government was elected, Mr. Speaker, and that‟s something 

we‟re proud of; 14 per cent decrease in children served since 

2007. I hear some chirping from across the way. The facts don‟t 

lie, Mr. Speaker. They‟re clear as black and white. 

 

Our action on the cost of living, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve removed 

110,000 low-income people from the tax roll since taking 

government: low-income single parents, single couples, single 

seniors, and low-income families of four. Utility costs have 

decreased 7 per cent in the average residential customer‟s 

energy bill, the third decrease in two years. 

 

We‟ve doubled the low-income tax credit, Mr. Speaker, nearly 

doubled the number of seniors eligible for benefits under the 

seniors‟ income plan from approximately 9,000 to 

approximately 17,000, Mr. Speaker, more than doubled the 

amount available to low-income seniors through the seniors‟ 

income plan from 90 to $190 for single seniors and from $72 to 

$155 for couples. We‟ve increased the rental supplements and 

shelter rates five times and indexed both to the cost of living, 

Mr. Speaker, increased the income threshold to help seniors 

qualify for social housing by up to 48 per cent in urban areas 

and it‟s 78 per cent in rural communities, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve 

doubled the caregiver tax credit, infirm dependent tax credit, 

and supplement to the disability tax credit, Mr. Speaker, and 

we‟ve increased the disability tax credit. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Introduced the low-income seniors‟ and prescription drug plans. 

Increased the minimum wage five times, three times since 

January 2008, to $9.25. We‟ve increased funding to CBOs 

[community-based organization] by 13.3 per cent, and we 

increased the amount paid for utilities for transition 

employment allowance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We‟ve increased the amount paid to low-income families for 

the Saskatchewan employment supplement and increased the 

threshold for those who can qualify. And we‟ve created 

programs like ACE [accelerating connections to employment] 

to help connect those on social assistance to employment 

opportunities. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what‟s clear is this government, since taking 

office, is taking action on affordability. We‟ve increased the 

number of units that are available for rent. With rent controls, 

Mr. Speaker, all that‟s going to do is dry up supply. It‟s going 

to ensure that people don‟t invest. And we know from looking 

at the economists, and most economists will tell us this, Mr. 

Speaker, that rent controls don‟t work. They prevent an increase 

in the number of units, Mr. Speaker. People won‟t invest. And 

what‟s worst of all, the properties that people will live in will 

continue to deteriorate until a point in time, and then what do 

you do, Mr. Speaker? I mean people deserve to live in good 

quality housing, and rent controls will do nothing for that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

What‟s required, Mr. Speaker, is broad-based consultation 

between government, industry, and stakeholders. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s precisely what this government is going to do. 

Rent controls won‟t work, but broad-based consultation with 

industry is what‟s needed to help us through this issue, Mr. 

Speaker. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I won‟t be supporting the 

motion. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased today to 

rise to speak in favour of this motion raised by the New 

Democratic Party opposition today, Mr. Speaker. This motion 

is a very simple motion that deals with matters pertinent to the 

current day that we‟re all living in in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The motion reads simply as 

follows: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan urges the 

Saskatchewan government to immediately implement 

rent controls to protect people from uncontrolled rent 

increases that have in some cases been up to 100 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very simple motion to support because, 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s all about protecting vulnerable people who 

have fallen victims to the growing economy that we‟re facing, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think the members opposite will acknowledge that in 2007, 

when the Sask Party inherited government in the province of 

Saskatchewan, they also inherited a growing economy. And 

with that growing economy have come challenges, Mr. 

Speaker. But has the Saskatchewan Party managed the growing 

economy to the benefit of all Saskatchewan people or have they 

simply cheerled that growth, Mr. Speaker, and left everyone 

else to fend for themselves? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as far as affordable housing goes, Mr. 

Speaker, this government has let the people of Saskatchewan 

down a tremendous amount, Mr. Speaker. They have left the 

hard work on managing a growing economy behind, and they 

have left a large number of people behind. The important thing 



April 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7159 

for the government to do in the future is to manage that 

growing economy for the benefit of all Saskatchewan people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s time to discuss and debate the benefits of 

new generation rent controls, rent controls that protect 

individuals but are also part of a larger housing strategy that 

ensures that there are new units built, there are more units 

available, Mr. Speaker, and at the same time the most 

vulnerable in our society are protected from the growth that‟s 

taking place around them. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, to begin my specific comments, I want to 

read from a letter that I received just two weeks ago in my 

constituency office from a constituent of mine, Mr. Speaker. I 

will read the email. It‟s in two parts: 

 

Hello Mr. Taylor [the email starts]. My name is Kevin 

Mathison, and I live here in the city of North Battleford, 

and the price of rent in the city has went through the roof. 

I have no clue where to turn. I‟m a disabled person and I 

live on very little money each month, so I have to take up 

residence with my mother who is on old age security. We 

currently rent a house that is in my opinion, is worth 

condemning. The roof leaks, there‟s no insulation and the 

furnace is older than the house itself and I fear fire at 

some point. So I have decided to look elsewhere for a 

better house to live in, but to my surprise I can‟t rent 

anything in North Battleford under 1200 dollars a month. 

Going to welfare does me no good because the amount 

they give you for rents is far below any rent amount in the 

city plus, since I‟m on disability, my CPP gets deducted 

from the amount they will give me. The way I see it, me 

and people like me will soon be sitting on the curb. I need 

[your] help. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I contacted Mr. Mathison. We discussed a 

number of things and, Mr. Speaker, he sent me a follow-up 

email after some discussions that he had with individuals in 

government. And here‟s a quote from the second email that Mr. 

Mathison has provided to me. And I quote: 

 

I think what needs to be addressed is the fact that if I need 

to leave my current residence and move into a 1200 dollar 

or more house very soon, where will I get the help to do 

this? Because all that really is available to rent in my 

price range is a one bedroom apartment, and with 

apartments there are stairs and not enough room to 

accommodate two people, which also leaves the extra 

cost of storage for stuff that I could not put into the 

apartment. I think that Social Services needs to be able to 

pay the full amount of rent until the province can get their 

act together and provide either rent control or better 

accommodations for people with disabilities and seniors. 

When I first moved to North Battleford from Prince 

Albert about six years ago the rent in this town was 

manageable, but over the past two years the amount of 

rent has in some cases tripled and even quadrupled. It‟s a 

sad state of affairs when people such as myself who can‟t 

work and have no way of making extra . . . [money] are 

being forced out on the street. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Kevin Mathison is living proof that this 

government is leaving people behind in our communities. And 

one of the solutions, Mr. Speaker, is rent control. Members 

opposite will know that I have been talking about this for some 

time. At least three years ago, Mr. Speaker, I brought to the 

attention of the Assembly here rent increases in the city of 

North Battleford as high as 40 per cent. I tabled petitions every 

day in the Chamber, Mr. Speaker, for an entire session from 

individuals living in North Battleford who were asking for rent 

controls three years ago. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, just this week we have seen people in the 

city of Regina face rent increases of 100 per cent, bringing 

those complaints into the Chamber. Mr. Speaker, the Premier, 

the Minister of Justice, both indicated that rent increases to that 

extent, Mr. Speaker, were unacceptable. That was the argument 

that was made, unacceptable. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if there are landlords in the province of 

Saskatchewan who are raising rents to an unacceptable level . . . 

In North Battleford my constituents would say 40 per cent is 

unacceptable. In the city of Regina the Premier, the Minister of 

Justice have indicated there‟s an unacceptable level of rent 

increase, Mr. Speaker. In this case it was 65 and 100 per cent. 

Mr. Speaker, at what level does a rent increase become 

unacceptable? At what level, Mr. Speaker, does the province 

say we have to do something to protect individuals like Mr. 

Mathison who‟s written a very difficult letter from the city of 

North Battleford. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we know that this is the case in most cities 

around the province, perhaps not so visible, Mr. Speaker. News 

accounts in the city of Estevan indicate that housing is one of 

the most important issues to the people living in the city of 

Estevan, Mr. Speaker. In the city of Humboldt, Mr. Speaker, 

the local newspaper is writing stories about people who are 

living in their cars because they can‟t afford properties that are 

available, if they can find a place, Mr. Speaker, that‟s available. 

 

We in this province have to recognize that there comes a time 

when we need to manage this growing economy and not just 

cheerlead it as it rolls its wave through the province. Because, 

Mr. Speaker, vulnerable people like Mr. Mathison and his 

mother are relying on their government to help them to find 

shelter — safe, secure shelter, Mr. Speaker — to be able to live 

the quality of life that they expect to live in a province as 

prosperous and as bright as the one that we are all living in. 

 

Rent control needs to be a part of a growing housing strategy, 

Mr. Speaker. I‟ve met with representatives of the city of North 

Battleford, I‟ve met with developers who are interested in 

developing in the city of North Battleford. The concern, Mr. 

Speaker, has not been rent controls. The concern has been the 

cost of construction of new properties, Mr. Speaker, to increase 

the number of units that are available. And until governments 

can find a way to help developers reduce the costs and help 

municipalities reduce the costs significantly, Mr. Speaker, new 

units aren‟t going to be made available, and landlords in 

properties that exist are going to continue to increase the rents 

to meet their interpretation of what a growing economy should 

pay them. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we need to ensure that we aren‟t just 

protecting landlords, but we‟re protecting individuals who live 

in our communities, Mr. Speaker. I thank you for the time to 



7160 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2011 

add my voice to this important issue in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to 

speak to this topic. I think it‟s a very important discussion we 

need to have about the real negative effects rent control would 

have on our housing availability and our economy. 

 

It‟s interesting to note that wherever rent controls have been put 

in place, it has had the exactly the opposite effect on housing 

availability that this motion would like to address. Ultimately 

supply and demand determines the vacancy rates. And in my 

presentation I will outline and give statistics to prove that point 

that how detrimental rent controls are to the construction of 

new rental units. 

 

But there is a place for the government to have a role in this 

whole housing issue, and I would like to point out a number of 

things that our government has done to address housing. On 

March 28th the Social Services minister announced details of a 

five-point action plan to add at least 4,600 new housing units 

over the next five years. 

 

And it‟s interesting, Mr. Speaker, our government is never 

afraid of setting goals, unlike the NDP government. You can 

take the example of attracting nurses to this province. The NDP 

would never have a goal, and the reason they never had a goal: 

because what if they didn‟t meet that goal? Well we met our 

goal as far as attracting nurses to this province. And we will 

meet this goal over the next five years of having at least 4,600 

new housing units in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it makes it easier for Saskatchewan people with 

modest incomes to purchase new homes. The total investment 

in housing from these five initiatives over the next five years 

will be more than $252 million. The five housing initiatives 

outlined in the Saskatchewan advantage housing plan include: 

number one, Headstart on a Home; number two, the affordable 

home ownership program; three, rental construction incentive; 

number four, $34 million investment in rental housing; and 

number five, Habitat for Humanity partnerships. These 

initiatives will add up to more than 4,600 new housing units 

over the next five years in entry-level and rental housing. These 

new measures will add to our housing supply and make it 

possible for all Saskatchewan citizens to build a better future. 

 

Number one of our five-point plan is Headstart on a Home. 

Headstart on a Home and the affordable home ownership 

program are designed to stimulate the construction of new, 

affordable homes and support municipal efforts to assist new 

buyers to purchase a home. Increasing these opportunities for 

moderate-income homebuyers will also help relieve pressure on 

the rental market by moving people out of existing rental units 

and into new homes. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Headstart on a Home will support the creation of a minimum of 

1,000 new entry-level homes over the next five years through 

the creation of a new capital funding pool. Almost $200 million 

over five years will be available to make these low-interest 

loans. The capital pool will provide construction project 

financing and incentives to municipality-approved builders and 

developers to stimulate the construction of moderately priced, 

entry-level homes. 

 

This program does two things: it moves people from rental into 

ownership position in new homes and also shows how well our 

government works with municipalities to work hand in hand to 

address these issues in Saskatchewan. 

 

The second plan that we have in the five-point plan is the 

affordable home ownership program. Building on successful 

municipal initiatives such as the city of Saskatoon‟s mortgage 

flexibility program, the affordable home ownership program 

will see the provincial government match municipal tax 

incentives with a grant equal to a five-year reduction property 

tax incentive on municipally designated new homes. 

Municipalities can then use the provincial grant, combined with 

their own tax incentives or similar assistance, to provide the 

new homeowner with down payment assistance on the property. 

This program is expected to stimulate the development of 600 

new homes over the next five years. Through the affordable 

home ownership program we can double the impact of 

municipal initiatives in this area. This program levers the 

expertise of our municipalities and provides real assistance to 

the new home buyer in assessing a new home. Again, 

co-operating with municipalities, moving people from a rental 

situation into a homeowner situation, very good initiatives. 

 

Number three on our five-point plan is the rental construction 

incentive. Through the rental construction incentive, the 

provincial government will partner with municipalities to 

increase the supply of new rental housing construction. The 

program will provide a grant equal to the education property tax 

of up to $5,000 per new door of rental housing. Combined with 

existing projects, this incentive will deliver 300 units in 2011 

and ‟12 and 650 new rental units in each of the next five years. 

 

Number four point, Mr. Speaker, is the $35 million investment 

in rental housing. Nearly $34 million in new funding has been 

set aside for two purposes. One, to develop more affordable 

rental housing in communities with long-term housing needs, 

and to rejuvenate the government-funded housing across 

Saskatchewan, rehabilitating homes and rental units that would 

be lost to the housing market without major work. More than 

100 communities across the province are expected to benefit 

from this funding. 

 

This is a fundamental part of a five-point plan as well, Mr. 

Speaker, because we fix up some of the older more dilapidated 

housing units so it increases the affordability and improves the 

living area for people in those rental situations. 

 

Number five on our five-point plan is the Habitat for Humanity 

partnership. Our government will continue to partner with 

Habitat for Humanity Saskatchewan to provide home 

ownership opportunities for lower income families. In 2011 the 

province will provide 1.5 million to construct up to 30 homes in 

select communities across the province. The funding will help 

to increase the supply of affordable housing for low-income 

families at a cost of $50,000 per home. This builds on the 

province‟s commitment of $1 million to Habitat for Humanity 

in both 2009 and ‟10. 



April 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7161 

Maintaining existing housing stock, increasing our inventory, 

and improving access would help to address the housing needs 

of a growing province. The initiatives in this action plan, and 

those that will be identified in our housing strategy, will make a 

real difference for Saskatchewan people in the long term as the 

province moves forward. 

 

Now the opposition likes to talk about Manitoba and the rent 

control that has been in Manitoba since 1976. The rent increase 

guideline is set each year by the province. It takes effect from 

January 1st, 2011. The rent increases was set at 2.1 per cent. 

Landlords can submit a fee and an application to residential 

tenancies branch for a larger cost increase if they demonstrate 

that the guideline will not cover their cost increases. Landlords 

must give the tenant three months notice of an increase. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is just more bureaucracy and, at the end of the 

day, doesn‟t do anything to increase vacancy rates. And I would 

like to state some statistics obtained from the Canada Mortgage 

and Housing Corporation 2010 Market Report. Vacancy rate for 

Manitoba, as a province, in 2009 were 1.1. Vacancy rate in 

2010 went down to point nine per cent. Winnipeg went from 

1.1 per cent to point eight per cent. Compared to Saskatchewan, 

vacancy rates in 2009 went from 1.9 per cent up to 2.5 per cent 

without any rent control. Regina went from point six per cent to 

1 per cent; Saskatoon, 1.9 per cent to 2.6 per cent. 

 

This shows that the marketplace is working. There‟s more 

rental units in Saskatchewan under no rental controls versus 

Manitoba where there is rental controls. And it‟s also important 

to note that the NDP‟s record on rent control, they cancelled 

rent control in 1992 and continued to reject it for 16 years. The 

NDP stakeholder consultation as of 2007 cited serious concerns 

about rent controls from key housing organizations. And just in 

the last few seconds, I just have to quote from one economist, 

Paul Krugman, “That the great sacred cow — Rent Control — 

is a textbook case of economic stupidity.” I think that pretty 

well lays it out, Mr. Speaker, and I will not be supporting this 

motion. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from . . . Order. 

Order. Before I recognize the member from Saskatoon Centre, a 

number of members had some good-natured kibitzing across 

the floor. However, it made it difficult to hear the member 

speaking, so I‟d ask members to go behind the bar if they want 

to have that discussion. I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

. . . Order. I recognize the member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

pleasure to get into this very important debate about rent 

controls and what they mean for the people of Saskatchewan. 

Too many families are getting the message that this government 

is out of touch. They don‟t know what‟s going on around 

kitchen tables and too many apartments, that people, people‟s 

homes, when they await every six months that letter that says 

their rent can go up whatever they want. And this really, really 

shows how this government has dropped the ball, dropped the 

ball. 

 

And it was interesting this morning that I thought the minister 

actually might‟ve come around a little bit when she was talking 

about rogue landlords, rogue landlords. And I thought, well 

this‟ll be very interesting to hear what she has to say about 

rogue landlords. But yet again, yet again, the government drops 

the ball. So what are you going to do about rogue landlords? 

And what is a rogue landlord? Is it 20 per cent, when they 

increase the rents 20 per cent? Is it 30 per cent? Is it 10 per 

cent? What is it? Nothing. 

 

So what we hear is a bunch of rhetoric from the other side. The 

list of programs that they‟ve done, and some have worked and 

some haven‟t worked. I know, for example, this minister takes a 

lot of pride in her recent announcement of increases to the rent 

supplement and to the shelter allowance. And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s 

as low as a dollar a month. The increase is as low as a dollar a 

month. I couldn‟t believe she even had the nerve to announce 

that she was increasing the allowance by as low or as little as a 

dollar a month. I don‟t know what she thinks people think when 

they get a dollar more a month. Now some of it was $18 a 

month, $18 a month. But what we‟ve seen over the course of 

the last four years, three, four years, where rents have gone up 

thousands of dollars each year, each year. And it really is a 

shame. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what we‟re really talking about here today and 

what our side of the House is talking about is next generation 

rent controls, second generation rent controls, which really 

includes two parts, includes two parts. We‟re talking about a 

cap, a reasonable cap on what a rent can go up each month — 1 

per cent, 2 per cent — you know, we‟ll work on that detail. 

We‟ll consult and make sure we have the right number. But the 

other part that‟s very, very important is the exemptions. They 

go hand in glove together. They work together. They work 

together to fix what we see today in Saskatchewan where we 

have a market failure in the rental marketplace. 

 

And so this is very important that we think of them together and 

not separate them out. The minister sometimes likes to refer to 

them as loopholes, but they‟re not loopholes. They‟re part of it. 

They‟re an integral part of it. You can‟t have one without the 

other. And so when the minister tries to portray that as 

something that, oh it‟s an afterthought, no it‟s not an 

afterthought. It‟s an important part of, how do we rebuild the 

housing stock, the rental stock that‟s been lost? And also how 

do we rebuild the public stock as well? And that‟s very, very 

important because as we know . . . And some of the stats have 

been quite shocking in terms of what we see here. And even in 

the Premier‟s own riding, we see the waiting lists go up for 

public housing. And they‟re going up because people are going 

to it because it‟s a little bit more predictable than the private 

housing rental stock. 

 

We see in social housing where in January 2008 . . . And these 

are the facts. These are the facts of what‟s happening in 

Saskatchewan despite all the programs that these folks like to 

talk about. But these are the facts. Social housing, where it‟s 

rental housing for people with low incomes or people who are 

the victims of abuse and the rent is based on the tenant‟s 

income, January 2008, it was 396. February 2011, it‟s grown to 

879. And this is under this government‟s management. That‟s a 

122 per cent increase, and they don‟t really want to talk about 

that. 

 

But even in the Premier‟s own riding, the Premier‟s own riding, 

it‟s a 15-month waiting list in Swift Current, 15 months in 

Swift Current. Affordable housing has grown from 205 on the 



7162 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2011 

waiting list to 408. In Estevan it‟s 19 months on the waiting list, 

19 months on the waiting list. Swift Current is 13 months, and 

Saskatoon is 11 months. 

 

But what about the seniors? What about the seniors? We see a 

situation where it‟s grown from 521 to 774, a 50 per cent 

increase, and again Swift Current takes the longest time with 15 

months on the waiting list. So this is critical. 

 

And we see right across the province, people are writing. And 

the folks over there, we know they get the letters. We get the 

letters. It‟s right across the province. Whether it‟s Yorkton, 

Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Estevan, Swift Current and 

Saskatoon and Regina, we‟ve had letters over the four years, 

Mr. Speaker, of people who have written. 

 

And I would want to quote and if I had more time . . . But I do 

want to say, here was a letter addressed to the Premier of 

Saskatchewan at the time, December 25, Christmas Day 2007. 

Here‟s somebody writing about Marquis Towers in Saskatoon 

where the rent‟s gone up by 40 per cent in six months. But he‟s 

particularly concerned about the seniors. And what are the 

elderly going to do? And he came from Manitoba. And so why 

can‟t we just do what they‟ve done in Manitoba? What they‟ve 

done in Manitoba works well, is predictable, adds stability to 

the marketplace, and we need to really consider that. And here 

from October 31st, again another letter: 

 

When I moved in in March ‟97, my rent was $477 a 

month. Then it goes up. According to the notice I‟ve just 

received this week, my monthly rent will be 960, which is 

a $270 or 39 per cent increase from what it is today. And 

you think from what it was just eleven years prior, it‟s 

almost doubled.  

 

I had to chuckle when the minister today talked about the rent 

increases in Saskatoon from 2000 to 2008, a 21 per cent 

increase. And if you do the math, that‟s 2.5 per cent. And if it‟s 

compounded, that‟s barely just above the cost of living, I would 

think. And she was thinking that was a shocking stat. But the 

fact of the matter is this is what‟s happening now, and we have 

to respond now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I could go on with the letters, and I could talk about the van that 

we had last year with people coming down from Saskatoon 

talking about the rent increases they‟re facing. And it‟s right 

across the board, Mr. Speaker. It‟s not just low income, but it‟s 

right across the board because people worry about when they‟re 

going to get that letter. Six months have come and gone. Is it 

time for another rent increase, and will it be reasonable? 

 

[11:45] 

 

And I think in many ways, and I would encourage the members 

opposite . . . And I don‟t know if they do much reading. They 

do read their speeches, and some read them very well and some 

not so well. But I would encourage them to take some time and 

do some research. We‟ve been talking a lot about the University 

of Calgary, released a paper, Mr. Speaker. There‟s a couple of 

papers these people should be taking a look at, and one is the 

University of Calgary, a public policy paper from last fall. Very 

important, talks about the kind of incentives that we can have in 

the marketplace. 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Yorkton on his 

feet? 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Yorkton has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the west 

gallery are three friends of mine. I know members of the 

Assembly might question me having any friends. But these 

truly are a few people that I know from Yorkton that are 

considered close friends. 

 

On the far right is Stefan Bymak. He‟s very involved in a youth 

program in Yorkton, a community program that exercises its 

opportunities to engage at-risk youth, vulnerable youth, in 

bettering their lives in the community through different 

programs, one of which is a clean up, community program and 

a recycling program. 

 

Next to him in the centre is Michael Sarafincian, another close 

friend. Very engaged in community, he‟s a family pastor at 

Prairie Harvest Christian Life Centre, as well as engaged in the 

program in Yorkton as well. 

 

And on the far left is Mr. Jeff Langan, a man who has an 

awesome story. He‟s an awesome leader in both the Aboriginal 

and non-Aboriginal communities, Mr. Speaker, as well as 

exercising the opportunity and the impact that he has in the 

community in pastoring at Yorkton Christian Fellowship, Mr. 

Speaker. So I‟d ask all members to welcome these men to their 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

Rent Controls 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Forbes: — As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, I would 

encourage the members opposite to do some research on rent 

controls, especially second generation rent controls. There‟s 

two good papers, one from the University of Winnipeg from 

January this year and one from the University of Calgary from 

September. But I just want to quote from the University of 

Winnipeg paper, because these folks often talk about the myths 

and really simply they are myths. And I will quote from the 

paper: 

 

Many of the criticisms about rent regulations are 

ill-founded both on the theoretical and empirical grounds. 

Well-worn myths about rent regulations — that they 

reduce the quantity and quality of rental accommodations 



April 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7163 

— derive from a simple textbook model of “rent 

controls” applied to first-generation programs that existed 

in the 1950s. More sophisticated analysis of 

second-generation programs — such as that which exists 

in Manitoba — indicate that well-designed rent 

regulations can improve the economic security of tenants 

and, at the same time, have a beneficial effect on market‟s 

efficiency. An assessment of the rent regulations must, 

therefore, proceed on a case-by-case basis. 

 

So here you have an economist. Now I think the minister thinks 

that . . . I know she loves to argue with auditors. She loves to 

argue with anybody who knows something about what‟s in 

their field. All of a sudden she‟s an expert on the economics of 

housing. Here‟s a person who does this as a living saying, you 

know, you really should give second-generation rent control a 

look. 

 

Eighty per cent of Canadians live with rent controls. Eighty per 

cent of Canadians live with rent controls whether it‟s BC — 

that‟s just come through the Olympics — Ontario, Quebec, 

Manitoba, Prince Edward Island. I think it‟s time that we take a 

look at second-generation rent control here in Saskatchewan. 

It‟s high time we do it for people who are at risk here in 

Saskatchewan. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Unprecedented 

population growth and unparalleled economic momentum must 

be supported by increased housing supply. That is why, Mr. 

Speaker, we announced a total new investment over $255 

million to develop over 4,600 new homeowner and rental units. 

 

I‟m not going to go through, Mr. Speaker, what the member 

from Biggar already went through with respect to the five 

initiatives in the housing spectrum. But I do know, Mr. 

Speaker, included in that is working with municipalities and 

giving them the final say on the builders, developers, and 

prospective homeowners. The increased supply of housing 

overall and the expanded opportunities for moderate-income 

renters to move into homeownership will help relieve pressure 

on the low-income rental market. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I heard the members opposite referring to second 

generation rent control and by my view, Mr. Speaker, and of 

the members on this side of the House, rent control by any other 

name is still rent control, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Two hundred fifty-two million total investment to create over 

46 new homeowner and rental units over the next five years. 

This increase includes 34 million recently announced to 

rejuvenate and rehabilitate affordable housing across 

Saskatchewan. Completed was 860 new affordable rental units 

since November 2007, an $80 million investment. Over 1,100 

new units currently in development helped nearly 400 

households achieve homeownership, increase the income 

threshold to help seniors qualify for social housing, help fund 

40 Habitat homes over the last two years. One point five 

million dollars has been set aside for 30 more Habitat units. 

 

Mr. Speaker, according to the RBC [Royal Bank of Canada], 

Saskatchewan hit the sweet spot in 2010 — a strong yet 

affordable housing market. Home ownership costs in 

Saskatchewan remained below the national average. Housing 

affordability improved for the second quarter . . . second 

consecutive time in the last quarter of 2010. 

 

Vacancy rates of course are up across the province: 

province-wide from 1.2 per cent to 2.5 since the NDP left 

office; province-wide from 1.9 to 2.5 in the last year; 

Saskatoon, 1.9 to 2.6 in the last year; Regina from 0.6 to 1 per 

cent in the last year. Vacancy rates are up in seven out of nine 

of Saskatchewan‟s largest cities in the last year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are not considering rent controls because quite 

frankly they don‟t work. An article in The StarPhoenix on 

March 10th quotes a survey that 93 per cent of professional 

economists — now, Mr. Speaker, this is professional 

economists — agreed with the statement: a ceiling on rents 

reduces the quantity and quality of housing available. What 

works is putting more money back into people‟s pockets. And 

that‟s what we have done, Mr. Speaker. There‟s more work to 

be done for sure. 

 

One hundred and fourteen thousand people off the tax rolls, 

index rental supplements and shelter rates to the cost of living, 

doubled the low-income tax credit, and we have the highest 

personal income tax exemption in the country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What works is creating more housing supply overall — 860 

new rental units, 1,100 more in development. Rental starts 

tripled from 2009 to 2010. Housing starts were up 115 per cent 

in February 2011. Multiple units increased by 231 per cent in 

February 2011. Our vacancy rates in Saskatchewan have gone 

from 1.2 per cent under the NDP to 2.5 per cent today. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, just the other day I had a number of 

phone calls from constituents who are very, very interested in 

putting together developments for affordable housing for the 

people in and around Regina. However, Mr. Speaker, the thing 

that they mentioned to me was any talk, any talk whatsoever 

with respect to rent control is absolutely going to stymie and 

stifle this particular industry. It is not going to help, Mr. 

Speaker. And these words, not just mine, Mr. Speaker; they 

were the words of the people, the developers, the builders in 

and around the Regina area. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, that we still have challenges. That‟s 

why we continue to hold consultations — and builders will be 

involved, municipalities will be involved, government will be 

involved — to put together a comprehensive, long-term housing 

strategy. What we have done has helped the market to date, and 

we are continue to address those issues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The NDP, Mr. Speaker, cancelled rent control in 1992 and 

continued to reject it for 16 years. Now they‟re talking about 

some second generation rent control . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Yes, exactly. The member from . . . My colleague beside 

me here is talking about because it seems to be politically . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. It‟s becoming 

difficult to catch the member from Regina Wascana Plains‟ 



7164 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2011 

comments. I recognize . . . Order. I recognize the member from 

Regina Wascana Plains. 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We talk about . . . It 

seems to be on the other side of the House, now that they‟re not 

sitting on the government side, that all of a sudden rent control 

becomes a major issue. I‟m sorry, Mr. Speaker. It smacks of 

political overtones, no question about it. And that‟s exactly the 

reason why they‟re doing it. They‟re not doing it, Mr. Speaker, 

because it doesn‟t work. They didn‟t do it, Mr. Speaker, 

because it doesn‟t work. 

 

The NDP stakeholder consultations in 2007 cited serious 

concerns about rent control. You‟re kidding, Mr. Speaker. Of 

course there‟s serious concerns about rent control because it 

doesn‟t work. Some of the stakeholders include the city of 

Saskatoon, Saskatoon Home Builders‟, the Saskatchewan 

Rental Housing Industry Association. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, what‟s really interesting too is that the 

NDP made a submission to the 2008 housing task force. Of 

course that‟s when they were in government, and of course 

that‟s when Saskatchewan was moving in a backwards 

direction. Between April 2007 and April 2008, there was a 21 

per increase in rents in Saskatoon because of NDP inaction with 

respect to housing for 16 years. There has been no average 

increase as large since. Average rent increases have steadily 

declined under our government. 

 

Right after the increases in 2007-2008, the member from 

Saskatoon Centre made a submission to the task force on 

housing affordability, and there was absolutely no mention of 

rent controls. NDP record, only opened 58 units in their last full 

year of government. Bob Pringle on affordable housing under 

the NDP, the issue wasn‟t addressed. Funny thing about it not 

being addressed, Mr. Speaker, and how it‟s so important that it 

be addressed now when they‟re sitting on the other side of the 

House. NDP failed to increase shelter rates for 13 of their 16 

years. NDP failed to increase the seniors‟ income plan for 16 

years.  

 

The member from Saskatoon Centre said the former 

government couldn‟t predict Saskatchewan‟s sudden prosperity. 

That‟s because they didn‟t know, they didn‟t anticipate, they 

didn‟t plan for any growth in this province. “It was a perfect 

storm. We didn‟t see it coming.” 

 

The member from Saskatoon Centre cited a report from the 

University of Winnipeg that he claims favours rent control. And 

of course, Mr. Speaker, and of course, Mr. Speaker, he didn‟t 

quite quote it all. He didn‟t tell the whole line with respect to 

the report that he was quoting on. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think our issue is clear. We will not support 

the amendment. We do not support rent controls. Thank you 

very much. 

 

The Speaker: — Time has elapsed on the 65 minutes. We‟ll 

now go to the 10-minute question. The member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We have 

today a debate about the fundamental rights of Saskatchewan 

people, Mr. Speaker. And we have people today who can‟t 

afford to pay their rent. We have people today who can‟t afford 

to live in our province, Mr. Speaker. And we have a Premier 

that says that situation is unacceptable. When we had 

individuals in this legislature, he said it was unacceptable for 

people to be facing 100 per cent wage increases, 60 per cent 

wage increases, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Pardon me, rent increases, Mr. Speaker. I made a slip of the 

tongue, Mr. Speaker. Rent increases. But they think it‟s funny, 

Mr. Speaker, that people cannot afford the rent increases, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, my question is for the member from 

Saskatoon Northwest. About 20 per cent of the residents that 

live in his riding are renters. Many of them are having difficulty 

paying their rent as well, Mr. Speaker. Does he believe that 

those people shouldn‟t have any form of rent control? 

 

[12:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker, and thanks . . . And 

that‟s a good question, Mr. Speaker. But I‟ve got to tell you, we 

made it clear in the speeches that have come from this side of 

the House that we don‟t support rent control. 

 

What we do support, Mr. Speaker, what we do support is 

broad-based consultation on the issue between industry and 

stakeholders, and that includes tenants, Mr. Speaker. And so 

just simply to impose a regime, a draconian regime of rent 

controls upon the people of this province is not the way to go. 

We need to consult, and we need to talk to the people that it 

affects, Mr. Speaker. And we‟re doing that, and that‟s how 

we‟re going to deal with the issue. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the members opposite are continuously misinterpreting the 

facts. But the member from Saskatoon Centre definitely did not 

do so in 2008, and I quote: 

 

. . . the former government couldn‟t predict 

Saskatchewan‟s sudden prosperity that has led to the 

housing crisis. 

 

“It was a perfect storm. We didn‟t quite see it coming.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. The opposition has openly admitted they did not see 

this housing crisis coming thus admitting they did nothing to 

prevent the housing shortage, Mr. Speaker. In fact the NDP‟s 

vision was to see a reduction in population to 750,000, not an 

increase. How can they come to this Assembly every day 

demanding housing faster when they couldn‟t even see it 

coming, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I am indeed very proud of our 



April 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7165 

record in housing in Saskatchewan. In 2004 we launched a 

five-year $200 million program called HomeFirst, and it was a 

very good program. Then we put more money in 2007, which 

included Station 20 West. 

 

An Hon. Member: — How much? 

 

Mr. Forbes: — $100 million, $100 million. 

 

Sixty million dollars around the province. Some went to North 

Battleford, which some really interesting things happen up 

there, and up to P.A.. And that also included Mount Royal 

Collegiate which saw a skills development centre which is a 

pride of Saskatoon, the pride of Saskatoon, a very good thing. 

But it also included the funding to Station 20 West which they 

killed, they killed, and people are still suffering because of that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the member 

from Regina Wascana Plains. Mr. Speaker, the member on his 

feet just made the comments that . . . He made the assumption 

— God, I‟m losing my voice; sorry, Mr. Speaker — that we 

hadn‟t done anything when we were in government. And the 

member from Saskatoon Centre clearly laid out, the member 

clearly laid out the dollars that we put towards housing: $100 

million in 2007. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I have to say to the member, he stood and 

said . . . Well he made accusations against us. But I have to say 

to this member: how does she explain seeing the crisis, seeing 

the issues that Saskatchewan families are doing and are living 

in, and actually ignoring it and not doing anything about it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would agree with the 

member opposite — and I won‟t agree with her very often — 

but I agree they did almost absolutely nothing when they were 

in government.  

 

But, Mr. Speaker, they did cancel rent control in 1992 and 

continued to reject it for 16 years. So you know, maybe I was 

being a bit too harsh with that, that they did do something. 

 

So what works, Mr. Speaker? It isn‟t ignoring an issue. But 

what works? And all economists, most economists in this 

country agree that rent controls don‟t work, Mr. Speaker. What 

works is putting more money back in people‟s pockets — 

114,000 people off the tax rolls, indexed rental supplements and 

shelter rates, double the low-income tax credit. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the most important is that we have the highest 

personal income tax exemption in the country. That‟s what 

we‟re doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon 

Centre, the member from Saskatoon Centre said they‟re proud 

of their record. Their last year was 58 units. That‟s all they 

produced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is absolutely no evidence that rent controls 

benefit low-income people. In fact the long-term effects of rent 

controls discourages investment and lower income residential 

construction, which actually harms low-income people. 

Saskatoon, Saskatchewan needs more housing, not 

discouragement of the construction industry by imposing rent 

controls. The members opposite alluded to Manitoba and BC. 

However Saskatchewan is unique with the economic and 

population growth that we need to encourage low-income 

housing rather than implement policies that disencourage it. 

 

To the member from The Battlefords: with all the facts that 

show rent controls are wrong, why does your party continue to 

pursue the policy that is detrimental to low-income people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We heard 

a number of interesting things in question period over the last 

few days. The Premier of this province, Mr. Speaker, has called 

rent increases in Saskatchewan unacceptable. Therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s very interesting that when poor people, when 

vulnerable people in Saskatchewan see their rents increase, the 

Premier can call them unacceptable but does nothing about it. 

 

But at the same time, just behind him, he has a minister that has 

just signed an agreement that guarantees a rent for 20 years for 

a developer in the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker. Rent controls 

for the business community, Mr. Speaker, but none for the 

vulnerable people in Saskatchewan. I stand with the vulnerable 

people in Saskatchewan. If the new Saskatchewan is support for 

developers, I support our Saskatchewan which takes into 

account real people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We hear a 

lot from the other side, quoting 1950s research from economics 

101 as if that‟s going to be the answer to all the concerns, and 

they don‟t cite any other sources. We heard the member 

previous talk about evidence but didn‟t cite it. So I‟d be curious 

to know some of their sources. 

 

But my question is for the member from Biggar. If rent 

controls, second generation controls are such a bad idea, such a 

bad idea, why didn‟t they take them out in BC? They‟d just 

come through the Vancouver Olympics, a great time. Why did 

they not remove them? Gordon Campbell, one of the most right 

wing premiers, left it in place. Manitoba, the Conservatives 

there, are they taking it out? My question is, why aren‟t they 

talking about taking them out in those provinces? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d just like to 

outline what our government is doing concerning housing in 

this province, and it‟s right here, the Saskatchewan advantage 

housing plan. And that includes a five-point plan: the Headstart 

on a Home, the affordable home ownership program, rental 

construction incentives, $34 million investment in rental 



7166 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2011 

housing, and Habitat for Humanity partnership. 

 

The members across the way would like to cite a study done by 

the University of Calgary, but they forget to list some of the 

reasons that they cited that rent control does not work. and I 

quote from the University of Calgary: “Economists are almost 

universally opposed to . . . rent control.” I‟d like to go on. Other 

items: “The major disadvantage of any kind of rent control is its 

. . . negative effect on investors‟ willingness to invest in 

multi-unit rental housing.” “That factor outweighs, in the view 

of one of the authors, any possible favourable effects of any 

sort . . .” 

 

The Speaker: — Member‟s time has elapsed. Next question. I 

recognize the member from Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Mr. Speaker, according to the Canadian 

Mortgage and Housing Corporation, vacancies throughout the 

province have risen from 1.2 per cent to 2.5 per cent since the 

NDP left office, and vacancy rates are up in seven . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Time. Sorry, time has elapsed in the 

75-minute debate. Order. Order. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Motion No. 5 — Minimizing Potential Flood Damage  

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the conclusion 

of my statements this afternoon, I‟ll move the following 

motion: 

 

That this Assembly acknowledge the proactive efforts of 

the public safety employees who, through their efforts, 

are ensuring our government will be better prepared to 

handle flooding issues in this province this spring. 

 

I think the key of this motion, Mr. Speaker, is the employees, 

the people that actually helped to mitigate some of the damage, 

helped to get through some of the issues and the flooding this 

spring, and are helping us to better plan for what we‟ll be 

seeing coming this next spring, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Before I move on, I‟m going to go back and kind of revisit why 

we have to do this. Why is this necessary? Well we just have to 

think back to June, what happened in Maple Creek; in July, 

what happened in my home town of Yorkton; what happened in 

Kawacatoose, Hudson Bay, Regina, Saskatoon, Carlyle. Mr. 

Speaker, the list goes on. Significant events like this, this 

province has rarely seen before. And addressing these issues is 

something that‟s important to do currently and to prepare for in 

the future. 

 

If we look back to the events of this past late spring and early 

summer, Mr. Speaker, we needed to react quickly. 

Communities needed to react quickly. The government needed 

to react quickly. And then once some of the initial issues were 

addressed, we needed to then respond. And there‟s quite a 

difference, I believe, between reacting and responding. 

Reacting is something that needs quick attention and quick 

action. Then in the response, we can better step back and plan, 

look at where we need to address more attention and move 

forward. 

 

So if we look at reacting and responding, I think we did that as 

a government. The employees of this province, the 

municipalities, private sector employees, and citizens alike, 

they reacted fairly quickly, addressing some of the short-term 

concerns. And if we look at the significant events, we saw no 

loss of life. Significant damage for sure, but no loss of life. 

 

So once we got through that point, we have to adapt and change 

and improve for the current situation. I think we‟ve done that 

through our PDAP [provincial disaster assistance program] 

changes which I‟ll outline in depth shortly, Mr. Speaker, and 

then get into some of the mitigation that we‟re going to be 

looking at doing this coming spring to alleviate some of the 

concerns and the damage that may be coming in this next 

spring. 

 

And then what we have to do, one step further, Mr. Speaker, is 

plan for the future. And that‟s another point I‟m going to be 

touching on towards the end of my remarks is, what are we 

doing to plan for the future? What are we doing as a 

government? What are employees and municipalities and 

government service people, people within the public sector of 

our government, what are they doing to help mitigate some of 

these issues and help plan for the future? And those would 

include employees of the Ministry of Corrections, Public Safety 

and Policing, that would include some of the protective services 

workers through our municipalities and RMs [rural 

municipality], Mr. Speaker, as well as some private citizens that 

are taking it upon themselves to also do the best they can to 

minimize the damage that might be coming in this spring. 

 

Reflecting as well back on my own experience in this past 

summer, I‟ve got to give a lot of credit to the people that I know 

doing the job that they did, was city employees, Corrections 

and public employees through that ministry, Mr. Speaker, as 

well. The work they did in my community — I know Maple 

Creek, two of the more significantly hit areas — but the work 

that they did across the province, from provincial representation 

to the communities and again through, down the line into the 

public employees and the protective services workers in those 

communities. 

 

I can speak first-hand, Mr. Speaker, of a lot of the preparedness 

and a lot of the strategic centre meetings that we had in Yorkton 

at the newly created fire hall. And in that respect, Mr. Speaker, 

I think city council in Yorkton and the fire department in 

Yorkton had some strategic foresight in creating of that fire 

hall, which became a very effective centre for developing a 

strategy in Yorkton and, I believe, something that is quite 

recognized across the province and to be adapted and changed 

for certain areas that, should those instances happen again in the 

future, we‟ll be better prepared. 

 

So again going back to the statement I made earlier, we respond 

and we learn from what happened, and we adapt for the current 

situation. And part of that, recognizing what was successful and 

what isn‟t, what wasn‟t, to plan for the future of situations that 

may arise in the coming years but firstly this spring, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 



April 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7167 

And again we have to remember, it‟s about the people. It‟s 

about protecting the people at home. It‟s about protecting the 

citizens of Saskatchewan, but it‟s also about those important 

people, whether they are government employees, municipal 

employees or private people that are helping to mitigate those 

issues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in speaking about the public employees, I‟m mentioning 

Corrections and Public Safety but also those very important 

people that are working on programming right now, Mr. 

Speaker, that are an employee of the Saskatchewan Watershed 

Authority, developing a program I‟ll touch on again towards the 

end of my comments, a $22-million program to mitigate the 

damage that would be possible, would possibly happen this 

spring. 

 

[12:15] 

 

And in looking at that program, Mr. Speaker, and in speaking to 

the Minister of Environment — been working very hard on this 

program through his ministry and through Saskatchewan 

Watershed — $22 million, a significant chunk of money, Mr. 

Speaker. But we have to compare that to what other 

jurisdictions are doing. We only have to look to our neighbours 

to the west, Mr. Speaker. The province of Alberta, what are 

they spending this year? What‟s their program for the upcoming 

spring for mitigating the flood damage that may happen? $1.2 

million, Mr. Speaker. So we see a significant investment in 

preparedness in this province. And I‟ll touch again on a lot of 

the details of that program towards the end of my remarks. 

 

So again I want to review where we have been, where we came 

from, and some of the situations that we saw, Mr. Speaker. 

When we came to office in 2007, what did the PDAP program 

look like? Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess if we went back 30 or 40 

years, it might have been sufficient at that point but really 

hadn‟t been changed in many, many years. The only time the 

former administration actually I believe used the program in the 

recent past was in, I believe it was Vanscoy. They had 

significant damage from flooding. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Vanguard. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Vanguard, I‟m sorry. I‟m corrected by the 

Minister of Corrections. He‟s very up on his file. Thank you for 

that, Mr. Minister. Significant damage there. But what was the 

program like at that point, Mr. Speaker? Well, capped at 

$100,000, which even at that time, I would argue it‟d be 

probably quite insufficient. 

 

And then we look at the timelines and we look at the resources 

that were available. Well PDAP at that point had . . . Well right 

now I believe there‟s over 20 employees in PDAP. And I‟ll talk 

about the addition to those employees, a significant increase to 

those employees to again be more prepared for the future and to 

deal with some of the claims that are currently outstanding, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

One person in the PDAP department at that point. And then the 

members across, they saw it, you know, after that significant 

flooding in that area, that after a significant amount of months 

that there was claims that are outstanding. A lot of the 

paperwork wasn‟t being done. A lot of upset people in that area. 

They decided to add a second one after I think it was about 12 

months. And we saw payments in that area, not within the week 

or two that we saw from the leadership of this government — 

$3,000 to most PDAP claimants within a week to 10 days; 

significantly quick in the Maple Creek area; and very quick in 

the Yorkton area as well, shortly after the flooding, Mr. Speaker 

— but in that area, we saw claims outstanding for up to two 

years and some of them even further. And I‟ve heard from 

people in that area that many, many restoration of properties 

never did happen because the significant damage that was in 

place and wasn‟t addressed quickly enough. And we had an 

area totally devastated by that. 

 

So in reviewing that PDAP program, what are we looking at? 

Well initially we found and we heard it from the people in the 

front lines, the people that were impacted by the flooding, that 

deductibles of 20 per cent were just undoable. Some of these 

people, even with the payments that were coming up with 20 

per cent upfront was just hard to come up with, Mr. Speaker. 

So, quick action by the Minister of Corrections and the Premier. 

Looking at some of the shortcomings, that deductible‟s lowered 

to 5 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Then we looked at the caps on claims. Again I touched on 

private residences and businesses capped at $100,000, which 

we know at this time in Saskatchewan, particularly anywhere in 

the world, $100,000 isn‟t enough to do very much. So quickly 

that was addressed, Mr. Speaker. Private residences, more 

reflective of the economy, of $240,000 cap and businesses at 

$500,000. 

 

Now that in itself is significant, Mr. Speaker, but we have to 

look at one more part of this program, is in the relocation 

expense. Under the New Democratic government, the 

relocation expense was taken out of your initial claim. So if you 

had a claim of $100,000, you had a relocation expense of 

$30,000 that effectively lowered your claim ability to $70,000. 

When you tie it into the deductibles and the depreciations that 

were in effect . . . You know, I‟ve heard complaints about our 

system as well, Mr. Speaker, and we take those to heart. We try 

and do the best we can. 

 

But we look at that old program. Once you tie all that into 

place, it minimized those claims down to almost nothing. What 

the minister saw fit to do is break that relocation expense out of 

the actual claim on the property and have it as a separate item. 

So if we look at a private residence of $240,000 claim, the 

ability to break that out, an additional $30,000 if it‟s so needed 

for relocation effectively makes that $270,000, which is a far 

cry from the $100,000 under the old administration. 

 

Talking about depreciation on items, we look at something like 

furnaces, for example: the old program, 60 per cent 

depreciation on furnaces. When we‟re looking at the 

replacement of those items, it gets very expensive. What was 

seen fit to do through this administration, through our 

administration, was the maximum depreciation of 35 per cent 

on those items, so again making it a lot more affordable when 

tied in to the deductible differences. And again with the caps, it 

made the system a lot better. 

 

Again I touched on the cheques that went out. The initial 

$3,000 payments went out, some of them within 24 hours. And 



7168 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2011 

we now see the time has been brought down to three to six 

months prior to the last summer‟s flooding. 

 

I talked about the staffing. And again we had about 22 people 

on staff working through these claims after the events of this 

summer, this spring and summer. And just recently, in the last 

number of weeks, cabinet approved further funding for 30 staff 

to be recruited to improve on these wait times and again to start 

preparing for what we may be seeing in the future. Hopefully 

we don‟t need to keep those people going, running off their feet 

as we‟ve had to keep the current staff running. 

 

And again I‟ve got to give a lot of credit to those staff through 

PDAP that . . . I know certain MLAs here may have gotten a bit 

short with them at times, and I‟ve apologized to them myself if 

I ever have gotten short. Everybody‟s under stress in a situation 

like this. But again, great appreciation of those people from 

PDAP and a lot of appreciation to the people from 

Saskatchewan Watershed Authority that are currently working 

on the system that we‟re going to be needing or possibly 

needing this coming spring. 

 

Again touching on that Vanguard flood of 2000, we had people 

waiting for years, one person working on claims, and seeing fit 

to add another person quite a while, 14 months I believe, after. 

 

And again we looked at who qualified for these PDAP 

programs, Mr. Speaker. Well, if we look at the residency 

requirements of the old program and the residency requirements 

of businesses in the old program, we saw that nobody out of 

province was allowed to apply which . . . You know, you want 

to look after your own people first, but we have to look at who 

was claiming for these properties. Out-of-province residencies 

that own rental property in the province, I would argue they 

need to be covered. The reason why we look in Yorkton — I 

know we have a lot of out-of-province landlords that own 

property — if they‟re not covered and they don‟t get to rebuild 

that property or replace that property, we effectively lose one 

rental property door in our city. So again, out-of-province 

ownership but an in-province, in-city resident, that I believe is a 

really good move to cover those to make sure we keep those 

doors where we need them, and especially in light of seeing the 

request and the need for housing in our province today. 

 

Businesses as well, Mr. Speaker, yes, they‟re out-of-province 

investment. They‟re having businesses in our cities and our 

province, but again they employ people. I know of a number of 

businesses in Yorkton where they employ 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 15 

people in our city. If they are not covered, do they close up 

shop and move out of the province? Do they close up their 

business in a province and in our cities, and do we lose 

employment? They employ our local residents. Again a great 

move, I think, on the part of the minister and our government to 

cover those out-of-province investors in our province. 

 

Regional parks. Prior to the changes, regional parks were not 

eligible. Now regional parks are eligible as is any municipal 

entity. 

 

So again to recap. The $100,000 cap increased, no 

out-of-province was covered, and no secondary income was 

covered. And now we see on that respect as well, Mr. Speaker, 

secondary income business people are covered as well, which 

we look at rental property and businesses. Quite often they are 

secondary income for individuals and by not covering them, we 

effectively eliminate rental doors; we effectively eliminate jobs 

in our towns. So we have to keep that in mind. 

 

We listened to the flood victims, and again that‟s where the 

front-line information came from, and that‟s the changes that 

were made. So, Mr. Speaker, we didn‟t stop there. In September 

and October of 2010, the government announced further 

changes to help our flood victims. And a lot of those I did 

outline, but again I‟ll recap some of those. The depreciation 

reduction on things like water heaters and furnaces which got 

bumped up to the front of the list, Mr. Speaker. With the 

oncoming cold weather, it was felt that those situations needed 

to be addressed fairly quickly, so to get hot water and furnaces 

back into those homes was paramount. 

 

As well as deductibles on things like drywall, concrete, that 

should depreciate at a lot lower level, those were addressed. 

They were in the prior program under the old administration. 

Depreciation was quite high on those, and those depreciation 

rates were reduced. 

 

We hired additional structural engineering firms. I know in 

Yorkton it was an issue with the amount of homes that were 

impacted. Seventy per cent of the homes in one way, shape, or 

form touched by the flooding — some very significantly, some 

less so. But again having those extra engineering firms on hand 

to address the concerns and get the claims in as quickly as 

possible was important as well as those independent adjusters 

that were brought in as well, Mr. Speaker, to make sure those 

homes were looked at as quickly as possible and as efficiently 

as possible to make sure that those claims went in and were 

addressed fairly quickly. We saw 20 per cent in increase in the 

advance payments for some of these claimants. Once they had 

their reports in, the reports were approved. 

 

The old program, you‟re eligible for 40 per cent pre-payment, 

initial payment; the new program, 60 per cent, which puts more 

money in people‟s pockets quickly that they can start 

addressing their concerns, predominantly structural and 

otherwise, that would need to be addressed fairly quickly. All 

our claims again involving furnaces and hot water heaters were 

put on a priority and were addressed as quickly as possible. 

 

Most recently, Mr. Speaker, in March of this year, we made 

further refinements to the program to both help victims and 

municipalities hit by flooding. Some of those key changes were, 

municipalities saw their deductibles lowered to point one per 

cent of their taxable assessment, which fixes . . . They have a 

solid idea of where their deductible is going to be sitting for 

damages that they may incur in the municipalities. This reduces 

the continued burden of excessive cost that may be found by 

municipalities as their deductibles formerly increased. 

 

And again we will be supporting mitigation processes and 

projects by allowing a maximum payment of 15 per cent of the 

estimated cost of damage in the existing disaster assistance 

claim to be used under flood prevention measures — again 

being more proactive, getting some of that money out to be 

more proactive and minimize some of the damages that may be 

incurred by future flooding. 

 



April 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7169 

Another change was the small-business category that will be 

established to meet the unique needs of groups like Hutterites. 

The current standards did not allow the Hutterite community 

access to this program. So again another unfortunate situation 

that inaccessibility was there, but again opening up the program 

that we could address more of our residents in the province. 

 

And one thing I know I dealt with personally on a few cases 

with PDAP and the minister, and I was very glad to see this 

change, was the quality criteria for minimum revenue for a 

business. Now formerly it was $6,000, and we saw a lot of 

cases at home where there might have been a $200 gap between 

$5,800 and $6,000 and a $5,800 claim may not be recognized. 

Again seeing that as a bit of a ridiculous stepping point or a 

sticking point for some of these claims, the minister and the 

ministry saw it right to reduce that to $4,000. 

 

So a lot of these people, cases I saw . . . Mr. Speaker, an 

example of the $4,000 limit would be rental properties where 

some of the landlords were keeping their properties quite low in 

recognition of the costs of living, and because they weren‟t 

charging the $500 a month rent, they were charging a lower 

amount, were being denied PDAP claims. Again I think, 

proactive thought and corrective work, not only by the minister 

and the government, but again by the important people that are 

exercising these programs, helping us develop these programs, 

the people in the public service, the front-line people like 

municipalities and citizens who see these shortcomings, bring 

them to our attention, either MLAs . . . I know the member 

from Cypress worked a lot of long hours on these claims and 

working directly with PDAP and the officials and the minister 

and his staff in addressing these claims. And at looking at a lot 

of the changes that have happened, I know that those issues 

were heard and were acted upon. 

 

I‟ve had some concerns by local residents as well with some of 

the timelines. They‟re still thinking it‟s taking a bit long and I 

mean we‟d want to address it as quickly as we possibly can. 

Again looking at the past history — two years on some claims 

before anything being dealt with, no money flowing out the 

door. And that‟s on a small scale. We‟re looking at a large 

scale. The last numbers I saw were 5,900 to 6,000 claims across 

the province, a lot of them quite significant. And to have those 

claims dealt with as quickly as some of them have been, again 

concerning at times . . . You can feel for the people, but looking 

at the expedited process that has happened and being willing to 

back up on some of these claims, to look at what might have 

been missed, to address those as well, I think, goes a lot. It has 

a lot to be said for not only the political people involved, but 

again, the front-line people, the people within the programs, the 

municipalities, working on these issues to try and get these 

issues touched on and addressed. 

 

[12:30] 

 

Looking at some of the . . . You know, you look at that amount 

of claims — 5,900 and 6,000 claims — without any revisionary 

work on these claims, we‟re talking at least three hours per 

claim minimum. So when you start adding up those hours, that 

amount of hours, man-hours, between 22 people, it gets a bit 

onerous and things do take time. But in order to get these 

claims dealt with properly, we have to spend that time. The 

employees spend that time and then when backing up on some 

of these claims to readdress these concerns, instead of just 

forging ahead and leaving the concerns to lie . . . You know, 

backing up on those claims does take a lot of extra time. So I‟m 

happy to see that we are adding those extra people. And as I 

touched on earlier, 30 extra employees that are going into the 

PDAP program to help address some of those backlogs is very, 

very encouraging. 

 

One thing I realize, I was quite surprised, Mr. Speaker, that 

there was no real solid information that was really easily 

accessible by people that are impacted by some of these 

situations for information, for what are the next steps. Ministry 

people were out, I know, in Maple Creek, they were out in 

Yorkton, some of these other areas that were hit by flooding, to 

give them the proper process. Information shared through 

municipal entities like city halls and RM offices was very 

effective. But I was very encouraged that the ministry, the 

public service employees took it upon themselves to get out 

there and really put a comprehensive brochure together. And if 

I have time towards the end of my remarks, I might even go 

through that document as well, Mr. Speaker, outlining what‟s 

claimable, what isn‟t, what‟s the best process, what‟s the 

chronological process to go through to get your claim done, and 

how to go about getting all your processes done and your 

claims in in timely manner. 

 

I‟m going to start touching on the $22 million program that was 

just announced just lately, Mr. Speaker, significant steps to help 

communities and their residents prepare for potential flooding 

this spring. Corrections‟ main role is to assist municipalities 

with preparing their own community plans. And we know 

communities know the best. They know what their needs are. 

They know what their strengths are. They know what their 

abilities are. So working in tandem with them to develop that 

plan and support them where possible is the key focus of 

Corrections and Public Safety and their employees as well as 

the Minister of Environment‟s people and those under the 

Saskatchewan Watershed Authority. 

 

There‟s been accumulation of necessary supplies that 

Corrections and Public Safety has been working on in order to 

help these communities fight their flood issues that may be 

arising — sandbags, equipment. I know the minister was 

sharing some information a couple of days ago about a diking 

system or a mobile diking system that actually fills with flood 

water in order to hold flood water back. Very significant piece 

of equipment that can be moved around the province to mitigate 

flooding and damages where it would be needed. And there‟s 

millions, I think $1.5 million, being spent on that initiative. 

 

Municipal officials and community residents are taking very 

preventative steps, there being a lot of forethought, and there‟s 

some foresight happening there, Mr. Speaker, communication 

with the ministries and communication with the employees to 

those ministries. And we have to again give them a lot of credit 

for the work that they‟re doing, as rundown, as tired as they 

must be by this point, Mr. Speaker, and still working diligently 

on addressing issues that may be coming and listening to the 

municipalities to find their needs and help where possible 

through expertise or financial assistance. 

 

And although the flood mitigation program has no direct 

bearing on PDAP, the $22 million again through Sask 



7170 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2011 

Watershed, through the Minister of Environment‟s office, you 

can only imagine that by taking these preventative steps now 

that there may be in fact a far less impact on the PDAP 

program, a far less need for that PDAP program this coming 

spring. 

 

I‟ll outline a few points here about emergency flood damage 

reduction program. The emergency flood damage reduction 

program is to implement emergency flood damage reduction 

and prevention measures for this spring. It will assist 

communities, cities, towns, villages and resort villages, 

municipalities, and individual farms and country residences in 

mitigating flood damage and preventing flood damage. The 

program will provided technical and financial assistance to 

protect homes and permanent structures. 

 

And there‟s a few key points that I really want to drill down on 

some of the issues or some of the technical numbers here, Mr. 

Speaker. Under the program, communities and resort villages 

are eligible for 100 per cent for technical assistance including 

engineering advice, 75 per cent for the cost of construction of 

flood protection works such as berms, channels and channel 

improvements. For rural yard sites and country residences, they 

are also eligible for 100 per cent of the technical assistance, but 

85 per cent of the cost for berm construction to protect 

property, farmsteads, and our country residences. When it 

comes to water protection, Mr. Speaker, costs to test private 

potable water supplies impacted by flood will also be covered 

under the program, but by 100 per cent. 

 

Short-term actions such as sandbagging, clearing channels and 

frozen culverts are eligible for 50 per cent of assistance. And I 

know Maple Creek has been approved for a lot of this work. 

They‟re working diligently to mitigate some of those . . . 

minimize some of those issues that will be coming. And I know 

the city of Yorkton has been working very diligently in opening 

up channels, ditches. 

 

And one thing of interest I found out here recently, Mr. 

Speaker, they are using some of these funds to actually look at 

some of the drainage sewer system in the city and, through that 

funding, have found that some of those sewers have actually got 

a buildup of sediment that wasn‟t expected to be there, so 

through some of this support in funding, through their hard 

work eliminating the sediment buildup in those sewers which 

will help address some of the flow this coming spring. And I‟ve 

actually noticed that locally that where I‟ve seen the snow 

diminish in my hometown of Yorkton and not a lot of water 

sitting around on the streets and in potholes, so we know that is 

working. 

 

Just to point out some of the inconsistencies or some of the 

shortcomings previously, and where we are — again I‟ll 

probably be reaffirming some of these points I just made — but 

to see where we were, and where we‟ve come. We‟ve heard 

time and time again from across the floor that our government 

is not doing enough to help flood victims and communities. 

 

Well let‟s look at that. As part of this year‟s flood mitigation 

preparation, Corrections officials were in attendance at the 2011 

SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] 

convention to deliver a workshop on municipal preparedness 

and responsibilities for emergency management according to 

provincial legislation. The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 

was directed to set aside that $22 million to help flood 

mitigation initiatives as part of the flood damage reduction 

program. Corrections is now working with Watershed 

Authority in tandem and other ministries to help communities 

to better prepare for flooding this spring. And that again 

includes construction of temporary and permanent flood 

protection, farmstead protection, short-term engineering, 

technical and other staffing to complete the work, cost sharing 

emergency measures. The municipalities are also included, as 

well as $3.5 million of that flood protection equipment I had 

previously spoke about, necessary for Corrections to effectively 

assist municipalities with mitigation efforts and to help to better 

respond to those efforts. 

 

Again there‟s the acquisition of flood mitigation equipment. 

Estimated cost of $2 million is being spent on sandbags, 

generators, and other equipment geared to reduce potential 

flood damage. And again those sandbags relate to the 

equipment . . . Related to the equipment, it‟s estimated the 

initiative will cost the province 1.5 million intended to support 

some of these programs. 

 

At the end of February 28, 2011, we had 70 communities, 7 

rural municipalities, and 20 individual farmsteads receiving 

assistance from the program. But, Mr. Speaker, we have some 

updated numbers on some of the uptake of this program just 

recently released and I wouldn‟t want to be incorrect in some of 

my numbers. So what we see here is, to date, we have over 509 

individuals and authorities that have requested help. Those 

numbers include 156 communities, 65 RMs, 283 farmyard 

sites, and four that would be classified as other. 

 

And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, individuals do have that 

responsibility to apply, to minimize the damage as best as they 

possibly can, and to prepare for what may be coming. So I 

would encourage them to go to the website, www.saskflood.ca, 

to look for information to apply for that program. 

 

We had some more positive feedback. I know Corman Park has 

been looking at some flooding issues and just heard today that 

the reeve of Corman Park had a lot of positives to say about this 

money coming out, the $22 million program, to help them put 

safeguards in place and to mitigate some of those damages. 

 

Just looking around the province, some initial . . . There‟s, I 

know, more announcements that have come out recently. In the 

Deputy Premier‟s riding, we have the town of Canora that has 

been approved; the RM of Buchanan; villages of Rhein and 

Buchanan; hamlets of Armit and Erwood have been approved 

for $100,000 in funding. And all of them, any indications I‟ve 

gotten, are very happy with that. 

 

Around the province, we have another nine that I can talk 

about. The towns of Aberdeen, Bruno, and Colonsay; 

municipalities of Colonsay, Humboldt, and Wolverine; villages 

of Muenster and Viscount; and the hamlet of Carmel, will all 

share in funding from the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 

to more than $300,000. And again, many thanks to the good 

work of those people and the Saskatchewan Watershed, 

Corrections and Public Safety for working on that program — 

all the hard work they‟ve done diligently over the past number 

of months to get that through — as well as the municipalities, 



April 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7171 

municipal partners that have been doing the work, having the 

feet on the ground, the employees on the ground, carrying that 

work out. 

 

Again looking at some of the history, the funding for this flood 

mitigation is unprecedented in Saskatchewan. I touched on, you 

know, a lot of the numbers, but we looked at some of the past 

history. The NDP promised for the people of Fishing Lake and 

Waldsea Lake money in June 2007 for flood protection 

planning but never did budget for the amount. The NDP did 

consult with Fishing Lake First Nation resulting in the stoppage 

of work on building a drainage ditch which wasted more than 

$1 million. Then on June 13th of 2007, the media release by the 

NDP announced a 50/50 cost-sharing program for affected 

communities but did not budget money for the program or 

announce parameters to receive the funding. So again to 

announce something, say we‟re going to be there, to announce 

something and then not carry through, well I guess, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the best indication of future behaviour would be past 

behaviour, and there‟s a lot of documentation on that regard. 

 

Here we‟ll talk about another NDP claim. The public have been 

complaining about extremely long wait times for PDAP and 

having their claims processed. What is your government doing 

about it? Well again some of these issues take time, with three 

hours per case plus. With 5,900 or 6,000 cases, we know it‟s 

going to take time. Addressing them as quickly as we can, but 

what do we do? We reduced that wait time under the NDP from 

12 to 18 months, and in some cases two years, to initial funds 

flowing out, some within hours, predominately within a week 

to 10 days that people were receiving some funds to get their 

feet back on the ground. 

 

We see an increase in staffing, initially from one or two to 22 at 

a certain point, and now an additional 30 employees that have 

been hired on for that program. We see a very hard-working 

group from Saskatchewan Watershed Authority that are 

working hard on that program and getting that money rolled 

out, approving those claims for municipalities and farmers to 

mitigate a lot of those issues. As well as we see right after the 

flooding, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the additional personal people, 

private people brought on to help us to shorten those wait times 

on engineering, shorten those wait times on claims, and to 

shorten those wait times for getting their claims in. 

 

In August of 2010, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government 

announced the following changes, again focusing again on 

those reductions in deductibles: increasing those maximum 

allowable benefits, increasing the amount of money available 

for businesses, getting rid of the out-of-province stipulation on 

those, taking the $30,000 relocation expense out of the 

program, effectively close to tripling the program for private 

residences, and then continuing on with the depreciation 

reduction with the increase in advance payments and a lot of 

that happening again so quickly because of the added staff. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to talk about this new road, where 

we‟re going with the program. Again, you know, we talked 

about, I talked about the PDAP staff who work very diligently 

on this program to reduce those wait times for claimants. 

During the 2009-10 fiscal year and prior to the summer‟s 

flooding, the average wait time again was lengthy. Those were 

reduced. 

To respond to the unprecedented weather conditions this 

summer . . . And we saw the gamut. We saw everything from 

hailstorms to tornados at Kawacatoose to significant flooding 

events in places like Maple Creek who had water-holding 

structures overflow and flood that area. 

 

[12:45] 

 

Or we saw instances like at Yorkton, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

where you know, I got calls from people around, actually 

around the world, saying what in the world is happening in 

Yorkton? You‟re flooding; you have no rivers. You have no 

significant bodies of water. 

 

Well effectively, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you get official 

claims of four to five inches but unofficial claims . . . Some 

seniors in the area I know that are very diligent in keeping 

water records with their rain gauges saying in a matter of 

actually half an hour to 45 minutes receiving seven inches. A 

bit of a sprinkle ahead of time, but then a sprinkle after the fact. 

But the actual event of the storm, up to seven inches in a 

45-minute time frame, which basically even the highest streets 

in the city became flowing rivers which overflowed from the 

sewer system, from the drain sewer system, the storm sewer 

system into the actual septic sewer system in the city and then 

backing up into homes. 

 

So again, significant levels of water falling that had to be dealt 

with. And again, witnessing the damage was quite impacting. 

And I mean people are still dealing with it to this day, but I 

think we‟re getting ahead of it now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

You know, in talking about the people that were involved, and 

again I really want to focus on those front-line people, the 

employees of Corrections and Public Safety, the employees of 

Saskatchewan Watershed. Also I want to talk about some 

significant help I saw come through the Ministry of 

Environment. But by firefighters from the North, when it was 

found — I know at home in Yorkton, I know they helped 

around the province — when it was found that we were short of 

people to try and go door to door to try and find senior citizens 

that might be in need of help, we saw some of the northern 

firefighters come down. I think there was a dozen or so that 

came down and worked very tirelessly, day in and day out, to 

help not only citizens get out of their homes, you know, maybe 

move some significant items that they needed moved out, but to 

help wherever possible there. So again, more provincial 

employees that we have to really thank for their input, their 

help, and their selfless acts of kindness and selfless acts of work 

that did help the people of our province and our cities. 

 

Some other people I really want to credit and thank is some of 

our political members that — to name one, our Premier; to 

name another, our Minister of Corrections — who showed up 

time and time again. The Agriculture minister from Melville 

showed up time and time again to speak to people on the 

ground first-hand to see where their concerns are, to see where 

we could best help. And I know that was very much 

appreciated, showing true concern for the people of Yorkton 

and our province in hearing their concerns. 

 

The one person I wasn‟t . . . Not that I wasn‟t happy about him 

coming to the city, because I mean the job of the opposition is 



7172 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2011 

to find out where the needs are to make sure those needs are 

addressed and to point out where improvements could be made. 

But I know one visit the Leader of the Opposition made to 

Yorkton with some of his colleagues did nothing but really 

upset a lot of the local residents by telling a lot of mistruths. 

And misconceptions were permeated, and what really upset me 

about that was in a time of struggle, you know, to play politics 

with certain things. This is part of the job I suppose. I don‟t 

really like that part of what tends to happen. But to prey on the 

fears and the stress of the local people who are displaced from 

their homes and going through a tough time, and to feed ideas 

and to feed misconceptions to work them up for your own 

political gain, I find that is troubling. 

 

And I know my own experience would be, if I was to exercise 

that type of behaviour in my hometown and my Premier was to 

find out about it, I would probably be sitting maybe a little 

farther over there or maybe even over there for a little bit, just 

as sort of a repercussion for that kind of action. And I know the 

leadership on this side of the House, again we‟re led by 

example. And the example set by our Premier I am very happy 

to follow, and it‟s an example that I know all members on this 

side of the House are happy to follow and very positive 

leadership indeed. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk about, 

go back to some of my personal experiences with the flood and 

the people that we dealt with. I know the council and the 

leadership around Maple Creek. I know a lot of the hard work 

they did and the work that was done by the member from 

Cypress Hills to bring those, again, those issues to light and to 

help mitigate what was happening there. 

 

But first-hand I saw a lot of what was happening in Yorkton. I 

was going to a lot of the stakeholder meetings, the preparedness 

meetings, the organizational meetings held at the fire hall, at the 

emergency centre there. And to see the work that was done by 

our council, you know, they did what they needed to do, but 

they stayed out of the way politically. Our mayor is still being 

heralded and thanked for the work, the leadership that he 

showed in that situation. 

 

Some of the ones I really want to focus on though, the city 

workers, the city of Yorkton workers that helped. And I know 

by singling them out I don‟t mean to diminish the work that 

was done by any other city workers in any other town. My 

comments, I‟m going to try and keep them broad to recognize 

all those that I would describe from the city of Yorkton and that 

area and the damage I found, to give thanks to the same, their 

counterparts in the other jurisdictions, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The city of Yorkton employees worked tirelessly whether it was 

by canoe, by wheel loader, as odd as that it sounds in a flat 

place like Yorkton, that was actually needed to get people out 

of their homes. We had seniors that were being evacuated from 

their homes by wheel loader, water well over the tires of a 

6-foot tire of a wheel loader to get those people out. 

 

Private people, RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] 

officers, and firefighters in canoes and boats going door to door 

and helping the people out of the hardest hit areas in the core of 

Yorkton. The city workers again, getting, you know, getting in 

as deep as they needed to get to clear drainage ditches and 

drainage grates to make sure the water was flowing and to keep 

all that work going. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the RCMP and the work that they did to 

minimize traffic. We saw a lot of damage that actually 

happened to homes from the wakes of vehicles. And again it 

sounds strange but I know my own experience in front of my 

house, we had the wake, the water was lapping at the 

foundation of the house and when you‟d have a vehicle drive 

by, the force of that water hitting the basement windows quite 

often would break the windows and then increase the flood 

damage to those homes. The RCMP were very diligent in 

getting out and kind of minimizing, I guess, the impact of that 

by getting some of the people that were causing that damage 

and maybe just out having fun in the deep water, getting them 

to realize the damage they were doing and again bringing that 

into check. 

 

The firefighters in Yorkton, Mr. Speaker . . . And again the 

firefighters, I know the emergency workers all around the 

province, doing a great job. I‟m going to start from the top 

down. The firefighters themselves did a great job, but again the 

leadership I saw from the firefighters, from the fire chief 

himself, Mr. Dean Clark, was second to none. 

 

In a meeting like that where you have coordinated efforts 

organizing, the Salvation Army to some of the 

community-based organizations in the city, to police, to the 

Crown corporations — SaskPower, SaskTel, SaskEnergy — all 

those different entities, city employees, even the MLA, keeping 

him corralled in some of those meetings, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

Chief Clark, being very respectful, but keeping the meetings on 

track to a minimal time that was needed to be had for effective 

information. 

 

People that wanted to visit and talk about their personal stories 

at any point were welcome to do that after the effective and 

initial part of the meeting. Once the plan was done for the day, 

to go out and exercise those plans and coordinate those efforts, 

then everybody was welcome to go out or to lay back and to 

talk about some of the concerns that might be coming. 

 

Working, I know, in conjunction with myself, ideas that 

actually came from the Premier when he was visiting at one 

point, going to the Kinsmen Arena which was used as a central 

point for people to come in to file their claims, we had again 

disaster assistance people from Corrections and Public Safety 

there, local community people helping go through some of 

these claims to get the information in as quickly as possible. 

And on one visit the Premier had come, and I believe, yes, the 

minister was there as well. 

 

And it came to light that some of these people were being 

displaced in areas other than hotels. The hotels were full 

because of the exhibition and a lot of these rooms were spoken 

for, and we had to find room for these people. And some of 

these people were displaced — families in some of the school 

gyms. 

 

And again in conversation with some of the workers, once this 

came to light, the conversation among a few of us said, you 

know, this just isn‟t quite right. And it brought to my mind a 

very important group in Yorkton, the Society for the 



April 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7173 

Involvement of Good Neighbours, who actually runs their 

operations out of an old hotel. And in that hotel through some 

of the programs they run, they had rooms available. So by 

bringing those people out of those schools, not able to get into 

hotel rooms, bringing them into that type of an environment 

was very effective. They had food services there that they could 

get fed. There was all kinds of support services in the building 

because it is an umbrella agency for community-based 

organizations. 

 

We saw a huge amount of support in the community, a lot of 

funding going to that organization to help support that, as well 

all the hard work that was done by those people to keep them 

under one roof — the most part under one roof — giving them 

food services, supportive services whether it‟d it be 

counselling, mental health, victim services that they might want 

to access. Those services, they‟re all there and delivered very 

effectively in that manner, as well as the caring, the caring 

nature in which it was carried out. 

 

Also in that building, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a church called 

the Victory Church, and they are very, very adept in operating 

the kitchen most hours that it needed to be operated, as well as 

giving some spiritual support for those that were going through 

a tough, tough and trying time. 

 

So when we‟re talking about those people that have to be 

recognized as in the motion, “That this Assembly acknowledge 

the proactive efforts of the Public Safety employees who, 

through their efforts, are ensuring our government will be better 

prepared to handle flooding issues in the province this spring,” 

we can‟t forget those. We talk about public safety employees, 

but I would argue public safety employees are those employees, 

whether they‟re support workers through the umbrella 

organizations like Society for Involvement of Good Neighbours 

and other community-based organizations, whether they‟re city 

employees working for municipalities, whether we‟re looking 

at employees and volunteers from any church organization that 

were out there. 

 

I know the Mennonite groups out of Manitoba came. We had 

the Salvation Army in full force. We had the Red Cross in full 

force. I would argue these are all public safety employees that, 

although not employed directly by government, are employed 

in one way, shape, or form within the province to help out in a 

situation. And for them to come to our province from many 

areas around the country and other provinces to help out in 

areas like Maple Creek and Yorkton and Hudson Bay and 

Saskatoon and Regina was very appreciated. And again this 

motion in my mind also reflects on the hard work done by 

them. 

 

And again moving up the ladder through people that would be 

actually considered public employees or Public Safety 

employees or Corrections people, whether they‟re policing or 

any of the other entities that came out and helped, EMS, we 

also have the fire and protective services that really helped out a 

lot. We have even leadership within the cities. But again as this 

motion states, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we really have to keep in 

mind those very important people that did so much with so 

little, through Corrections and Public Safety and the PDAP 

program and the Sask Watershed Authority as well. 

 

That‟s a lot of talking, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟m getting kind of 

dry. 

 

So again, I know my time is coming to a close. I‟ve got less 

than 40 seconds before we wrap up here for today, but again, 

I‟m sure the members opposite would support this. But I know, 

on this side of the House, we are very appreciative of all those 

public people, those . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — According to rule 15(5), I would ask 

the member to move his motion before time of adjournment. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So that I 

would move: 

 

That this Assembly acknowledge the proactive efforts of 

the Public Safety employees who, through their efforts, 

are ensuring our government will be better prepared to 

handle flooding issues in the province this spring. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Yorkton has 

moved a motion: 

 

That this Assembly acknowledge the proactive efforts of 

the Public Safety employees who, through their efforts, 

are ensuring our government will be better prepared to 

handle flooding issues in the province this spring. 

 

The time of adjournment having been reached, this House now 

stands adjourned until 1:30 Monday afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7145 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7162 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7145 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7145 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7145 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7145 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7146 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7146 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7146 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 World Health Day: Fighting Superbugs 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7146 

 Organ and Tissue Donor Awareness Month 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7147 

 Saskatchewan Cadets Excel 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7147 

 Saskatchewan Country Music Awards 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7147 

 Saskatchewanderer Competition 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7148 

 Facebook Posting 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7148 

 Rent Relief 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7148 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Rent Controls 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7148 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7148 

 Arrangements for Office Space  

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7150 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7150 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7151 

 College Merger 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7151 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7151 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 623 — The School Bus Drivers (Saskatchewan) Appreciation Day Act 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7153 

MOTIONS 

 Leave of Absence 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7153 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7154 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7154 

PRIVATE BILLS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 906 —The Bethany College Amendment Act, 2011 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7154 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Rent Controls 

  Higgins ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7154, 7165 

  Wyant ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7157, 7164 

  Taylor ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7158, 7165 

  Weekes ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7160, 7165 

  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7161, 7164 

  Tell ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7163, 7165 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7164 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7164 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7165 



 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7166 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 5 — Minimizing Potential Flood Damage  

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7166 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


