




















































Hansard: March 10, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 29A  THURSDAY, MARCH 10, 2011, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6619 

 March 10, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to 

stand today and present a petition on behalf of my constituents 

who live in Hampton Village, and it‟s a petition concerning the 

need for a new school in the community. 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes, including education property taxes; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to neighbouring 

communities to attend schools that are already typically 

reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources to the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition live in the 

community of Hampton Village. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today 

to present a petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan 

concerned about Bill 160 and the detrimental effects that it will 

have on the development of human rights law in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

withdraw Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public 

consultations, informed by a public policy paper, before 

any amendment to the Human Rights Code, the law that 

supersedes all others in our province, are even considered. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Pilot Butte, 

Cudworth, Regina, Canwood, Delmas, Nipawin, and Leader, 

Saskatchewan. I so submit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions 

on behalf of concerned residents from across Saskatchewan as 

it relates to the mismanagement of our finances by the Sask 

Party. They allude specifically to the two consecutive deficit 

budgets, the debt loading that‟s currently going on, $400 

million in this year alone, Mr. Speaker, and done at a time of 

unprecedented highs in revenues, of course coming at a cost to 

Saskatchewan people now and well into the future, Mr. 

Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents of Regina. I 

so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mobile Spay and Neuter Clinic 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

recognize a very special program here in Regina. I was 

honoured to join the talented and passionate team at the Regina 

Humane Society on Thursday, March 3rd to launch the mobile 

spay and neuter clinic. 

 

In the spirit of leadership demonstrated by our province 

historically, this clinic represents the first of its kind in Canada. 

The clinic puts to practice the best practice in animal 

management. The clinic is mobile, a state of the art, 26-foot, 

commercially built clinic on wheels. Further it removes the 

barrier of cost to spaying and neutering of a pet. Its program 

provides a subsidy based on a pet owner‟s ability to pay. The 

clinic follows and operates under the professional standards and 

regulations that ensure high-quality surgical pre- and 

post-operative animal care. 

 

I would like to thank the entire team at the Regina Humane 

Society: Ms. Lisa Koch, executive director, all of the staff, Ms. 

Louise Yates, president, all of the board members, and Dr. Brie 

Hamblin, veterinarian. I would also like to recognize the city of 

Regina for its support, partnership, and funding. Lastly I want 

to thank and recognize the volunteers, supporters, and donors of 

the Regina Humane Society, who recognize the need for animal 

care and protection. 

 

I ask all members of this Assembly to join with me to thank all 

of those that have led and assisted this project, to commend 

them for their leadership, and to thank them for the valuable 

service that they‟re providing our fine city. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 



6620 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2011 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Listening to Rural Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, when the people of rural 

Saskatchewan speak, our government listens. This week held 

the annual convention, Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities. And just like any good convention, issues and 

concerns were raised, concerns such as the status of 

infrastructure in rural Saskatchewan and future flooding relief. 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to proudly announce that our 

government is investing $23.5 million in rural municipal roads. 

 

There has been a huge response to our government‟s recently 

announced 22 million emergency flood damage program. So far 

claims have been approved for multiple municipalities and 25 

individual farmsteads, with more claims being approved daily. 

 

Mr. Speaker, several municipalities have been raising concerns 

over the funding formula for health care facilities put in place 

by the former government. Our government heard loud and 

clear that the current formula of 35 per cent local funding and 

65 per cent provincial was a financial burden for communities. 

We have responded by reducing the local share to 20 per cent. 

This will save municipalities millions of dollars which can then 

be used to address infrastructure and other needs. 

 

Conventions like SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities] are an important way for government and 

communities to connect. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Battlefords Citizen of the Year 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, The Battlefords Citizen of the 

Year for 2010 is Yvonne Nyholt, whose photograph has 

appeared in the local newspapers numerous times because of 

her efforts to help re-light the picturesque and statuesque water 

tower in North Battleford. But her volunteer work has spanned 

decades and includes numerous organizations and events. 

Yvonne Nyholt has served as a board member of the 

Battlefords Residential Services for 25 years. She served 

several terms as the north region associate member 

representative on the Saskatchewan Association of 

Rehabilitation Centres board of directors. Prior to her 

involvement with BRSI [Battlefords Residential Services Inc.], 

she was active with one of its predecessor organizations, 

Battlefords Developmental Centre and Residence Association. 

 

Yvonne Nyholt is also a board member of the Battlefords 

Interval House and has served as a board member for the 

Saskatchewan ophthalmic association. She has volunteered with 

the Canadian Red Cross, Battlefords District Food and 

Resource Centre, Diabetic Association, the Battlefords Union 

Hospital association, and the Battlefords Wildlife Federation. 

She is the incoming president of the Good Sams RV 

[recreational vehicle] travel club. 

 

Yvonne says, and I quote: 

 

To work for your community is something that we all 

need to do. If everybody gives just a little of their time, 

it‟s amazing what we can get done. 

 

I ask all members to join me today in congratulating Yvonne 

Nyholt for her lifetime of good works and her recognition as the 

2010 Battlefords Citizen of the Year. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

University President to Retire 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

stand today in this House to announce that yesterday Peter 

MacKinnon, president of the University of Saskatchewan, 

announced that he will be stepping down as president on June 

30th, 2012. 

 

He has been at the helm during a period of unprecedented 

growth, and that growth is a testament to his leadership. 

 

Mr. MacKinnon joined the University of Saskatchewan in 1975 

and served as professor, assistant dean, and dean of the College 

of Law, as well as acting vice-president academic before his 

appointment as president and vice-chancellor in 1999. He was a 

leader in many of the innovative projects at the U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan], including the Academic Health 

Sciences building and the Canadian Light Source synchrotron. 

 

Mr. MacKinnon was also integral in the establishment of the 

university‟s strategic directions in 2002, a document that has 

been the foundation for the institution‟s growth and 

development ever since. 

 

All people of this province should be proud of the 

accomplishments of the U of S, and particularly so those 

accomplishments achieved under President MacKinnon‟s 

leadership. I would ask all my colleagues to join me in 

extending our heartfelt thank you to President MacKinnon for 

his commitment to the University of Saskatchewan and indeed 

the province of Saskatchewan. We wish him nothing but the 

best in his future endeavours. Thank you, President 

MacKinnon, and thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

World Kidney Day 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is World 

Kidney Day. World Kidney Day is a joint initiative of the 

International Society of Nephrology and the International 

Federation of Kidney Foundations. The mission of World 

Kidney Day is to raise awareness of the importance of our 

kidneys to our overall health and to reduce the frequency and 

impact of kidney disease and its associated health problems 

worldwide. That awareness includes highlighting that diabetes 

and high blood pressure are key risk factors for chronic kidney 

disease. It includes educating all medical professionals about 

their key role in detecting and reducing the risk of chronic 

kidney disease. 

 

It‟s also a time, Mr. Speaker, to remind the people of 



March 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6621 

Saskatchewan to have their organ donor cards signed. Mr. 

Speaker, there are 115 families currently waiting for a kidney 

transplant in Saskatchewan. They trusted the minister when he 

told them last year that he would have the kidney transplant 

program operating by July 2010. For the minister to keep these 

patients waiting any longer is a cruel breach of that promise. He 

should immediately put their minds at ease and honour his 

promise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this morning‟s Leader-Post a kidney disease 

patient is quoted as saying in regards to his wait for a kidney 

transplant, “It‟s not the right way to live.” And he‟s sadly right. 

Mr. Speaker, the minister needs to get the Saskatchewan kidney 

transplant program fully functioning now. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Trade With India 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, today marks an important step in 

the continuing chapter relating to the trade relationship between 

India and the province of Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan‟s 

exports to that country already account for roughly 40 per cent 

of Canadian total. That trade has been mostly potash plus 

beans, peas, and lentils. The livelihood of 18,000 Saskatchewan 

farm families depends on this important relationship. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m very pleased to report our exports also include 

high-tech expertise. Today in India, Premier Brad Wall 

witnessed the signing of two major contracts involving 

International Road Dynamics of Saskatoon. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Just to 

remind the member to refer to members by their position in the 

Chamber. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Wyant: — The company secured work on two major 

transportation projects worth $1.1 million. This is further 

confirmation that IRD‟s [International Road Dynamics] work in 

remote-sensing equipment and intelligent highway technology 

is world-class and can compete anywhere. Mr. Speaker, our 

government would like to congratulate the staff at International 

Road Dynamics in Saskatoon and in the offices around the 

world. 

 

We would also like to thank the Saskatchewan Trade and 

Export Partnership for the work they do in promoting 

Saskatchewan companies in India and around the world. Now 

the focus of the trade mission to India will focus on important 

discussions with Indian officials on the sale of pulse crops, 

potash, and innovation. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Follow-Through 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

trick in every sport, from a golfer‟s swing to a hockey player‟s 

shot, is follow-through. It‟s a trick this government has yet to 

master, Mr. Speaker, because they‟re great at the windup, but 

they have no follow-through. From storing carbon underground 

with Montana, Mr. Speaker, to creating medical isotopes in 

Saskatoon, the story with this government is big ideas, no 

follow-through. 

 

It was in this same building where they had their grand 

ribbon-cutting ceremony on carbon capture, Mr. Speaker. The 

governor of Montana was here for the photo op. It was a big 

windup, Mr. Speaker, but there‟s no follow-through. Months 

after the project was dead, the government finally admitted it 

couldn‟t deliver. 

 

It‟s the same story with the medical isotope reactor, Mr. 

Speaker. The Premier said he‟d be doing the federal 

government a favour by taking their money to complete this 

project. But a federal budget came and went, and this big idea 

went with it — big idea, Mr. Speaker, and no follow-through. 

 

And these big ideas aren‟t free, Mr. Speaker. Dollars are wasted 

on studies that go nowhere, and time is lost waiting for the trial 

balloons to go pop in the air. 

 

The environment, health, clean energy — all areas where we 

could do so much. We could be so much further ahead than we 

are today if only this government would learn to master the 

most basic skill in sports — follow-through. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Physician Recruitment 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 

physician recruitment agency CEO [chief executive officer] 

was at the SARM convention talking to delegates who were 

there voicing their concerns about rural health care and 

particularly the doctor shortage. 

 

To the minister: other than go out and buy yourself a doctor, 

what message or help did the physician recruitment agency give 

to communities like Wakaw, Watrous, Spiritwood, and Big 

River, just to name a few, who are struggling to keep their 

emergency services without doctors? 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the physician 

recruitment strategy that our government implemented over the 

last couple of years is proving results, Mr. Speaker. We have 

more physicians, more general practitioners, and more 

specialists working in this province today than we have any 

year under the NDP [New Democratic Party], Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only that, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve increased the 

number of medical seats, and we‟ve also increased the number 

of residencies. I am proud to announce that the U of S just 

announced earlier this week that a record number of residents 

have matched in the first round of CaRMS [Canadian resident 

matching service] — that‟s when medical students match with 

residencies — 79, Mr. Speaker, in this province. Can you 



6622 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2011 

imagine if we ever went back to only 60 residency seats under 

the NDP? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — I think the residents of Saskatchewan, the 

doctors of Saskatchewan, and the PAIRS [Professional 

Association of Internes and Residents of Saskatchewan] would 

like to have a contract. That‟s what they‟re imagining. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister‟s physician recruitment agency — 

and I‟ve seen the PowerPoint — has been in place for months, 

and all it has done is spent $200,000 on furniture. Rural 

communities across the province are competing with each other 

to recruit their own doctors with no help from the government. 

Doctor vacancies have increased from 84 in 2007 to 119 now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: when is he going to stop hiding 

behind the physician recruitment agency and come up with a 

real strategy to address the doctor crisis in rural Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, the 

exact number of doctors working in the province over the last 

three years of our government has increased by 228. That‟s an 

increase of 13 per cent. Mr. Speaker, we‟ve increased the 

number of medical residency positions, and we‟ve also 

increased the number of medical seats. So we train more of our 

own that will stay here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is interesting, and I can‟t help but quote the 

former NDP MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] and 

former physician who talks about, and I quote, “Judy Junor to 

carp on about health care in rural Saskatchewan is pure 

hypocrisy.” That‟s what that is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Always rely on credible sources, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the main concerns at the SARM 

convention for rural community representatives is aging 

infrastructure. Communities have very limited resources to use 

for infrastructure improvements and to provide basic services 

for their communities. Mr. Speaker, that minister and that Sask 

Party government are telling rural communities to take their 

money and, instead of fixing infrastructure problems, buy a 

doctor. 

 

To the minister: when is he going to start doing his job and get 

communities like Wakaw and Big River and Watrous and all 

the others who are just on the brim of losing their doctor and 

losing their services, what is he going to tell them that they 

need to do and how they‟re going to use their municipal 

revenue? What help is he giving them? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we‟re working very 

closely with all the communities across the province through a 

physician recruitment agency, the first one in Saskatchewan‟s 

history. Other provinces have had one, never under the NDP. 

We implemented it, and it‟s working in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite talks about infrastructure in 

rural Saskatchewan. Well I‟ll tell you what we have done for 

infrastructure in rural Saskatchewan. Under the NDP, 35 per 

cent of any capital had to be raised by the community. This 

government changed it from a 65/35 to an 80/20. That‟s what 

we‟re doing in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are issues in rural Saskatchewan. But I can 

tell you they were a lot more acute under the former NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Employment Trends 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, there‟s a letter in today‟s 

StarPhoenix from well-respected University of Saskatchewan 

economist Eric Howe entitled, “Aboriginal job loss disaster.” 

The letter references a subject that has been a long-time focus 

of Dr. Howe‟s research, a subject on which he is an authority. 

And the letter adds to a debate that has seen his authoritative 

observations pitted against sunshine spin from this Sask Party 

government. Eric Howe states, and I quote: 

 

In January 2009, 60 per cent of Saskatchewan‟s aboriginal 

adults were employed. A year later, everything had 

changed. 

 

. . . By January 2010 . . . one in seven aboriginal workers 

. . . had lost their jobs. Only 50 per cent of our aboriginal 

adults were still employed. 

 

Given Saskatchewan‟s demographic reality, decreasing 

aboriginal employment spells economic disaster 

provincially. 

 

Mr. Speaker, recognition of a problem is critical. Does this 

government agree with Dr. Howe? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we know that there‟s more 

to do regarding the education and employment of First Nations 

and Métis people in the province, Mr. Speaker. That‟s why 

we‟ve invested, within the Ministry of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration alone, more than $40 million of 

direct investment. That raises by tens of million dollars when 

we look at indirect investment. Those are considerable 

increases over the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, when we begin to look at some key areas, Mr. 

Speaker, for several months we‟ve seen First Nations and Métis 

employment on the rise, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 Mr. Speaker, we know there‟s more to do. We‟re working 

nationally through the CMEC [Council of Ministers of 

Education, Canada], that is Canadian ministers of Education 

and Advanced Education. Just a couple of weeks ago, we were 



March 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6623 

sitting down with the national Aboriginal organizations. 

 

There is more to do, Mr. Speaker. Those numbers are on the 

rise, Mr. Speaker. We‟re going to continue to work through 

partnership to see the numbers continue to improve, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Well we‟ll get to partnerships and this 

government‟s record on that, Mr. Speaker, but there‟s a letter 

from January 14th in the Leader-Post from, again, Professor 

Eric Howe in which he states: 

 

Aboriginal employment in Saskatchewan in 2010 

decreased in every month since July. However, there is 

seasonal variation in employment, so it is important to 

take a longer view although that view is even more 

depressing. Aboriginal employment is down an 

extraordinary 10 per cent from its previous peak in 

January of 2008, so aboriginal employment decreased 

sharply during a period when total provincial employment 

was slightly up. During the tenure of the Saskatchewan 

Party government (comparing October 2007 to December 

2010) aboriginal employment is actually down. 

 

. . . As to why this is happening and what needs to be 

done, people will differ. [I go on quoting in the letter.] 

However, it does not help to distort the record. The 

province is facing economic disaster. 

 

When is that minister going to stop with the summits? When is 

that minister going to stop with cutting programs that have 

helped improve Aboriginal employment, and when is he going 

to present a plan that actually holds some water? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s important for the record 

to make sure that everyone in this province understands that 

First Nations employment went up in January by 1,400 jobs, 

Mr. Speaker. That‟s the ninth consecutive month, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As far as a track record, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the 

decade between 1996 and 2006 we see that the gap in education 

and employment success at both the K to 12 [kindergarten to 

grade 12] and at the post-secondary level, Mr. Speaker, it 

widened under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. They were ineffective. 

They were inattentive and, Mr. Speaker, they lost their focus. 

And as a result, this province lost a decade under the NDP, Mr. 

Speaker. The lesson learned is we can‟t go back to NDP 

governments. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess we can mark 

the minister down as disagreeing with the authoritative 

comment of Dr. Howe, which again is very interesting, Mr. 

Speaker. Who are we going to trust: an authority on the subject 

or the Minister for Employment on that side? I think the people 

know who to trust on this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the things that Dr. Howe points out to us as problematic 

in the way that this government has approached the question of 

aboriginal employment is the fact that, and I quote, “The 

Saskatchewan Party government had eliminated its Aboriginal 

Employment Development Program.” 

 

He goes on to state that: 

 

It had taken a major aboriginal institution — First Nations 

University of Canada — and beaten it to its knees. 

However cathartic these actions were to the Saskatchewan 

Party‟s base, the damage to our province was severe. 

 

We‟ve got a government that ripped up, unilaterally ripped up 

100-plus Aboriginal employment development program 

agreements, and now they want to talk about partnership. The 

numbers speak for themselves. When it comes to deciding what 

we‟re going to believe, we‟ll side with Dr. Howe every time — 

asking, demanding action on Aboriginal employment for the 

people in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker, for the opportunity. Not only did we see First Nations 

and Métis employment increase in January by 1,400 jobs, we 

saw that First Nations and Métis youth employment jumped by 

over 30 per cent. That‟s 1,900 jobs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With reference to the First Nations University of Canada, Mr. 

Speaker, we know the track record, and it‟s a sorry one, of the 

members opposite. Turn a blind eye, write a blank cheque, and 

hope it goes away, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We work with federal partners. We work with partners here in 

the community, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve come up with a four-year 

framework including a partnership with the University of 

Regina to ensure that our First Nations and Métis students have 

maximum opportunities, not just simply to succeed in their 

studies, but to simply succeed and stay in Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, a far brighter future than was ever offered students 

under the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess we‟ve got some 

fairly clear indication. On the one side, you have the 

authoritative comments of Dr. Howe, a respected economist 

from the University of Saskatchewan, who‟s dedicated three 

decades-plus to this kind of research. On the other side you‟ve 

got the pompom waving and spin from the Sask Party. 

 

But the fact remains, Mr. Speaker, that between October 2007 

— December 2010, Aboriginal employment, to cite the work of 

Dr. Howe, it‟s actually down. He says that this is a disaster for 

the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I guess on the 

opposition side, we agree with Dr. Howe that this is a disaster. 

A useful tool in the fight to ward off that disaster was 

Aboriginal employment development, the cause for a 



6624 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2011 

representative workforce. 

 

We‟ve seen the government opposite tear up that valuable 

program that should have been bolstered and improved. Instead 

they walked away from it. When is this government going to 

bring forward a meaningful, comprehensive plan that deals with 

representative workforce, Aboriginal employment, and when 

are they going to stop the spin? Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, once again, Mr. Speaker, for 

nine consecutive months we‟ve seen employment increase in 

Saskatchewan for First Nations and Métis people, Mr. Speaker. 

That includes, Mr. Speaker, a jump of 30 per cent for First 

Nations and Métis youth. Mr. Speaker, there are some key 

indicators of the success that is under way, Mr. Speaker. The 

success: we can look at adult basic education, which we know 

is so important for First Nations and Métis communities, Mr. 

Speaker. You‟ve seen a 17 per cent increase year over year in 

investments in adult basic education, Mr. Speaker. That stands 

in stark contrast . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, what we see is investments 

in adult basic education through our ministry alone, the 

Ministry of Advanced Education, Employment and 

Immigration, increased by 17 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The crisis, Mr. Speaker, was defined between 1996 and 2006 

when First Nations education in both the K to 12 system and 

the post-secondary system saw the gap increase, Mr. Speaker, 

that is between First Nations and other members within this 

provincial community. We know there‟s more to do, and mostly 

that‟s because we‟re trying to clean up the mess created by the 

NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Support for Northern Housing 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the Quarry apartment building 

is set to close in La Ronge after complaints of bursting pipes 

and heaving floors, but the rental vacancy rate in La Ronge is 

zero per cent. Mr. Speaker, some will try to find a place with 

friends and families to stay on the reserve, but that situation is 

no better. One resident, Mr. Speaker, says, we have no idea 

where to go. 

 

To the minister: why has this government failed to act on a 

serious northern housing strategy so families in La Ronge have 

safe and affordable places to live? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I know 

that this is a very serious issue not only in La Ronge but in 

other parts of the North. I know that there‟s a 16-apartment 

building that shut down now for building code violations. And 

the ministry had asked the Calgary landowner to apply for 

assistance to bring it up to code, but at the time of the closure, 

they hadn‟t made that application. 

 

So we do know that there is work to be done, and we will help. 

We can‟t give specifics about the individuals in the building, 

but we‟ll help them find accommodation. That‟s why we have, 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s why we have implemented a housing 

strategy. The northern people will definitely be involved in the 

strategy as we build towards a discussion on what we should be 

doing in the province. And, Mr. Speaker, we know that we have 

done work and there‟s more work to do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that‟s going to do lots for 

the people that have no place to go at the end of the month. Mr. 

Speaker, La Ronge has experienced a boom but the people 

aren‟t seeing the benefit. Everyone, Mr. Speaker — students; 

young professionals; families on-reserve, off-reserve — is 

couch surfing, finding places with friends and families because 

they can‟t find affordable housing. With a zero vacancy rate, 

they have nowhere to go. 

 

To the minister: why is this government failing to ensure La 

Ronge families have safe and affordable housing options? 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, since November of 2007 

when we became government, we‟ve invested over $18 million 

for 173 rental or ownership units in the North. Ninety-eight 

units are complete and there are 75 under construction at this 

time. And we‟ve spent $2.8 million helping 224 low-income 

homeowners make the necessary repairs to their homes and to 

their properties. The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 

homeowner repair program is now delivering this through the 

northern housing network. 

 

Mr. Speaker, right now Sask Housing owns approximately 

1,400 social and affordable housing units in the North. That‟s 

one unit for every 12 people in the North, Mr. Speaker. In the 

South, it‟s one unit for about every 35 people. We are working 

on it. We know it‟s a challenge. And the North will be part of 

the strategy as we go forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the housing that is 

available is often substandard. The overcrowding rate in 

northern Saskatchewan is 18 per cent and the people have to 

live in unsafe and unhealthy conditions because they have a 

lack of safe and affordable housing. Now some are being forced 

out of their apartment. Mr. Speaker, this government says 

everyone in Saskatchewan is benefiting from the boom, but 

families in La Ronge aren‟t enjoying a boom when they have to 

thump on doors to ask for a place to stay with friends and 

families so they can find a place to have to sleep. 

 



March 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6625 

To the minister: why is this government not ensuring that 

families in La Ronge and throughout northern Saskatchewan 

have safe and affordable homes to live in? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the issue of affordability is 

important for northern Saskatchewan, as it is right across all of 

our province. I want to just point out the NDP record on 

housing. Maybe they should talk about they only invested in 89 

new units in their last three years, compared to 173 units for us. 

The NDP invested $4.5 million in their last three full years, and 

our government invested $18 million. But when it comes to 

affordability, Mr. Speaker, let‟s talk about the 92,000 . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I recognize the 

minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, what we‟ve done on 

affordability is things like removing 92,000 low-income people 

off the tax rolls. That saved $2,800 annually for low-income 

single parents. We‟ve lowered utility costs by 7 per cent. We‟ve 

doubled the low income tax credit. We‟ve nearly doubled the 

number of seniors who are eligible for benefits under the 

seniors‟ income plan. We‟ve doubled the amount available to 

low-income seniors for the seniors‟ income plan, and we‟ve 

increased rental supplements five times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s always more we can do. And people in 

northern Saskatchewan are an important part of a growing 

economy, and we‟ll be working with them as we build the 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

SaskTel Services 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, this government continues their 

ideological attack on our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, and 

continue to privatize by stealth. Mr. Speaker, one of our longest 

standing and most profitable Crown corporations, SaskTel is 

one of the latest to be attacked by this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we saw the sell-off of the Hospitality Network, a 

service that provided telephone and TV service to hospitals 

across this province and across the country, Mr. Speaker. A 

profitable Crown sold off, Mr. Speaker, taking away some of 

the profit out of that Crown corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we saw the ideological selling off of the SaskTel 

building in Saskatoon, a building where we owned it and we in 

fact made a profit by renting other portions of the building to 

others. Now we have to pay rent in that building, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, why is this government throwing away the 

future of our Crown corporations because it ideologically wants 

to destabilize them and privatize them? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, SaskTel is investing into 

Saskatchewan at a record rate, some $120 million into the 

Internet system and into high-speed Internet, into the cellular 

network in Saskatchewan. SaskTel is doing a tremendous job in 

terms of reaching more people in Saskatchewan with 

high-speed Internet, allowing people to have the latest of 

communications equipment. 

 

The Hospitality Network is simply not a part of that core 

business. It is felt that this was an area that should more be in 

the private sector, and as a result of that the province made the 

decision and SaskTel made the decision to divest in this area. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, this government for ideological 

reasons continues to sell off and privatize portions of SaskTel. 

Mr. Speaker, today we have citizens of this province standing at 

SARM . . . yesterday, pardon me, Mr. Speaker, talking about 

the services being provided to them in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an individual stood up yesterday and talked about 

how SaskTel is delivering poor service to them in rural 

communities because of their stop sell directive. Services now 

that were once provided by the Crown corporation are now 

provided by private suppliers, contracted out, or privatized, Mr. 

Speaker. And citizens are saying they‟re not getting the same 

quality of service, and they can‟t, Mr. Speaker, they can‟t hold 

their government accountable because they don‟t own it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of this province want SaskTel to 

deliver those quality services to every rural community, but 

instead this government‟s decided to sell it off. When will the 

minister reverse that bad decision? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, there was a realized capital 

adjustment of $36.6 million subject to final closing 

adjustments. The net cash gain from this investment is about 

$25 million for the people of Saskatchewan. There are no job 

losses at SaskTel as a result of the transaction. And we 

understand it‟s the purchaser‟s intention to keep Hospitality 

Network‟s head office here in Regina. So the service is still in 

place. The people of Saskatchewan that were employed in it in 

SaskTel are still working in SaskTel, which is in a sharp 

contrast, in a sharp contrast through the $72 million that was 

lost under Navigata under the previous administration. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, can the 

minister confirm to this Assembly that during a meeting of the 

SaskTel board of directors, a motion was passed to downsize 

the corporation by eliminating positions, outsourcing, and 

eliminating assets, and can he confirm that this was not simply 

a motion of the board of directors but came as direction from 

their Sask Party leadership? 



6626 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2011 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, we will look into the 

member‟s question. With respect to that, I don‟t know; I wasn‟t 

in attendance at all of the board meetings. But we‟ll certainly 

look into the member‟s contention with respect to this. 

 

But I don‟t think it‟s any secret the Government of 

Saskatchewan has said on numerous occasions that we are 

looking at reducing the number of people that work for the 

Government of Saskatchewan through things like attrition as 

people retire, that sort of thing. It‟s a stated goal here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. We will certainly be moving 

forward with respect to that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the people of this province are very 

proud of their Crown corporations. They want their Crown 

corporations to remain publicly owned and publicly operated, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, how does the government square 

with motions passed in the board to outsource jobs and 

eliminate assets of the Crown corporations and being in the best 

interest of the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, if the member was listening 

to my response, the second-last one here, it was there were no 

losses of jobs for the people that were in the Hospitality 

Network that were employed in SaskTel. No losses of jobs, 

they were all moved into other areas of responsibility, which of 

course is in sharp contrast . . . As I said, there was a profit 

gained in this area, which of course is in sharp contrast to the 

$72 million of taxpayers money that was lost on Navigata by 

the previous government and the front bench members of the 

opposition today. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Review of Potash Royalties 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased to rise 

today to move a private member‟s motion urging the Assembly 

to properly represent Saskatchewan families with respect to 

potash royalties. Now this is of vital importance to our province 

currently and of vital importance to the future of our province, 

for reasons that will become obvious if they‟re not already. 

 

Here are the facts, Mr. Speaker. The Potash Corporation in 

2010 netted $1.8 billion in gross revenue. On that $1.8 billion, 

they paid $77 million in royalties to the province of 

Saskatchewan. Less than 5 cents on every dollar has gone in to 

the people of Saskatchewan, the owners of the potash resource. 

 

Now who thinks this is fair and who thinks this is unfair? Well 

the people who think that this is, less than 5 cents on a dollar is 

a fair amount are the Potash Corporation and the Saskatchewan 

Party. 

 

Now do I blame the Potash Corporation for saying they‟re 

against the royalty review? Certainly I do not. It‟s the job of 

their CEO to protect the interests of the company, which is a 

profit-driven company. So they‟re interested in maximizing 

their profits and certainly I don‟t blame their CEO for saying 

that he‟s not interested in seeing their profits diminish in any 

way. But unfortunately for the people of Saskatchewan, their 

CEO, the Premier of Saskatchewan, has said that he‟s not 

interested in maximizing the profits for his shareholders — the 

million or so of us who live in Saskatchewan. And it‟s shameful 

because it‟s his job to maximize the benefit for his 

shareholders, and he‟s not doing his job and he‟s not 

maximizing that benefit for Saskatchewan people. 

 

So what is the call for a royalty review based on? Well certainly 

it‟s based on the numbers put forward by the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan. I listened for over an hour to 

their quarterly report earlier last month where the CEO spoke of 

a few things, a few things that are driving the industry. He said 

that inventories were especially low at this point in their 

history, that stockpiles are also low for companies that resell, 

and that world demand is enormous right now but is going to 

skyrocket moving forward. And so we are simply calling on a 

review based on what the CEO himself called the new norm for 

Potash Corporation. So he said clearly in that meeting or that 

presentation that $1.8 billion in profits is the new norm for the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now we‟ve called for a review, and we want that review to take 

place immediately because we believe that 5 cents on a dollar is 

not enough. The Saskatchewan Party government countered by 

saying that for 16 years they will not have a review. Now what 

does that mean for Saskatchewan people? What does that mean, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

If you use the numbers from 10 years ago, we were getting 

about approximately 30 per cent in terms of royalties on potash. 

And you use the new norm and extrapolate that over 16 years, 

electing and re-electing this government would cost the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan, for one corporation, $7.4 billion. 

That‟s the difference for one corporation that makes up 40 per 

cent of the production in Saskatchewan. Now if you again move 

that into 100 per cent production, you‟re looking at somewhere 

close to $15 billion of royalties that are not being paid and that 

should be paid to the people of Saskatchewan — nearly $1 

billion a year the Saskatchewan Party government is willing to 

forgo that Saskatchewan people, we believe, deserve. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Now who else has weighed in on potash? Who else has 

weighed in suggesting that a review is something that should 

take place immediately because the current regime is not fair? 

The Premier of the province of Saskatchewan called the royalty 

review crazy. Now in spite of the fact that that term‟s offensive 

and ridiculous, he said it anyway. Now why did he say it? And 

who agrees with him? Bill Doyle agrees with him. 

 



March 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6627 

Who else disagrees with him, Mr. Speaker? People from all 

over the political spectrum, including people from the right and 

people from the farther right. Rick Swenson, the leader of the 

Saskatchewan Progressive Conservative Party, a party to which 

many of the MLAs currently in the Saskatchewan Party used to 

belong, said recently that the government needs to negotiate a 

new deal on potash to “ensure that the owners of resources — 

the people of Saskatchewan — get their fair share of the 

resource pie.” 

 

Now it‟s clear that this is not ideologically driven. It‟s simply a 

matter of pragmatic need for the Saskatchewan people, and 

what‟s fair and what‟s not fair. 

 

Who else has weighed in, Mr. Speaker? Colin Boyd, professor 

at the Edwards School of Business at the University of 

Saskatchewan — again a school of business, Mr. Speaker — 

suggesting that “The capital writeoffs make it . . . [difficult] to 

determine whether there‟s an appropriate rate of return.” And 

he notes the complexity of the current regime. Now what he 

says is: 

 

It may be a fair debate to have. What is a fair profit for 

PotashCorp to make if potash prices do go up? Is the 

province fairly sharing in that bounty? 

 

So he‟s asking too that, is it fair for the Saskatchewan people to 

take less than 5 cents on a dollar for their potash? And he‟s 

arguing that we should have a review. 

 

Who else, Mr. Speaker? Sylvain Charlebois, associate dean in 

the school of management and economics at the University of 

Guelph, a former University of Regina business professor. So 

two business professors, Mr. Speaker, suggesting that we need 

a review. 

 

He says that “A review of province‟s royalty structure is „dearly 

needed‟ to make the system more responsive to volume of sales 

rather than price.” He says: 

 

The world needs the mineral. The world needs potash. I 

think there is actually a public responsibility for the 

government to go for a review. This would be good for the 

industry, not just the public, for the long run. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, not only does he suggest that it‟s good for the 

people of Saskatchewan and that it‟s dearly needed, but he also 

says that this would be good for the industry. 

 

So the fearmongering that‟s going on on behalf of the 

Saskatchewan Party is not accurate, according to the associate 

dean of the school of management and economics at the 

University of Guelph. 

 

Now it‟s not only university professors in schools of economics 

that are weighing in, Mr. Speaker. In addition to those folks, 

there are tax experts that are also weighing in, saying that we 

should look at a potash royalty review. Now who might those 

people be, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Jack Mintz of the school of policy at the University of Calgary 

and a fiscal and tax policy specialist describes the province‟s 

current royalty system as “just wrong.” 

My argument is that it is actually a poor rent-collector, 

probably not collecting enough rents on it. In fact, when 

you kind of look at the numbers it would suggest that. 

 

He‟s a former head of the conservative C.D. Howe Institute 

think tank. 

 

So there you have it, Mr. Speaker. From all over the political 

spectrum, people are calling for a review. 

 

In addition to the folks that I‟ve already listed, Erin Weir has 

written in to the Leader-Post, February 17th, and said that a 

review is necessary. The headline of his article reads, “Sask. 

gets „measly return.‟” He says: 

 

. . . Saskatchewan people are still getting a measly return 

on the resource they own. A provincial review of potash 

royalties would be a good first step toward fixing a broken 

system. 

 

And Erin Weir is a Saskatchewan expatriate working as a 

senior economist with the International Trade Union 

Confederation in Brussels, Belgium. So another person 

weighing in that has an economics background, Mr. Speaker, 

suggesting that a royalty review is needed immediately. 

 

Now the fearmongering that‟s going on by the Saskatchewan 

Party is reprehensible. It‟s sad. It‟s unfortunate. And the 

Premier himself used the word crazy to describe a call for a 

royalty review. These credible people suggest otherwise. 

They‟re saying that it‟s not that at all, that it‟s something that‟s 

necessary for Saskatchewan people. 

 

And he‟s saying that, he‟s trying to incite fear into people 

suggesting that there will be no jobs if this takes place. But 

what are the workers saying? What are the people that are 

actually employed at the potash mines saying about this? 

They‟re saying, “The Government of Saskatchewan should 

revise its royalty regime to ensure that companies pay the 

province a fair price for every tonne of potash that‟s extracted.” 

 

So quite simply, the workers are saying that a review needs to 

take place. Ken Neumann says, “The workers who mine potash 

and the citizens who own it deserve better.” So their 

fearmongering, Mr. Speaker, is nothing more than that. It‟s 

nothing more than a desperate attempt to change the channel 

from a royalty review because they don‟t want to do one. 

 

Now Ken Neumann is the national director for Canada of the 

United Steelworkers Union, which represents only 280,000 

workers, including potash workers. Now Mr. Neumann was 

born and raised in Saskatchewan. So those are some of the folks 

who are also calling for a review. Credible, hard-working folks, 

most of whom have economics backgrounds, work in business 

schools, and contribute and are from the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now it‟s sad that the Government of Saskatchewan is willing to 

walk away from, like I said, close to $15 billion or 

approximately that over 16 years, but they are used to it, Mr. 

Speaker, and that‟s unfortunate. They walked away from $800 

million a year in equalization because they wanted to help their 

Conservative friends in Ottawa. They‟re willing to walk away 



6628 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2011 

from $800 million a year to help their friends. The people of 

Saskatchewan deserve that money as well, Mr. Speaker. So if 

you add that $12.8 billion over 16 years to the 15 already 

existing, you get somewhere close to $28 billion that this 

government is interested in walking away from to protect their 

conservative friends. 

 

Now whether it‟s a corporation, whether it‟s the Conservative 

Party of Canada in Ottawa, it‟s unfortunate that that‟s who their 

friends are and that they‟re not protecting the people of 

Saskatchewan, the people that they were elected to represent. 

So it‟s sad that that‟s the state of affairs in Saskatchewan today. 

 

Now I‟m sure that they‟re going to fearmonger and that‟s going 

to continue and they‟re going to talk about how this is going to 

extend to every other industry in Saskatchewan, to minerals and 

oil and gas and all over the place, Mr. Speaker. Not true. Not 

interested in doing that, and here‟s why. The difference 

between potash and oil and gas is obvious and it‟s simple. We 

have currently around 30 per cent of the world‟s potash 

production and about one-half of 1 per cent of the oil 

production in the world. We‟re getting less than 5 cents on the 

dollar for royalties in potash. We get around 30 cents for a 

barrel of oil that‟s extracted. 

 

We have over 50 per cent of the world‟s supply of potash. 

Again, somewhat less than 1 per cent of the world‟s supply of 

oil. Capital for oil and gas is as the product: it‟s fluid; it‟s fluid. 

You can move it. You can cap a mine, or cap a well. You can 

shut it in. And you can move away to another jurisdiction. You 

can‟t do that with a potash mine, Mr. Speaker. You can‟t do 

that. It‟s billions of dollars, and the price to sink a shaft for a 

potash mine has nearly doubled over the last few years. So you 

can‟t do it. 

 

Additionally, Mr. Speaker, it protects Saskatchewan citizens. 

Saskatchewan citizens use oil and gas. We use most of the gas 

that we produce in Saskatchewan and so you‟d be asking the 

citizens of Saskatchewan to pay for that review. We do not use 

potash in our agricultural sector in any way, shape, or form. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if I could, I‟d like to move the motion for 

those reasons: 

 

That this Assembly urge the government to represent 

Saskatchewan families by ensuring a fair return for their 

potash resource; and further, 

 

That this Assembly urge the government to support a 

review of royalty rates that would benefit Saskatchewan 

families. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The motion before the Assembly is a 

motion presented by the member from Prince Albert Northcote: 

 

That this Assembly urge the government to represent 

Saskatchewan families by ensuring a fair return for their 

potash resource; and further, 

 

That this Assembly urge the government to support a 

review of royalty rates that would benefit Saskatchewan 

families. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Martensville. 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it‟s a pleasure 

to rise today to discuss the difference between the NDP‟s plan 

for the future of our province and our government‟s vision for 

our province. And I think the difference between our two 

parties is pretty clear on this side of the House. We want to see 

Saskatchewan moving forward and the NDP are happy to go 

backwards, which is exactly what their policy would do to our 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, potash in Saskatchewan is an amazing story. The 

amount of people that are employed by this, the amount of 

money that is derived from potash in Saskatchewan, and when 

we look at the investment that is planned on being made by 

potash companies in our province, it‟s about $12 billion, and I 

don‟t think that now is the time to jeopardize that. 

 

The opposition says it‟s fearmongering. I don‟t believe that is 

true. I think that is a simple fact. As soon as you make a 

jurisdiction not competitive with other jurisdictions, you are 

going to lose investment. We have pages and pages of potential 

projects in other places around the world. The potash in 

Saskatchewan represents 50 per cent of potash in the world, 

which means that 50 per cent of it, Mr. Speaker, is someplace 

else. Companies don‟t have to invest in our province. They 

have other options. They have other places to go. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think it‟s incumbent upon any government to make 

sure that we remain competitive. 

 

And what‟s interesting is the royalty structure that is currently 

in place was put in place by the previous NDP government 

under Lorne Calvert. And, Mr. Speaker, why did they do that? 

They looked at the investment that was needed in our province, 

the investment that was willing to be made by companies, and 

changed the structure in order to facilitate that investment. And 

I have to say, Mr. Speaker, economic development is not 

usually the strong suit of the NDP. But in this circumstance, the 

NDP actually made the right decision, and we will give credit 

where credit is due. And, Mr. Speaker, we‟ll give the former 

premier, Mr. Lorne Calvert, credit for making these changes. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it was interesting the things that Mr. Calvert 

said at the time when these changes were made. He said, and I 

quote: 

 

I think it is more significant to have opportunities for our 

young people to go to work in the province first of all 

[first of all] than to secure revenues for the General 

Revenue Fund of the province. Moreover, having people 

to go to work will guarantee the latter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I couldn‟t say it any better. If you make an 

investment friendly to business and make sure that they invest, 

that will lead to jobs, which in the end leads to more money for 

the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Calvert had it right, and it‟s 

surprising to see the change in direction under the NDP 

currently. 

 

There was a government release under the NDP in 2003 talking 

about the benefits of the changes to the potash industry which 

said, and I quote, “This will result in new jobs and new 



March 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6629 

infrastructure expenditures by the industry.” Mr. Speaker, that 

was the . . . He was talking about the current status of taxes and 

royalties paid by potash companies into the province of 

Saskatchewan. And like I said, Mr. Speaker, we‟ll give credit 

where credit is due, and we believe that they made the right 

decision. 

 

Another government release from 2005 under the NDP said, 

and I quote, “As a government, we want to promote that 

expansion and growth of our economy.” And he was referring 

to the changes that had been made to the royalty structure in the 

province. 

 

[11:00] 

 

And it‟s also interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the current leader of 

the NDP . . . When looking at what Alberta had done with their 

royalty review, I think we all saw the chill that came over 

Alberta and the subsequent investment into Saskatchewan. One 

of the best things a government can do is offer stability to those 

who are investing in our province. Alberta at the time talked 

about a fair share, which is apparently the same talking point as 

the NDP is using today. And, Mr. Speaker, just less than a year 

ago the current leader of the NDP said, and I quote, “And I 

think there was a huge flow of investment into Saskatchewan 

after the Stelmach government made their ill-advised royalty 

changes.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the current leader of the NDP understood that 

when you start messing around with royalty structures, you start 

messing around with the investment that people are willing to 

make into our provinces. He didn‟t have anything good to say 

about what Alberta had done, and now he‟s standing up less 

than a year later — these quotes come from April of 2010 — 

less than a year later he‟s standing up saying that we need to 

change the way that we‟re doing business in this province. And 

at the same time, the NDP seemed to be saying that this isn‟t 

going to affect us. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it is absolutely going to affect us. And that 

has nothing to do with fearmongering. Again less than a year 

ago, April of 2010, he was praising our Energy minister and he 

said, and I quote, “And to give credit, and I do give credit to the 

minister for the fact that he didn‟t change and hasn‟t proposed 

changes to the royalties that were in place when this 

government was elected in 2007.” 

 

He was praising our government for the stability that we are 

offering business and industry in this province, Mr. Speaker. So 

what has changed? The only thing that I can understand that has 

changed on the NDP side is that we‟ve got an election coming 

up and they want to pad the coffers so they can pay for new 

election promises. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when they had money the last time, they 

didn‟t do anything. Mr. Calvert stood up in this House in 2007 

and said over and over and over again that they left $2 billion in 

the bank. Yet just three days ago the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview said that they couldn‟t do anything about the hospital 

in North Battleford because they didn‟t have any money. She‟s 

completely contradicting the position of her former leader who 

said they left us money. So if the NDP left us money to the tune 

of $2 billion, why didn‟t they do anything to invest in schools 

and hospitals and roads and long-term care in this province, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, do you know why? Because they had absolutely 

no vision for our province. They didn‟t believe that we could 

grow. They were planning for decline. That‟s why our schools 

are falling apart, our hospitals are falling apart, and our roads 

are crumbling. They didn‟t think that we were going to grow, 

Mr. Speaker, so they kept all the money in the bank and didn‟t 

invest it in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we are committed to 

investing in Saskatchewan, in the people of Saskatchewan and 

our infrastructure, to make sure that we can continue to move 

forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite had just stood up and quoted 

from a bunch of different people about the royalty structure in 

our province. I‟ve already quoted from his very own previous 

leader and his current leader as to the benefit of the current 

royalty structure. But Ken Rasmussen, a U of R public policy 

analyst, said this, and I quote: 

 

If you want to collect more royalties, I guess you can. But 

you will be limited to the existing levels of production. 

You won‟t see much new investment and you won‟t see 

the kinds of growth that we‟ve witnessed in the potash 

sector. So it really depends on what you want. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I really think that goes to the point of this matter: 

what do you want? Our side of the House wants to see our 

province grow. We want to see investment. We want to see 

jobs. 

 

And according to Ken Rasmussen — not us, Mr. Speaker, but 

this is an independent public policy analyst — who said that if 

these changes are made that the NDP are proposing, that we 

will see limited investment and we‟ll probably see decline as 

well, which is not something, Mr. Speaker, that we want to see. 

 

Nesbitt Burns analyst Joel Jackson said, just in January: 

 

You have to be careful because if the government was to 

revise the potash royalties and make them prohibitive for 

producers to start greenfield mines because you make the 

profitability of those mines lower, the province could 

jeopardize billions [not millions, billions] of dollars of 

greenfield investment by global companies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen the commitment by companies like 

BHP [BHP Billiton] who are willing to come into this province, 

invest billions of dollars in this province which will result in 

hundreds and thousands of jobs for our province, Mr. Speaker. 

And we are not willing to jeopardize that as the NDP is. 

 

And the member opposite has also said that this isn‟t going to 

apply to any other resource in our province. Well of course not, 

Mr. Speaker, because the NDP actually just want to nationalize 

the other industries and tax this one so that it doesn‟t grow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people who are directly affected by potash 

have also come out with their concerns. There‟s been letters 

written to the Leader of the Opposition voicing those concerns. 

One of them comes from Malcolm Eaton, the mayor of the city 

of Humboldt, who says, and I quote: 



6630 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2011 

We are very concerned about recent discussions regarding 

changes to the taxation and royalty agreements that are in 

place. We believe the uncertainty that these discussions 

create will have an adverse effect on the investment 

climate and consequently affect our ability to take 

advantage of the opportunities that the current growth of 

the potash industry is presenting to us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the mayor of Colonsay, James Gray, said, and I 

quote: 

 

Our community is seeing growth largely due to the potash 

industry, and we don‟t want to lose residents and future 

housing because of issues between the potash companies 

and the provincial government. We want Saskatchewan to 

remain the place to be for all and don‟t think raising 

royalties is a way to encourage this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s not just us. It‟s not just the Saskatchewan 

Party government who is against the raising or the changing of 

royalties when it comes to potash. It is public policy analysts. 

It‟s economists. It‟s the people who are directly affected, the 

people on the ground, Mr. Speaker. And I think, as I said, it‟s 

incumbent upon any provincial government to offer stability. 

It‟s incumbent upon us to offer competitive jurisdiction. As I 

said, these companies don‟t have to be here. They could go to 

other places and invest there, Mr. Speaker. But they‟re 

choosing to be here, and we welcome them here, as opposed to 

the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it‟s truly 

a delight to be able to second the motion from the member from 

Prince Albert Northcote: 

 

That this Assembly urge the government to represent 

Saskatchewan families by ensuring a fair return for their 

potash resource; and further, 

 

That this Assembly urge the government to support a 

review of royalty rates that would benefit Saskatchewan 

families. 

 

I am very happy that I get to enter into this debate today, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP believes that Saskatchewan people 

deserve a fair return on our potash resource. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

the Premier has been speaking out of both sides of his mouth on 

the issue. On one hand he is talking to the national stage and the 

global stage, quite frankly, about the fact that potash in 

Saskatchewan is a strategic resource. And, Mr. Speaker, 

furthermore, when we have the member that just spoke, Mr. 

Speaker, talking about the fact that companies will go 

elsewhere, it‟s quite interesting that that notion is even brought 

up by the previous member, Mr. Speaker, given that we in 

Saskatchewan own 50 per cent of the potash reserves in the 

world, Mr. Speaker. So perhaps that information needs to be 

disseminated amongst the Sask Party opposite as well, so they 

understand the advantage that Saskatchewan has. It‟s a strategic 

resource in Saskatchewan for many reasons, not the least of 

which is that we own 50 per cent of the world‟s reserves of 

potash, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The NDP believes that when potash companies are making 

billions of dollars in profits from our potash and paying just 5 

cents on the dollar in royalties, it‟s time for a royalty review to 

ensure that the owners of the resource, which are Saskatchewan 

people, Mr. Speaker, are getting their fair share. 

 

The NDP believes that higher royalties and a fair return on our 

potash will make more resources available for other things that 

will benefit all of us in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And let‟s 

just list a few of those: affordable housing, assistance for 

farmers who are facing rising input costs, improved public 

health care, improved senior care, better roads and highways, 

early learning and child care, debt reduction, reduced tuition, 

education funding. I could go on and on and on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The needs in this province are great, as they are in any 

province, Mr. Speaker, and therefore it‟s incumbent upon the 

Government of Saskatchewan and the representatives of the 

Government of Saskatchewan and the lead representative, being 

the Premier of Saskatchewan, to do everything he can on behalf 

of the people of Saskatchewan. And that means making sure 

that we are seeing the returns that we should be getting from the 

resources that we own, especially a strategic resource like 

potash, Mr. Speaker. When we own 50 per cent of the world‟s 

reserves, business is not going to be going elsewhere, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP believes that if the Potash Corporation 

has enough money to give one individual, being the CEO of 

PotashCorp, approximately $500 million, it has enough to pay a 

little more in royalties, Mr. Speaker. But what has the Wall 

government said, Mr. Speaker? The Wall government has said 

unequivocally no. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

Ms. Morin: — Sorry. The Sask Party has said unequivocally 

no. They said that we‟re not going to look at doing a royalty 

review for four terms, Mr. Speaker. That amounts to 16 years. 

Now I know that the Sask Party government is fixated on the 

term 16 years, Mr. Speaker. They‟re fixated on that term 

because the NDP was in government for 16 years prior to the 

Sask Party getting elected. But now they‟re fixated on the 16 

years, being that that‟s when they‟re looking at potentially 

doing a royalty review on behalf of the citizens of the province 

of Saskatchewan. And it‟s unconscionable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And let‟s talk about the fact that the previous member talked 

about, that these policies were put into place by the NDP. 

Absolutely they were put into place by the NDP. And why? It 

was to stimulate the economy. 

 

The NDP government in 1991 was left with a $15 billion debt 

by some of those individuals that are sitting across the way, Mr. 

Speaker — $15 billion debt. We were on the verge of 

bankruptcy in this province, Mr. Speaker. So what did the NDP 

have to do since 1991, Mr. Speaker? It had to do all sorts of 

interesting and creative things to ensure that we didn‟t have to 

declare bankruptcy, Mr. Speaker. It also had to make sure that 

we implemented policies that made Saskatchewan more 



March 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6631 

attractive than any other province to ensure that the economy in 

Saskatchewan was stimulated to its maximum potential, Mr. 

Speaker. That‟s why the NDP put those policies in place. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the industry themselves, the industry itself is 

saying that there is a new norm, Mr. Speaker. There‟s a new 

norm, and that new norm means that there is high profitability 

in potash, Mr. Speaker, which also means that there should a 

royalty review of potash royalties in the province of 

Saskatchewan to ensure that the people of Saskatchewan are 

seeing the maximum return on the benefit of ownership of 50 

per cent of the world‟s reserves, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Wall government . . . sorry, the Sask 

Party government. Sorry, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party 

government has recently confirmed, on March 9th, 2011, in the 

Leader-Post, by the Minister of ITO [Information Technology 

Office] that, like I said, it would not review the royalty regime 

in this province for potash for four terms. And that‟s as recent 

as March 9th, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in 2010 PotashCorp alone made $1.8 billion 

from potash sales in Saskatchewan, but paid only $77 million to 

the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, $77 million, 5 cents 

on the dollar is what people of Saskatchewan are seeing on their 

strategic resource, on the resource that they own that‟s 50 per 

cent of the world‟s reserves, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that‟s why the NDP wants to see a royalty review in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in fiscal 2009-2010 potash royalties were actually 

negative. The Government of Saskatchewan, the Sask Party 

government, had to pay back over $200 million in potash 

royalties to the companies that mine potash, Mr. Speaker. Now 

instead of Saskatchewan people reaping the benefit of their 

strategic resource, as the Premier calls it, and instead of people 

in Saskatchewan seeing a return on a strategic resource that 

they own 50 per cent of the world‟s reserves, they ended up 

having to pay $200 million back to those companies because of 

what happened in 2009, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote a few people because the 

Sask Party government is keen on quoting individuals who 

have a petition to support them, so that they‟re not standing 

alone out there against the people of Saskatchewan who feel 

quite differently than the Government of Saskatchewan. And, 

Mr. Speaker, Rick Swenson, whom they already quoted, says 

this . . . He‟s the leader of the Saskatchewan Progressive 

Conservative Party, to which the Sask Party government holds 

the magic key on the $3 million trust fund, which they‟re not 

allowing the Progressive Conservatives to get their hands on so 

that they can actually participate in the democratic process in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And he says this, that “The government needs to negotiate a 

new deal on potash to ensure that the owners of the resources, 

the people of Saskatchewan, get their fair share of the resource 

pie.” Mr. Speaker, and that‟s from a right-wing Progressive 

Conservative Party, which they love to tout themselves as 

representing, despite the fact that the only thing they represent 

is big business. And they don‟t worry one bit about the people 

of Saskatchewan, while Rick Swenson actually has a 

conscience about the people of Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, Jack Vicq, Jack Vicq, in talking about a potash 

royalty review that could potentially pay for tax cuts, says this, 

“There would certainly be some people, not business people I 

don‟t think, who would say Saskatchewan is not getting its fair 

rewards from resource revenues.” This comes from 

SaskBusiness Magazine of January-February of 2011. And 

that‟s Jack Vicq who they also like to quote. Well we like to 

quote Jack Vicq as well, and that‟s what he has to say, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let‟s talk about Jack Mintz. That‟s another 

Jack that they like to quote, Mr. Speaker. And Jack Mintz is 

from the University of Calgary, describes the province‟s current 

potash royalty system as “just wrong,” Mr. Speaker. And this 

was in The StarPhoenix in February 17th of 2011. Now let‟s 

also talk about Sylvain Charlebois, former U of R [University 

of Regina] business prof who says, “A review of the province‟s 

royalty structure is „dearly needed‟ . . .” From The StarPhoenix 

of February 17th, 2011. 

 

[11:15] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I‟m running out of time; I have 44 seconds 

left. And there are so many more individuals, third party 

individuals who are experts on taxation issues, on the issue of 

potash in the province, Mr. Speaker, that I could go on and on. 

But I‟m going to leave you with the workers, the potash 

workers, Mr. Speaker, and they‟re saying this: 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan should revise its 

royalty regime to ensure that companies pay the province 

a fair price for every tonne of potash extracted. 

 

The workers who mine potash and the citizens who own it 

deserve better. 

 

And that‟s from the United Steelworkers of America, Mr. 

Speaker, and it‟s Ken Neumann who‟s the national director. 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Well, thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. And it‟s certainly a pleasure to enter into this debate. 

You know, Mr. Speaker, it‟s very interesting to watch how the 

opposition is starting to operate or continues to operate, and 

particularly in these days as we‟re getting closer to this fall‟s 

general election. They read the polls the same as the people of 

this province and we do. They see that in the polls that their 

numbers are heading south; they‟re tanking. And so what 

they‟ve done and where they are now — at least I believe they 

are — is they‟re in desperation mode, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we just heard the member opposite talking about referring 

back to the ‟80s. Well in all of my years in this House 

whenever the NDP were in desperation mode and they felt that 

they were backed into a corner, they would bring out the 1980s 

blues song. You know, they‟d blame everything on the 

Conservative Grant Devine government, and they‟d sing the 

1980s blues, and it was always their fault and so on. And Mr. 

Swenson, that they quoted here today, was part of that 

organization and so on, and so as I said they definitely are in 



6632 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2011 

desperation mode. 

 

And so what are they doing? They‟re reaching back into the 

‟70s, Mr. Speaker. And for those people that remember back 

into the ‟70s, they saw this new industry growing here in 

Saskatchewan, the potash industry and they said, well listen, 

only government can get things right in this province. And so 

what did they do? They went ahead and they nationalized the 

potash industry. And how did that work for them, Mr. Speaker? 

Well history will tell us it didn‟t work very well. So eventually 

when the people of the province could see that, and they said, 

listen, we need new administration. We need to fix this. We 

need to turn this around. And so the potash industry was 

privatized. And the bottom line is we‟ve got a thriving industry, 

a stable industry that‟s making massive investments in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And these people now, in desperation mode, are going back to 

the ‟70s and saying, hey, you know, I mean they‟re saying, let‟s 

just have a review. Well I think that‟s just opening the can a 

wee bit, Mr. Speaker. I think in their desperation they‟ve got 

more things in mind. 

 

And what is this doing, Mr. Speaker? It is sending the wrong 

message, just like the wrong message they sent in the ‟70s 

when they nationalized this industry and sent the wrong 

message to investment of any kind in this province from around 

the world. And if we let them continue with this foolishness and 

people aren‟t buying into it, Mr. Speaker, we could have the 

same sort of problems here. 

 

Nobody‟s saying that the people of this province don‟t deserve 

a return on their resources. And they are getting that; we are 

using the royalty structure that was put in place by the Calvert 

government. And what did the current Leader of the Opposition 

say, as my colleague mentioned, just less than a year ago? He 

was in committee, in the Economy committee. And I think I‟ll 

just quote it again. The Leader of the Opposition says this, 

“And I think there was a huge flow of investment into 

Saskatchewan after the Stelmach government . . . [and] their 

ill-advised royalty changes.” 

 

Later on in committee, the Leader of the Opposition said this. 

He said: 

 

. . . the stability in Saskatchewan under the Romanow 

leadership, and Lorne Calvert, and now our Premier 

leaving it in place has led to a stability regime that is 

really known across the country. And to give credit, and I 

do give credit to the minister for the fact that he didn‟t . . . 

and hasn‟t proposed changes to the royalties that were put 

in place when this government was elected in 2007. 

 

That is Economy Committee out of Hansard on April the 20th, 

2010. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what has changed? The only thing that has 

changed is we‟re getting close to election. Their party isn‟t 

getting any traction out there. They‟re heading in the wrong 

direction, so they‟re going for a Hail Mary pass here, Mr. 

Speaker. And I can tell you, it‟s not working because they 

haven‟t done their homework for one thing. I was listening 

earlier to the member from Prince Albert Northcote who stood 

in his place. He‟s the critic of Energy and Resources. He‟s 

supposed to have done all his homework and he boldly 

proclaims, here in the House, that Saskatchewan doesn‟t use 

any potash. Farmers in Saskatchewan don‟t use any potash. 

 

Well I can tell you there‟s nothing further from the truth, Mr. 

Speaker. I want to tell him that farmers of Saskatchewan do use 

potash in their production. If he was reading the papers recently 

in the last couple of days, you would know that the maltsters of 

Canada are saying, there‟s really going to be a problem in 

getting quality malt barley and that‟s going to translate into the 

increase in their product. The beer prices are going to increase. 

 

Where‟s the tie-in between potash and beer? If that member had 

done any homework and if his caucus researchers would have 

helped him with this, he would know that potash is an essential 

nutrient for plant growth. And it‟s particularly essential for 

barley production; if you want quality barley, you use potash to 

make sure that you get good quality malt barley. 

 

So they haven‟t done much homework on this issue, Mr. 

Speaker. They‟re in desperation mode and they‟re going for a 

Hail Mary pass. They talk about Saskatchewan‟s low royalty 

rates. Well if you do a comparison, if you do your homework 

and look at the facts, our royalty rates are 22 per cent. The next 

highest jurisdiction, which is the country of Jordan, is 11 per 

cent. The UK [United Kingdom] and the US [United States] are 

down in that 3 or 4 per cent. 

 

The member from Regina Walsh Acres talked about we‟ve got 

potash all sewed up and it‟s not going anywhere and we should 

be able to tax the devil out of it and that sort of thing. Well 

that‟s not reality. We have 50 per cent of the known reserves, 

but I‟m looking at a list of potential potash expansion projects 

from around the world. And just some of the countries that I 

would like to mention at this time is China happens to have 

potash. Russia has potash. Argentina has potash. Brazil has 

potash. China has potash. There‟s projects happening in the US. 

There‟s projects happening in Australia. 

 

Do you think for a minute that if we get our royalty structures 

and our taxation structures way out of line, that these 

companies aren‟t going to move to where there‟s more suitable 

and more favourable and fairer tax and royalty structures? I 

think they‟ve done it in the past. They‟ll do it again, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And then they don‟t even talk about the amount of corporate 

and income tax that‟s generated by that industry, Mr. Speaker. 

They totally ignore that. They take one little thing out of 

context, again because they‟re in desperation mode, Mr. 

Speaker, and they‟re hoping that they can ride that one-pony 

story to at least have some sort of success in the next election. 

 

Well I‟m going to tell you something. The people of the 

province see through their foolishness, Mr. Speaker. All we 

need to do is look at the letters condemning their position, Mr. 

Speaker, that are coming forward from mayors of communities 

whose communities are in the potash belt. These people know 

what‟s happening. They know what‟s fair. They see the jobs 

and the people in their communities that are working in the 

industry and the additional jobs that are in the industry and, Mr. 

Speaker, they don‟t want any part of their position. So I would 



March 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6633 

suggest, Mr. Speaker, to the members opposite that they should 

do their homework. They should know that potash is being used 

in Saskatchewan by Saskatchewan farmers, that the industry is 

creating jobs. 

 

On the weekend, this past weekend, Mr. Speaker, I was on the 

Yellowhead Highway driving past Jansen. And I happened to 

see the BHP Billiton‟s sign saying the mining location, 

proposed mining location is just a little north of the 

Yellowhead. So I turned off and I drove up there just to see 

what‟s happening up there. Well, Mr. Speaker, I was quite 

amazed at what‟s happening up there. 

 

There was four drilling rigs that — this is a Sunday afternoon 

— there‟s four drilling rigs working. There was a number of 

vehicles on the road. In fact there‟s a speed zone on a grid road 

alongside this construction site because of the traffic that‟s on 

there. There‟s a lot of economic activity just starting to take 

place. There will be a lot more when they actually start sinking 

the shaft. They‟re currently, I understand, drilling to freeze the 

ground so that they don‟t have water coming in when they start 

drilling the shaft. This is an example of what‟s happening. 

 

I understand that the community of Leroy has had to develop 

more lots and to provide homes. Wynyard, Lanigan, I know that 

BHP Billiton is working with First Nations in my constituency 

to develop their workforce for the future. Those are the 

benefits, Mr. Speaker, that these people see ignored. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my 

pleasure to weigh in on debate here today on a matter that‟s 

most important to Saskatchewan people. I‟m certainly going to 

be speaking in favour of the motion put forward by the member 

from Prince Albert Northcote. I‟ll read that motion at this point 

in time: 

 

That this Assembly urge the government to represent 

Saskatchewan families by ensuring a fair return for their 

potash resource; and further, 

 

That this Assembly urge the government to support a 

review of royalty rates that would benefit Saskatchewan 

families. 

 

I find it troubling. I find it surprising. I find it disappointing that 

the government would be of a different mind, of a different 

opinion on this front, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is not an ideological debate, Mr. Speaker. This is not a 

debate that has anything to do with election timing. It‟s a debate 

that should stay away from the goofy fearmongering that we‟re 

hearing opposite, Mr. Speaker, and it should be focused on 

principles of fairness, of equity, and of balance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what we need to recognize, Mr. Speaker, is that this is the 

furthest thing from an ideological or political discussion. What 

we see is that experts and political leaders from across the 

political spectrum — from centre, from left to right across the 

piece, Mr. Speaker — we‟re seeing that they support fairness in 

Saskatchewan, that they‟re calling for this review of our potash 

royalty rates, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The question is, and we‟ve seen members opposite . . . In fact 

the member from Lloydminster and the Minister of Energy and 

the current Premier of the Sask Party have highlighted that 

they‟re not going to review potash royalties for four terms, Mr. 

Speaker, that they‟re going to be stuck in cement as an industry 

and a world market evolves and changes, leaving Saskatchewan 

people with dust, leaving the fair and equitable return that they 

so deserve out of their reach, Mr. Speaker. Sixteen years, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And let me just highlight a very distinct difference. We‟re 

calling for a review and an increase to potash royalties, Mr. 

Speaker. What we‟re not, what we‟re not calling for, Mr. 

Speaker, is that to be reflected onto oil, Mr. Speaker, because 

it‟s a very different resource, Mr. Speaker. Oil is a very 

different resource, oil and gas, Mr. Speaker. And in fact we 

think we have a balance that‟s working quite well — a fair 

balance, Mr. Speaker, that was developed by New Democrats, 

Mr. Speaker, put forward. 

 

The reason I say that, the interesting thing about oil, Mr. 

Speaker, is that as we see oil price move along, Mr. Speaker . . . 

And it‟s unfortunate circumstances that‟s driving that price of 

late. But as we see oil price move along, we recognize that a 

benefit increases to Saskatchewan people, directly into the 

coffers of their government to be invested back into 

Saskatchewan families — almost $20 million in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, on an incremental increase of $1 for a barrel of oil, 

Mr. Speaker. It‟s a very different resource and should be treated 

as such. 

 

I believe Saskatchewan produces about one-half of one per cent 

of the world‟s oil, Mr. Speaker. And there‟s mobile capital in 

that industry, very different than what we have in potash where 

we‟re mining, Mr. Speaker, where we have 50 per cent of the 

world‟s resource and we have 30 per cent of the world‟s 

production, Mr. Speaker. So a very different circumstance. 

 

So what we‟re talking about here today is standing up for 

Saskatchewan people, standing up for Saskatchewan 

communities, Mr. Speaker, who aren‟t getting their fair share 

out of their most prosperous resource, that being potash, Mr. 

Speaker. For the members to stand up opposite and not to 

review royalties and to leave it right now where we get pennies 

on the dollar — 5 cents on the dollar, Mr. Speaker, for our 

potash — and to leave the burden on Saskatchewan people, Mr. 

Speaker, is unfair. And the fact, Mr. Speaker . . . And the 

member from Weyburn Big-Muddy can shout from his seat all 

he wants, Mr. Speaker, but what he should, what he should 

recognize is that when you don‟t collect the fair rent, Mr. 

Speaker, collect the fair dollar in royalties for Saskatchewan 

people, you in fact create an inequity across Saskatchewan. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Because if we‟re not collecting the rightful amount from the 

most prosperous resource in our province, from prosperous 

companies that we want to continue to see be prosperous, Mr. 

Speaker, we‟re putting a burden unfairly on families, on 

individuals, by way of income tax, Mr. Speaker, by way of 

property tax, Mr. Speaker, by way of small-business taxation, 



6634 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2011 

Mr. Speaker. If you‟re not collecting your fair share from that 

most prosperous industry, Mr. Speaker, our most prosperous 

resource, our strategic resource, you‟re failing Saskatchewan 

people. Failing to stand up for Saskatchewan people is in no 

way responsive to what we see going on in our province. And I 

hear the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood talking about 

the Jansen project. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I‟d ask the member 

from, or the Minister Responsible for Crown Corporations to 

state his point of order. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, for two times in the last 

minute, the member making a speech has referred to the 

presence of a member on this side of the House. I believe the 

rule states you may not comment on the presence or absence of 

a member in the Chamber and I would ask that he more 

carefully give the speech that he‟s intending. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I thank the Minster of Crown Corporations 

for his point of order. And the minister is absolutely correct. If 

the member has referred to the absence or presence of a 

member, that is inappropriate. And I would ask the member 

from Regina Rosemont to follow the rules and procedures of 

the Assembly. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can 

understand the uneasiness too, to not, to pretend that one wasn‟t 

maybe part of this debate on that side of the Assembly, one 

that‟s most critical for Saskatchewan people and then one that‟s 

critical, Mr. Speaker, to providing fairness to Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

As I‟ve said, there‟s many business leaders, economists, 

politicians from across the spectrum who have weighed in on 

this debate, Mr. Speaker. And I can think of tax specialist and 

somebody who has certainly has high regard in Saskatchewan, 

business leader Jack Mintz, who has described the current 

system, and this is from The StarPhoenix of February 17th, 

2011: “. . . describes the province‟s current potash royalty 

system as „just wrong.‟” 

 

Just wrong, Mr. Speaker. That‟s coming from Jack Mintz, one 

of the most reasonable individuals and experts in the field of 

taxation. What Mr. Mintz, I suspect, recognizes is that if we 

don‟t collect the fair dollar that we should from potash, but yet 

we go to income tax of families and individuals and property 

tax on businesses and families, Mr. Speaker, that that‟s an 

inequity. Because if we‟re not collecting our fair share from the 

most prosperous industry in our province and asking for 

Saskatchewan people to pay for the growth that we‟re 

experiencing within Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that‟s simply 

unfair. 

 

It goes on. Jack Mintz, I quote, “Regardless of whether BHP 

buys PotashCorp or not, the Saskatchewan government should 

reform its potash royalty to reduce its complexity and minimize 

distortions.” That‟s from The Financial Post on October 14th, 

2010. 

 

I want to highlight a business leader from across Canada and 

certainly a business leader here in Saskatchewan, Sylvain 

Charlebois, a former U of R business prof, Mr. Speaker, and I‟ll 

quote, “A review of province‟s royalty structure is „dearly 

needed.‟” That‟s from The StarPhoenix on February 17th, 2011. 

A business leader that‟s renowned in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, that certainly isn‟t affiliated in any political manner 

with our party, Mr. Speaker, that simply is representing 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And I‟ll highlight Mr. Erin Weir, an economist, senior 

economist with the United Nations, Mr. Speaker, and I would 

quote, “Saskatchewan is collecting far too little revenue from 

potash.” That‟s from The StarPhoenix on February 10th, 2011. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a pretty clear-cut case and we need to see 

action from government. The fact that this government is 

cemented in its position and irresponsive to the game-changing 

environment that has occurred in potash from a global 

perspective, Mr. Speaker, does not serve Saskatchewan people 

well. 

 

The member from Last Mountain-Touchwood talks about the 

Jansen mine and the excitement that exists in that region, and 

he is correct about that excitement, Mr. Speaker. There‟s also 

diligent planning that‟s required in each of those communities 

to lay out the infrastructure — hard, physical, and social, Mr. 

Speaker — to meet the needs of that mine, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well who is going to do that without collecting our fair dollar 

for our potash resource, Mr. Speaker? This government, this 

Sask Party government, and this weak Premier, Mr. Speaker, 

are failing Saskatchewan people on this front, Mr. Speaker. 

What we need to recognize is we have a taxing inequity in this 

province. We need to make sure that we do a review and get the 

dollar right and make sure we collect a fair share from our 

dollar. Because quite simply, Mr. Speaker, from our potash 

resource, our most prosperous resource, 5 cents on the dollar 

doesn‟t cut it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What could we do with those sorts of dollars? Well we could 

address inequities across this province. We could invest in a 

significant way in communities, in families, in child care, in all 

sorts of programs that are required for Saskatchewan people. 

We could address the taxation inequity that exists, Mr. Speaker, 

for families and for individuals and for small business, Mr. 

Speaker. Failing to do so fails Saskatchewan people. The 

numbers are crystal clear, Mr. Speaker. We can dial back our 

numbers almost a decade and the fact remains that when price 

was a fraction of what it is today, the revenues to government 

were the same, Mr. Speaker. That‟s not fair and it‟s not right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan New Democrats have a proud 

economic record working with industry to develop an economy, 

Mr. Speaker, to understand their needs, but to represent and 

have a backbone to collect fairly the resource and the benefit 

for Saskatchewan people, to put it back into making sure that 

quality of life across this province improves, Mr. Speaker. 

Failing to collect the fair dollar we should from this most 

prosperous resource is a shame, Mr. Speaker, and we‟re going 

to adamantly ensure this government reverses this decision. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to speak to this here 



March 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6635 

today, and we look forward to questions in the coming minutes. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a delight to be 

able to speak to this topic, to this motion. I certainly will not be 

supporting the NDP‟s motion. And I‟ll give you many reasons 

why our government will not be raising royalty rates, which 

will stifle investment in this province. I‟d like to start by 

quoting Eric Anderson, who made comments on NewsWatch 

Saskatchewan this morning. And I quote Mr. Anderson: 

 

Over a four-year span from 2005 through 2009, 

PotashCorp paid about $1.5 billion in taxes in 

Saskatchewan. But over the next four years, starting last 

spring until 2014, PotashCorp forecasts they‟ll pay about 

$4 billion in taxes in Saskatchewan, almost triple their 

previous four-year span. And the expansion projects will 

see about $1 billion spent per year in Saskatchewan for the 

four consecutive years of 2009 through 2012. It is like the 

mother of all economic stimulus packages, but using 

money derived from other countries. 

 

Finally, 10 years ago PotashCorp employed about 1,100 

people in Saskatchewan. In a couple of years, they should 

hit about 2,500 people. That is more than double from just 

10 years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s why we will be not tinkering with the 

royalty rates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan know where 

the government and NDP stand on the issue of potash royalty 

reviews. Our government seeks to ensure a stable and 

responsible investment climate where the people of this 

province get a fair share for their resources. And the private 

sector can be certain that their multi-billion-dollar investments 

in Saskatchewan‟s resource sector will be respected. On the 

other hand, you have the NDP, who want to shake down 

profitable enterprises with their job-killing resource tax. Yes, 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP has devised a thousand and one ways to 

drag this province back to the reckless NDP policies of the 

1970s. 

 

So there you have it, Mr. Speaker. On one hand, our 

government wants to grow Saskatchewan‟s resource sector to 

attracting investment and respecting existing agreements, 

royalty and taxation policies. And then you have the NDP and 

their job-killing resource tax. This is hyperbole, Mr. Speaker. It 

is an appropriate description for the NDP‟s proposal. 

 

But there‟s more to this issue than a policy disagreement 

between a responsible government that wants to move this 

province forward and an opposition that wants to back the clock 

on Saskatchewan‟s success story. 

 

Our government has received plenty of correspondence from 

actual stakeholders, and they all agree that NDP‟s job-killing 

resource tax is bad for this province. First I would like to read a 

letter from the mayor of Humboldt on behalf of the city. Mr. 

Malcolm Eaton writes, I quote: 

 

The city of Humboldt is at the centre of a vibrant, growing 

economic region in Saskatchewan. The potash mining 

industry is a key element in the continued growth and 

development of our city and region. 

 

He also goes on to say: 

 

We have been working very closely with BHP 

development process and are involved in several major 

growth planning initiatives as a result. Many of our local 

businesses are planning for renovations and expansions. 

New business ventures are evident throughout the city. 

We are working with several private, residential, 

commercial, and light industrial enterprises that are 

considering investing in our community. The city is 

reviewing the feasibility of several large-scale projects 

and investing in major infrastructure improvements and 

new developments. All of the communities in our region 

are working on plans to address the emerging labour 

needs, housing needs, and support services for our 

growing population. 

 

Mr. Eaton goes on to state the fact that: 

 

The potash mines in our area include PCS Lanigan, 

Mosaic Colonsay, PCS Allan. PCS Lanigan and the new 

BHP Jansen mine project are both within 30 minutes of 

Humboldt, and many employees live in Humboldt and 

area. The confidence and optimism that is evident in our 

region is vital to the success of our community‟s growth 

and development plans. 

 

We are very concerned about recent discussions regarding 

changes to the taxation or royalty agreements that are in 

place. We believe the uncertainty that these discussions 

create will have an adverse effect on the investment 

climate and a consequential effect on ability to take of the 

opportunities of the current growth of the potash mining 

industry is presenting us. The economic downturn in the 

global economy in 2009 and the recent debate regarding 

BHP Billiton‟s bid to purchase PCS definitely causes 

some concerns and uncertainty in our region. 

 

When BHP reiterated that their commitment to the 

development of the Jansen project and PCS brought 

forward its pledge to Saskatchewan, the concerns and 

uncertainty that was replaced by renewed optimism. We 

believe there is a need for the period of stability to support 

the growth and the development of potash industry in our 

province and allow our communities to attract the interest 

and confidence of new residents and new business 

ventures. Discussions regarding changes in royalty and 

taxation policy should not be brought forward in the midst 

of this significant growth phase. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here we have a well-articulated letter from 

someone who represents a great swath of people who will be 

directly harmed by NDP‟s job-killing resource tax. Yet in spite 

of the many, many valid points raised by the good people of 

Humboldt, the NDP wants to power ahead with their reckless 

job-killing resource tax. 

 

Why, Mr. Speaker, why would the NDP opposition insist on 

such counterproductive policies? The mayor of Humboldt 



6636 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2011 

represents the general sense of optimism in this province and, 

quite frankly, one could argue that Humboldt is the ground zero 

in this potash debate. The progress being made by Humboldt is 

representative of a province that is moving forward on all 

fronts. The only thing not moving forward are the political 

fortunes of the NDP, which is exactly why they want to 

undermine all the progress being made throughout the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also have another mayor from the town of 

Colonsay writing about his constituents‟ concerns. In Mayor 

James Gray‟s letter dated March 7th, 2011, he writes: 

 

Dear Mr. Boyd, 

 

This letter is to advise you that I am not in favour of 

raising the royalties on potash in Saskatchewan. Business 

agreements to set priority royalties were made between the 

province and the potash companies, and I do not think the 

government should renege on those agreements now. 

 

Mayor Gray goes on to write that: 

 

Our community is seeing growth largely due to the potash 

industry, and we don‟t want to lose residents and future 

housing because of issues between potash companies and 

the provincial government. We want Saskatchewan to 

remain the place to be all and don‟t think raising royalties 

is the way to encourage this. 

 

He ends by saying, “Please consider these concerns and don‟t 

raise the royalties on potash.” 

 

[11:45] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it is quite clear that the people of Humboldt 

and Colonsay are united in their opposition to the NDP‟s 

job-killing resource tax. If the NDP would just get past their 

own ill-informed talking points, they would realize that the 

province has nothing to gain through the job-killing resource 

tax. 

 

But the NDP‟s reckless job-killing resource tax extends beyond 

potash. A recent letter from the president of the Saskatchewan 

Mining Association urged our government to dismiss the 

NDP‟s job-killing resource tax and here is why, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. David Neuburger wrote that: 

 

The world demand for energy, food, and natural resources 

made Saskatchewan an attractive place for investment. 

The SMA conducted a study in 2009 and identified 

approximately $43 billion of direct investment of its 

member companies over the next 20 years. 

 

I‟d like to paraphrase something the late, great Ronald Reagan, 

former U.S. President, said. The NDP operates in this manner: 

if it moves, tax it. If it keeps moving, double-tax it. And if it 

still keeps moving, conduct a review to see how much more 

you can tax it before it stops moving. That‟s what the NDP are 

doing with their discussions about raising royalty rates. They 

are going to tax business out of this province and chase an 

investment away, like the Stelmach government did when they 

increased royalty rates on their oil industry. That investment 

came to Saskatchewan. We‟re not going to make the same 

mistake. We want to attract investment. We want to attract 

investment for jobs in this province and for the royalties that 

these businesses pay so we can have, so we have money . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Time has elapsed on the 

65-minute debate. We‟ll move into the 10-minute question 

period. I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is interesting, a 

number of rural members getting up to speak. Yesterday in 

question period, the Leader of the Opposition . . . Or two days 

ago in question period, the Leader of the Opposition asked the 

Minister of Agriculture why crop insurance premiums are going 

up 21 per cent, but this province, the Sask Party, won‟t even 

consider a 1 cent increase in the royalties from potash, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I ask the minister from Biggar, or the member from Biggar, two 

questions, Mr. Speaker. The first one is, how does he jive 21 

per cent up in crop insurance and no review of potash revenues? 

And secondly, the member and I were in North Battleford at a 

meeting of the joint school boards, Mr. Speaker. The school 

boards said we need equity financing in education. The member 

from Biggar said, potash revenues are up; you should get some 

help this year. How does he jive his thoughts about potash 

revenue, education, and his discrepancy in comments? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m glad to answer that question. 

This government invites investment in this province. We invite 

the potash companies and the oil industry and other mining 

sector to this province. We set up a royalty rate and taxation 

rates that they can work within and we obviously take that 

money to fund education. We‟ve increased education funding 

dramatic — 14.7 per cent. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting that they‟re talking about 

agriculture. Their member from P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote, 

he said that no farmer in Saskatchewan uses any potash in the 

province. He needs to do better research. He should talk to the 

Leader of the Opposition who claims to be a farmer. He‟s got 

ads in the paper that Saskatchewan farmers do use potash in this 

province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Alberta witnessed an 

exodus of jobs, investment, and revenue when their government 

disrupted the existing royalty structures in place. As a result of 

the Alberta government‟s initiative, jobs, investment, and 

revenue came to Saskatchewan. To the member from P.A. 

Northcote, why would you want to endanger jobs, investment, 

and revenue that would strike at the heart of Saskatchewan 

families? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — It‟s a shame that the member wasn‟t listening 

to my speech because I spent three minutes talking about and 

answering this specific question. But what I want to know from 

the member opposite is, how is it that he can ask that question? 



March 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6637 

And how is it that they can have this policy of 16 years without 

potash royalty review? How can they have that policy while the 

people of Saskatchewan are suffering? The price for rent is 

through the roof. The price for SaskPower, SaskEnergy is 

through the roof. They have no relief for rent controls. They are 

underfunding schools. The Roman Catholic School Division in 

Prince Albert is the lowest-funded school division in the 

province of Saskatchewan. How can they have this going on 

and not want to institute a royalty review in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if potash 

is a strategic resource as the Premier has touted, why is the 

government not thinking strategically, thinking about — long-

term — about the return to the people that the people of 

Saskatchewan should be getting from their resource? Why are 

they closing their eyes to long-term conditions of the new norm 

of growing demand and rising profits and leaving 

Saskatchewan people out of this opportunity for prosperity to 

fund things like the surgical care centre or correct the funding 

inequity between the Catholic and public school systems and 

other issues that are important to Saskatchewan people? The 

member from Martensville could potentially answer that 

question. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Happy to answer 

that question. Within the current royalty structure that we have 

for potash and the amount of money that the province is 

realizing in this, I‟m happy to explain to the members opposite 

what our government is doing. We currently have just under $1 

billion in our savings account. We have paid down almost 40 

per cent on our debt, all of this while record investments in 

infrastructure, in schools, in roads, in health care. We have 

lowered income taxes. There are, I think it is 92,000 people of 

the lowest-income earners in our province who no longer . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I‟d ask the member who 

just placed the question to allow the member to respond. I 

recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, we have lowered income taxes. 

I believe it‟s 92,000 low-income earners no longer pay any 

provincial income taxes. We have lowered education property 

taxes, Mr. Speaker. After this budget is introduced, the 

agriculture sector — something that the NDP have historically 

ignored — will have an 80 per cent reduction in their education 

portion of property taxes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is all within balanced budgets and without 

any royalty changes or jeopardizing investment in our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, we know that members opposite 

did not consult with the Saskatchewan Mining Association or 

the Saskatchewan Potash Producers Association, the two major 

entities most affected by their job-killing resource tax proposal. 

And the opposition ignored requests from the municipalities 

that would be most directly affected by the same resource tax. 

 

I‟d ask the member from Prince Albert Northcote to provide 

this House and the people of Saskatchewan with a list of groups 

that he and his caucus members consulted prior to creating their 

job-killing resource tax. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, we‟ve just gone through the most 

comprehensive consultation in Saskatchewan‟s history on 

politics and what people want from their government. We just 

spent six months going through a review and consulting with 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

You know who they consulted, Mr. Speaker? The Minister of 

Energy and Resources consulted on potash for the 2009 budget. 

He was off by $2 billion. Who have they consulted on a royalty 

review? The potash companies and Bill Doyle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will stand on the side of Saskatchewan people 

every time in this debate, in calling for a royalty review to 

benefit Saskatchewan people and not the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

members opposite continue to fearmonger and say that if 

there‟s a change in royalty rates in this province, that the 

mining companies will simply pick up and leave, Mr. Speaker. 

Well when you have 50 per cent of a strategic resource in the 

world, Mr. Speaker, and other countries are talking about 

moving to have 3 or 4 per cent, maybe 8 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 

could the member from Martensville please tell me how a 

mining company picks up a mine shaft and moves it to another 

country? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is correct 

that we have 50 per cent of the resource, and that means that 50 

per cent of it is someplace else. 

 

And what our government is trying to do is to make sure that 

the investment climate in this province is such that companies 

want to stay here because they do have the opportunity to invest 

someplace else. They‟re not going to pick up mine shafts, but 

they can certainly pick up their company and go to a different 

jurisdiction whether it‟s China or Russia or Australia, other 

parts of this country, the United States. They have other places 

to go, Mr. Speaker. And under the NDP we saw out-migration 

of people. We saw businesses leave. We see them coming back 

under this administration, Mr. Speaker, and we want to keep 

them here. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, during 



6638 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2011 

an Economy estimates meeting last April, the Leader of the 

Opposition stated in reference to potash royalties, and I quote: 

 

. . . the stability in Saskatchewan under the Romanow 

leadership, and Lorne Calvert, and now our Premier 

leaving it in place has led to a stability regime that is . . . 

known across the country. And to give credit, and I do 

give credit to the minister for the fact that he didn‟t 

change and hasn‟t proposed changes to the royalties that 

were in place when this government was elected in 2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the member from Regina Rosemont: why is 

your leader now flip-flopping on the royalty structure he 

appeared to be so proud of just a year ago? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for the question. 

Of course what we‟ve recognized, we‟ve had a game-changing 

environment in potash and we see a new norm in the potash 

industry. And we‟ve also consulted across Saskatchewan and 

analyzed the books, something this government fails to do. 

 

What we‟ve recognized is that Saskatchewan people are simply 

not getting their fair share of their most prosperous resource, 

and that‟s not fair to Saskatchewan people. It creates an 

absolute inequity. So as price and production skyrockets, the 

people of Saskatchewan deserve to see benefits from that as 

well, Mr. Speaker. And quite simply, they‟re not. 

 

And just in close, Mr. Speaker, it‟s fair to note that this 

government that can‟t balance its books over the last two years 

has drained $1.2 billion from our Crown corporations over that 

same period of time. In essence they‟ve got nothing from PCS 

[Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan]. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We hear 

repeatedly from the members opposite this continued 

fearmongering that if there was even a slight change in royalty 

structure that the province‟s mining companies would pick up 

and leave and they‟d go elsewhere in the country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question again to the member for Martensville: could she 

please explain to this Assembly and the people of 

Saskatchewan how they pick up the potash and leave? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, as I‟ve said, there is potash 

resources in other places . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Time. Time has elapsed on the 75-minute 

debate. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Motion No. 4 — Potash Royalties 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, there has been a lot of talk about 

potash royalties in particular, uranium royalties, oil and gas 

royalties over the last little while, Mr. Speaker. And all of that 

talk has originated from the opposition benches in this 

honourable Assembly, Mr. Speaker. Sadly a lot of that talk has 

been nothing more than rhetoric, Mr. Speaker, designed to 

bolster their sagging political futures on the eve of a provincial 

election, Mr. Speaker. And I will be trying to inject some facts 

into the debate today, Mr. Speaker, and to set the record straight 

with regard to royalties in this province and other taxes that are 

paid by our mining industries, particularly the potash mining 

industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the process of setting the record straight, I will start with a 

history lesson about the potash production tax and how it‟s a 

tax that has been deemed fair by virtually everybody who has 

reviewed it over the years, and a tax, frankly, Mr. Speaker, that 

the NDP should be able to take a great deal of credit for. 

 

The potash production tax, Mr. Speaker, was brought into effect 

in January 1st, 1990. It replaced the potash resource payment 

agreements, the PRPAs, which had been in place since 1979. 

The PRPAs required producers to make two payments: a base 

payment and a graduated payment. 

 

The base payment, Mr. Speaker, set a per tonne charge on the 

value of potash sold by the producer. It was meant to be a 

minimum amount payable to the province for the production of 

the resource, even when the producer was not profitable. The 

graduated payment was based on the profit of the producer‟s 

Saskatchewan potash operations. There were five brackets 

originally, Mr. Speaker, for the graduated payment: 10 per cent, 

20 per cent, 30 per cent, 40 per cent, and 50 per cent. 

 

The institution of the potash production tax, the PPT, ended the 

unusual and unique practice of taxation by agreement. The PPT, 

the potash production tax, was designed to function in a manner 

very similar to the PRPAs. The PPT, or potash production tax, 

also has a base payment which is a set charge on the volume of 

potash sold. The profit tax component is similar to the 

graduated payment of the PRPA, except that it initially had 

three brackets instead of five. And those three were 15 per cent, 

35 per cent, and 50 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[12:00] 

 

In the first eight years of the potash production tax, there were a 

number of small amendments to the potash production tax 

regulations, mostly to deal with some minor issues that arose in 

the administration of the tax system. 

 

In the late 1990s, the potash industry came to the Government 

of Saskatchewan with the concern that the total tax burden on 

the potash industry was such that it was next to impossible to 

justify new investment. Analysis confirmed that the maximum 

marginal tax rate for the industry exceeded 80 per cent. When 

considering its total tax burden, including federal and provincial 

corporate income tax and corporation capital tax resource 

surcharge, average tax rates — that‟s average, Mr. Speaker — 

on profits from potash operations exceeded 50 per cent in 

Saskatchewan. 



March 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6639 

In 1998 under the previous NDP administration, the following 

changes to the PPT were implemented in regulations. The 

highest profit tax bracket, 50 per cent, was eliminated leaving 

35 per cent as the top profit tax rate. The maximum base 

payment rate was frozen at its 1997 level of $12.33 per K2O 

tonne. The four different categories of mine capital were 

consolidated into one and given a 35 per cent depreciation rate. 

The categories of research and development costs eligible for a 

40 per cent tax credit were broadened and their treatment made 

more consistent. The tax treatment of various other costs and 

revenues were clarified with a number of housekeeping 

measures. A provision was made that in 2001 the first profit tax 

bracket, 15 per cent, was expanded from $35 to $40 profit per 

K2O tonne. 

 

In the early 2000s, the industry came to the government with 

the concern that the tax burden was still too high to justify new 

investment in the industry. This was an issue as potash markets 

were growing rapidly and new investment was needed in order 

to meet the increasing demand. The industry said that the 

potash divisions operated within larger corporate entities and 

had to compete with alternative investment opportunities that 

existed in other divisions of their companies. Changes would be 

made so that growth and investment was encouraged, but the 

government would retain the taxes that it collected from the 

industry up to that point. 

 

In 2003 the following changes to the PPT, the potash 

production tax, were implemented in regulation. And that‟s 

still, Mr. Speaker, under the previous NDP administration. The 

profit tax portion of the PPT was removed on sales of potash 

that were above the producers‟ average of sales in 2001 and 

2002. Producers were given an accelerated depreciation rate of 

100 per cent for capital investment in the year that was in 

excess of 90 per cent of the producers‟ capital investment in 

2002. 

 

Also under the previous NDP administration, Mr. Speaker, after 

the 2003 tax changes were implemented, the government and 

the industry agreed to discuss possible ways to further improve 

the system. 

 

In 2005 the following changes to the potash production tax 

were implemented in regulations. Producers were given a 

10-year holiday from the base payment portion of the PPT for 

potash produced from approved expansions of productive 

capacity. The accelerated depreciation rate for capital 

investment in excess of 90 per cent of the producers‟ capital 

investment in 2002 was increased from 100 per cent to 120 per 

cent. 

 

Due to the 2003 tax changes that removed the profit tax on 

sales in excess of the producers‟ average sales in 2001 and 

2002, a situation was created where a new entrant to the 

Saskatchewan potash industry would not pay profit tax as it 

would not have had sales in 2001 or 2002. Existing potash 

producers were concerned that new entrants to the industry that 

were not subject to some base level of profit tax, as they were, 

would have a significant long-term advantage in potash 

markets. 

 

The new 2010 system, Mr. Speaker, under obviously this the 

current government, created a base minimum taxable 

production. And in response to concerns that due to the 2003 

tax changes it was possible that the fraction of potash sales 

subject to profit tax could continue to fall without limit, the 

government instituted a 35 per cent floor on the producers‟ 

sales subject to profit tax. 

 

In 2010, to summarize the changes, Mr. Speaker, the following 

changes to the PPT were implemented in regulations. For 

existing producers, base tonnes subject to profit tax are average 

sales in 2001 and 2002. The equivalent base tonnes of a new 

entrant are set equal to 75 per cent of its sales in the year until 

75 per cent of sales exceeds 1 million K2O tonnes. In the year 

that this occurs, the base tonnes of the new entrant are set 

permanently at 1 million K2O tonnes. When new producers 

enter the industry, the base tonnes of all producers will be 

adjusted downwards. The total industry adjustment is 65 per 

cent of new entrants-based tonnes and is distributed among 

producers according to their proportionate share of total 

industry-based tonnes. For both existing producers and new 

entrants, there is now a minimum floor on taxable tonnes equal 

to 35 per cent of a producer‟s total sales. 

 

So the only substantive change to the royal structure introduced 

by this government was instituting a tax for new entrants equal 

to 35 per cent of a producer‟s total production. At the same time 

though, there were a number of relatively minor housekeeping 

changes made in response to the concern that mine-based 

executive jobs were included in the deductible costs for the 

purpose of profit tax while non-mine-site corporate jobs were 

not. Changes were implemented. 

 

In the calculation of profit for the profit tax, producers are 

allowed to deduct $100,000 allowance for each qualified new 

— new, that is, Mr. Speaker — corporate office position and 

$25,000 for qualified existing corporate office positions. After 

five years a new position is treated as an existing position. 

 

Revisions have been made over time to improve the 

Saskatchewan potash industry‟s competitive . . . And full credit 

has to be given to the previous NDP government, and we have, 

Mr. Speaker. We‟ve done that. We‟re taking the measures that 

were necessary to keep the industry in Saskatchewan and 

enable further investment by the industry in this province. 

 

To put our royalties in context, they are quite simply, Mr. 

Speaker, the highest in the world. To raise them again risks 

killing the industry in the province, certainly would cancel 

announced new investments by the industry in the province and 

eliminate the possibility of any new investment. This would 

translate into the loss of thousands of jobs in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, and probably in the neighbourhood of $1 billion 

dollars in revenue to the province each and every year. In the 

long term it would kill the goose that laid the golden egg. 

 

I have in front of me, Mr. Speaker, a bar graph prepared by 

CRU of Great Britain, Mr. Speaker. CRU group is a 

well-respected, UK-based mining industry research company. 

And this bar graph is potash royalty and production taxes 

around the world, and it‟s an interesting comparison, Mr. 

Speaker. It includes 13 potash producing jurisdictions globally. 

 

And this is very interesting. This is the part that the members 

opposite really ought to listen to. Those jurisdictions that 



6640 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2011 

charge 1 per cent or less royalties include China, Russia, Spain, 

Germany, and Belarus. Jurisdictions who charge under 5 per 

cent include Israel, United Kingdom, USA [United States of 

America], Brazil, and Chile. Those are under 5 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. New Brunswick, the other Canadian potash mining 

jurisdiction, charges 6 per cent. Jordan, with the second highest 

royalties in the world, charges 11 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And 

the only other potash mining jurisdiction in the world that I 

haven‟t mentioned is Saskatchewan. And we charge 22 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker, the highest, the highest royalties in the world 

and more than double the next closest royalties charged in the 

world. And that from Jordan — Jordan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, potash industry payments to the Government of 

Saskatchewan are very substantial. I‟ve talked about the 22 per 

cent royalties our potash mining companies pay. Mr. Speaker, 

when we add in corporate income tax and other taxes paid by 

the industry over and above the royalties, which is a three-piece 

piece on its own, Mr. Speaker, the potash mining companies in 

Saskatchewan marginal tax rate in this province is 45 per cent. 

When all taxes are considered, Mr. Speaker, on potash mining, 

companies pay four to five times the tax rate of any other 

jurisdiction in Canada or any place else in the world. 

 

I don‟t know if the members . . . The members seem to be 

having a time yelling across the floor, Mr. Speaker, but they 

ought to listen to this. They ought to hear this part, if you don‟t 

listen to anything else. When you consider all taxes paid, the 

marginal tax rate of the Saskatchewan potash producers is four 

to five times that paid in any other jurisdiction in Canada or the 

world. 

 

The public policy, Mr. Speaker, the public policy, our taxation 

policy around potash, has been a success. Significant 

investment in mine expansions still to come, Mr. Speaker. We 

are seeing the first greenfield mines built in Saskatchewan in 40 

years. Industry estimates $12 billion will be invested in 

expansion, and that investment is expected between now and 

2020, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I have in front of me, Mr. Speaker, three pages of fine print. 

And these are a list of potential potash expansion projects 

around the world. Three pages, Mr. Speaker, very fine print. 

And dozens and dozens, I suspect well in excess of 100 

potential potash expansion projects around the world, only five 

of which are in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It 

is folly indeed to suggest that we have a corner on the potash 

market, on the ability to produce potash for the world. It is an 

absolutely unfounded and ridiculous statement, a statement 

designed to bail out that hastily dreamt up election campaign 

strategy by the NDP, to sacrifice the potash industry to bolster 

their own political support in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 2008 demonstrates that as profits increase with 

price, payments to government increase dramatically. In 2008, 

Mr. Speaker, government received nearly $1.4 billion in potash 

royalties. Currently and for the next two to five years, 

significant capital investment writedowns will suppress 

government revenues. But there will be significant revenue 

growth in the long term. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, maybe that‟s how they justify the false 

statement, frankly, that the industry pays 5 cents on the dollar. 

Maybe they‟re looking at the next two or three years and 

saying, well maybe that‟s close to that because of the 

writedowns that are allowed. Every business, Mr. Speaker — a 

farm, gas station, any business that you can think of, a 

lemonade stand — any business, Mr. Speaker, gets to write off 

capital investment, and so does the potash industry and the 

uranium industry and the oil and gas industry in this province. 

That‟s the way business is conducted, in the free world at least. 

 

[12:15] 

 

And if any of those members opposite would take the time and 

effort to study our royalties, which were developed for the most 

part under NDP governments, they would know this. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition, I know — I know — the Leader 

of the Opposition understands how they work, but he continues 

to advance his pre-election rhetoric regardless of the facts and 

at the expense of our potash industry and jobs for Saskatchewan 

people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

World potash demand is generally expected to increase by 

about 3 to 4 per cent per year over the next decade. And those 

projections, Mr. Speaker, are based on the following economic 

indicators: increasing world food demand, Mr. Speaker; limited 

available land to expand agricultural production; growing 

middle class in emerging economies resulting in an increased 

protein demand; and growing world population. 

 

Total annual demand could increase by as much as 15 million 

tonnes by 2020. At current market share, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan sales would increase by as much as 5 million 

tonnes annually. New expansions will be the first to market, 

resulting in the opportunity to capture more than the current 

world market share for Saskatchewan producers. Mr. Speaker, 

under our current royalty regime, that spells a windfall for this 

province. 

 

I have some interesting quotes, Mr. Speaker. I‟ll start with some 

New Democrat quotes. And here‟s what the NDP said in the 

Regina Leader-Post on October 5th, 2003, Mr. Speaker: 

“Premier Lorne Calvert said he is willing to forgo some potash 

royalties to help create employment.” 

 

And he says: 

 

“I think it is more significant to have opportunities for our 

young people to go to work in the province first of all than 

to secure revenues for the General Revenue Fund of the 

province,” Calvert said. “Moreover, having people go to 

work will guarantee the latter.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP had little respect for that previous leader. 

He was not well treated, not well regarded by them. But I bet, I 

bet, Mr. Speaker, they wish they had him now. We don‟t hear, 

we don‟t hear that kind of straightforward, economic common 

sense from their current leader, Mr. Speaker, like we did from 

their past. 

 

My next quote from the NDP, Mr. Speaker, comes from a 

government news release, August 14th, 2003. 

 

Premier Lorne Calvert said the tax changes will help the 



March 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6641 

industry to realize its immense growth potential. Potash 

sales and investment are expected to increase as a result of 

the tax changes. This will result in new jobs and new 

infrastructure expenditures by the industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is certainly true. That‟s true and they all know 

it. They know it, their leader knows it, but they still indulge in 

this destructive rhetoric — destructive to our economy, 

destructive to our mining industry — and they do it, Mr. 

Speaker, for short-term political gain. 

 

A government news release issued April 11th, 2005, Mr. 

Speaker, entitled . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The chatter‟s starting to pick 

up a little more across the floor. I would ask certain members to 

keep it down. I would like to listen to the speech that‟s being 

made. I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, this is a government news 

release, or part of one, issued April 11th, 2005, entitled “New 

tax changes to grow potash industry.” And it states, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

New tax initiatives announced today will stimulate . . . 

expansion in Saskatchewan‟s potash industry, resulting in 

more jobs and increased wealth for the province. 

 

. . . “Saskatchewan potash producers are currently 

enjoying record sales, but there is still ample room for 

expansion.” [Industry and Resources minister Eric Cline 

said that.] “As a government, we want to promote that 

expansion and grow our economy.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have here a quote from the former Energy and 

Resources minister in the previous government, the member 

from Prince Albert: 

 

The NDP‟s Minister of Energy and Mines argued that 

lower royalties will encourage increased activity with 

more capital expenditures, more drilling, and increased 

land sales. The government expects the revenue raised 

from this increased activity will more than offset the effect 

of lower royalties. 

 

That is pretty straightforward, simple economics, Mr. Speaker. 

And even the NDP understood it until lately. We want to ensure 

. . . Here I have one from the Leader-Post, Murray Lyons, 

August 15th, 2003 entitled, “Two tax changes for the potash 

industry.” And I‟ll read a bit of it. He says: 

 

“We want to ensure the people of Saskatchewan get fair 

return for their resource. We want to ensure as well that 

the profit and profitability of potash in our province makes 

us competitive with other jurisdictions,” said Lorne 

Calvert. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Leader-Post, September 20th, 2002, Murray 

Lyons again, “Mining industry offered incentives.” And the 

quote is: 

 

We believe exploration is the key to ensure the 

sustainability and competitiveness of this important 

industry, and it‟s important to take action now to ensure 

future exploration will occur and to reverse the trend of 

decreasing exploration expenditures in our province. 

 

And that quote is attributed to former Premier Lorne Calvert as 

well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on June 14th, 2004, in Hansard, page 1595, this 

quote appears from the former premier: 

 

We are seeing, as a result of changes in royalty structure 

with the potash industry, expansion, specifically at the 

Rocanville mine. And we‟re working with the mining 

industry. You can read the reviews of the mining industry 

now saying Saskatchewan is a very competitive place to 

invest for mining. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have a series now of quotes that I would 

like to read from the current Leader of the Opposition, and they 

are illuminating, to say the least. He, on the 20th of April, 2010, 

in Economy Committee estimates, the Leader of the Opposition 

said these words, Mr. Speaker, and I think they‟re illuminating 

indeed. He says, “And I think there was a huge flow of 

investment into Saskatchewan after the Stelmach government 

made their ill-advised royalty changes.” 

 

Now that is one of the things, that is one of the things that the 

Leader of the Opposition has said over the years, Mr. Speaker, 

that I can‟t help but agree with. And there haven‟t been many, 

but that is certainly on the list. And I think it takes any 

credibility away from his current position. He knows the oil 

industry, Mr. Speaker. That man, the Leader of the Opposition, 

worked in the oil industry for Nexen for years, 10 years 

roughly, when he left Saskatchewan in bad times and went to 

Alberta. He worked for Nexen and had a very high, had a very 

high position, Mr. Speaker, a vice-president‟s position, I 

believe. And he learned the industry. I don‟t know if he knew 

much about it before he left, but he knew how to give away the 

golden share for Saskoil, and he earned himself a spot in Nexen 

by doing that. And he went there, and he learned something 

about the oil industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now he recognizes that the exact changes that he‟s advocating 

for potash and uranium would kill the oil industry, but he won‟t 

admit yet, Mr. Speaker, that those changes would have exactly 

the same effect on potash and the uranium investment in this 

province. 

 

I‟m fortunate to have another quote from the Leader of the 

Opposition, Mr. Speaker, in the Economy Committee estimates, 

April 20 — same day — 2010. And in this quote, he‟s speaking 

to the current minister of Industry and Resources. And another 

illuminating quote from the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. 

Speaker, who now thinks that we should tax industry to death: 

 

I would certainly tend to agree that stability in the royalty 

and the trust that . . . in doing political risk — whether its 

in Alberta or Saskatchewan or anywhere in the world — 

the political risk is one thing on the investment side that 

people certainly factor in when they‟re making 

investment. 

 

And as John Lau and other industry leaders have 



6642 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2011 

indicated, that the stability in Saskatchewan under the 

Romanow leadership, and Lorne Calvert, and now our 

Premier leaving it in place has led to a stability regime 

that is really known across the country. And to give credit, 

and I do give credit to the minister for the fact that he 

didn‟t change and hasn‟t proposed changes to the royalties 

that were in place when this government was elected in 

2007. 

 

Well unbelievably, Mr. Speaker, those are comments made by 

the current Leader of the NDP Opposition, the same, the same 

gentleman, Mr. Speaker, that‟s now advocating doing exactly 

what he railed against doing a year ago. But of course he wasn‟t 

as close to an election a year ago, Mr. Speaker, and he wasn‟t 

as desperate then. 

 

Oh, look. Another quote from the Leader of the Opposition, this 

one from Hansard on March 25, 2010, Mr. Speaker. And he 

says in this quote in Hansard on March 25, 2010, he says: 

 

I was invited by John Lau and his wife Heather to come to 

the sod-turning of the new office building in Lloydminster 

a couple of weeks ago. And while I was there, the 

president and CEO, John Lau said, [he said] I want to say 

one thing where I give the Premier credit — [and that‟s 

the current Premier he‟s referring to, Mr. Speaker, and the 

quote is] that he didn‟t change the royalties that were put 

in place by the NDP government. That‟s what he said. 

 

So on the issue of energy and royalties, I think we have a pretty 

good track record. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in recent years the government of Alberta raised 

oil royalty rates in the neighbourhood of 20 per cent in an effort 

to extract more government revenue from the oil industry. The 

current Leader of the Opposition railed against that at the time 

when he was an employee of Nexen, having given away the 

Saskoil golden share to earn that position. I‟ve gone through 

that before, and the members have their backs turned to me 

now, so they don‟t seem to want to listen to that. But in any 

event, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition was a 

vice-president of Nexen, a major Canadian oil company in 

Alberta at the time after he left Saskatchewan, in a time when 

our economy was in the doldrums. We were a have-not 

province, and he bailed on us and he went to join Nexen. 

 

In any event, he railed against these increases in oil royalties 

and the instability that that caused. And the net result, Mr. 

Speaker, of those royalty changes in Alberta that the Leader of 

the Opposition rightfully railed against, was a loss of billions of 

dollars in oil industry investment in Alberta, a loss of billions of 

dollars of oil revenue for the people of Alberta, and the loss of 

thousands of jobs in that province, as well as substantial 

investment moving from Alberta to Saskatchewan where our oil 

royalties remain stable. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition recognizes that did great harm to 

the oil industry and to the province and to the people of Alberta, 

but he now advocates doing the exact same thing in the potash 

and uranium industries in our province. He would do it in the 

oil industry here too, Mr. Speaker, if it suited his political 

motives. And if he ever had the reins of power, Mr. Speaker, at 

some point it would suit his political motives, and the oil 

industry would get it next. 

 

He knows full well that that action would devastate the 

economy of the province and put us back into have-not status 

again for a very, very long time. He knows this action would 

leave no revenue for investment in health, education, social 

services, housing, roads, or further debt reduction. He knows 

these things from experience, and yet he advocates destroying 

Saskatchewan for the foreseeable future for short-term political 

gain as we approach an election in which it appears that he will 

be humiliated and the NDP will be devastated. 

 

[12:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have also some third party quotes that refer to 

this issue and don‟t exactly, to say the least, support the 

position of the opposition: 

 

Nesbitt Burns analyst Joel Jackson warned raising potash 

royalties could stall the momentum by reducing the 

attractiveness of Saskatchewan potash producers and 

threaten investment plans by new entrants. 

 

He goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 

 

You have to be careful, because if the government was to 

revise the potash royalties and make them prohibitive for 

producers to start greenfield mines because you make the 

profitability of those mines lower, the province could 

jeopardize billions of dollars of greenfield investment by 

global companies. 

 

And he said that in the National Post, Mr. Speaker, on January 

20th, 2011. 

 

Paul Martin, business analyst on CJME, Mr. Speaker, February 

15th, 2011, said, “I don‟t think there is very much merit in it.” 

That‟s in brackets, the NDP wanting to change potash royalty 

structure. 

 

It‟s more of a political posture than it is an economic one. 

The NDP has been looking for some kind of an issue, a 

wedge issue, to hang its hat on and potash came along. I 

suppose if I was in the NDP‟s boots, I would be trying to 

do something like this too. 

 

But we looked at what happened when Alberta started 

tinkering with royalty rates and it did them no favour 

whatsoever. We are getting hundreds of millions of 

dollars, billions of investment in the province. Why should 

we mess with that?  

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting that when we talk about the NDP 

motives for this devastating policy, even talking about royalty 

reviews and dramatically increasing royalties on the mining 

industries has a potential of devastating investment in the 

province. When we talk about that, the members opposite turn 

their backs. They don‟t even listen. They don‟t want to hear it. 

They don‟t want to think about it. They don‟t want to even 

consider the damage that they‟re already doing. And I don‟t 

think they can fathom the damage that they would do if these 

policies were actually implemented. 

 



March 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6643 

Mr. Speaker, I have another quote here from the Leader-Post, 

an editorial, February 16, 2011, another very recent one, Mr. 

Speaker. It says: 

 

Now is not the time to launch such a review of the potash 

industry as some are suggesting . . . 

 

The dust is still settling after last fall‟s failed takeover bid 

of PotashCorp by Australian mining giant BHP Billiton. 

Indeed, PotashCorp‟s “Pledge to Saskatchewan” on 

Monday was a response to the provincial government‟s 

support for the company that helped convince the federal 

government to block BHP‟s bid. The pledge reaffirms 

promises of almost $6 billion in mine expansion, more 

than 600 new jobs and millions of dollars in donations to 

charitable and community organizations. 

 

. . . if not handled right, higher royalties could impact 

production, slow mine expansion and reduce jobs. The 

province might then be the ultimate financial loser. 

 

In our view, the industry needs some breathing room after 

the roller-coaster ride of the past couple of years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see their backs are still turned. They‟re still not 

listening. They‟re still not willing to consider, they‟re still not 

willing to consider the devastation their policies would reap on 

Saskatchewan and our people and the unemployment that 

would be caused by them. But they don‟t want to listen, Mr. 

Speaker. And that‟s fine. I believe there are people out there 

that are listening. 

 

Another quote here from . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, I 

overdid it, Mr. Speaker. I woke one of them up. Another quote 

here, Mr. Speaker, from Petroleum News, dated March 21st, 

2010 goes like this: 

 

Abandoning the trumpeted objective to deliver a “fair 

share” of oil and gas profits to the 3.5 million people of 

Alberta, Stelmach said “building competitiveness (against 

the other oil and gas jurisdictions of North America) is at 

the top of the government‟s agenda.” 

 

. . . Newly installed Energy Minister Ron Liepert said the 

government could no longer “pretend that oil and gas 

investment levels haven‟t eroded or that we don‟t have a 

responsibility to current and future generations of 

Albertans to address that.” 

 

. . . The most sweeping overhaul of Alberta‟s royalty 

regime since it was first introduced was supposed to 

generate an extra $1.4 billion a year in government 

revenues from a 20 per cent average hike. 

 

. . . The combined result was the loss of billions of dollars 

in capital spending to other provinces and the U.S. and 

thousands of jobs. 

 

That quote, Mr. Speaker, from Petroleum News, March 21st, 

2010. 

 

I have a short one here from Andre Plourde, the University of 

Alberta, on Global Television News, February 16th, 2011. And 

part of what he said was, “I think stability and predictability are 

really the key.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have another one here from, oh look, this one‟s 

from Nexen, the same company that employed the Leader of 

the Opposition for 10 years or so in Alberta in an extremely 

lucrative position as vice-president responsible for government 

relations. I don‟t know what that really involves, Mr. Speaker, 

but it seemed that they felt some gratitude to the Leader of the 

Opposition. Maybe it had to do with giving away the golden 

share that Saskatchewan possessed in Saskoil. Maybe that‟s 

why he got the job. And I don‟t know if it really included any 

duties at all, but he did learn a few things about the oil industry 

while he was away, we hope. 

 

Nexen says this in the Alberta oil royalty review 2007 

submission from that company. They say: 

 

We hope the royalty review process will consider this 

carefully and recognize that changes to the fiscal burden 

on future investments will affect the level of future 

investments based on economics. A negative revision to 

the royalty burden for past investments, regardless of the 

stage of development, would undermine the attractiveness 

of investment in Alberta and Canada. 

 

Nexen believes that it is extremely important that we 

preserve the principles of stability, certainty, consistency 

and fairness for Alberta‟s business climate. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when the Leader of the Opposition was a 

vice-president of Nexen, and when Nexen believed in 

preserving those things for Alberta apparently, I don‟t know, 

maybe the Leader of the Opposition had something to do with 

writing this submission. I wouldn‟t be surprised if he did, being 

the vice-president of government relations. If he actually had 

duties to perform at all, Mr. Speaker, I suspect that this might 

have been one of them. 

 

But he believed clearly in preserving the principles of stability, 

certainty, consistency, and fairness for Alberta‟s business 

climate. But he now doesn‟t believe, now that he‟s Leader of 

the Opposition in Saskatchewan, he doesn‟t believe in doing the 

same here. That, Mr. Speaker, I think pretty much underscores 

the problem with that Leader of the Opposition and illustrates 

why he, in the polls, ranks as the lowest scoring Leader of the 

Opposition in the entire country, Mr. Speaker. And he seems to 

be on a downward trend. 

 

Eric Anderson commented on the potash industry in 

Saskatchewan. He said this on News Talk radio, March 10, 

2010. Eric Anderson said: 

 

Over a four-year span from 2005 and 2009, PotashCorp 

paid about $1.5 billion in taxes in Saskatchewan. But over 

the next four years, starting last year, until 2014, 

PotashCorp forecasts to pay about $4 billion in taxes in 

Saskatchewan, almost triple their previous four-year span. 

And the expansion projects will see about $1 billion spent 

per year in Saskatchewan for the four consecutive years of 

2009 through 2012. It‟s like the mother of all economic 

stimulus packages, but using money derived from other 

countries. 



6644 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2011 

Finally, 10 years ago, PotashCorp employed about 1,100 

people in Saskatchewan. In a couple of years, they should 

hit 2,500 people. That‟s more than double from just 10 

years ago. 

 

And that is from Eric Anderson, Mr. Speaker, on CJME radio, 

March 10th, 2010, and very illuminating indeed. 

 

And I think, you know, I sat here yesterday and today and I 

listened to those opposition members talk on this issue. And I 

didn‟t hear much that I thought was factual, but I heard a lot of 

talk. But one thing I did notice, and they had Rick Swenson in 

here yesterday. And they introduced him around again and they 

all took turns, they all took turns chatting with him and trying 

to convince him that he‟s one of them now. And I think he‟s 

buying in. I really do. I think they got him, Mr. Speaker. He 

believes it. 

 

But I noticed that they gave Rick Swenson some credibility on 

this issue. And I think it‟s worth exploring that, Mr. Speaker, 

because I have here the verbatim of a conversation between 

Rick Swenson and John Gormley a couple of weeks ago I think, 

on John Gormley‟s radio show. And I‟ll start, I‟m not going to 

go into, I‟m not going to read most of it because it‟d take too 

long, and it‟s frankly just too embarrassing. But John Gormley 

says, I‟ll start here, he says: 

 

Some things you did, Rick, worked very well. And I‟m 

politically the kind of guy who was aligned with some of 

your projects, but some of the screw-ups you guys had 

near the end there were totally brought on yourselves. 

 

And Rick Swenson says, “Right, but the taxpayer today . . . and 

you‟ve got to remember this has been 17 years basically since 

we‟ve had a royalty review in this province under that regime.” 

 

And Gormley says: 

 

What the blank are you saying? You had a royalty review 

in ‟98, ‟03, ‟05. The law, by regulation, the potash taxes 

were significantly amended on those three occasions. Do 

you not know that? 

 

Rick Swenson said: “Right. Yes.” 

 

Now normally, Mr. Speaker, I wouldn‟t be doing this to a 

member of the public in this province, but the NDP have been 

raising him yesterday and today as some sort of an expert on 

potash royalties. So I think he‟s fair game now. He‟s brought 

himself back into the limelight. 

 

After he said, “Right. Yes,” John Gormley said: “Okay. So 

what are you telling me about 17 years?” And Swenson says, 

Rick Swenson says: 

 

But you still have a scenario today where you would have 

had BHP, if they had been successful with the PCS bid, 

being able, because it was an existing company, it would 

be able to write off all of the costs of that mine, and the 

taxpayer of Saskatchewan had to bear it. Which is totally 

wrong. 

 

Now I‟m not going to editorialize on this. I‟ll just follow the 

script, tempting as it is. John Gormley said then, he said: 

 

Well actually new entrants were dealt with in 2010. There 

were amendments made in 2010 to deal with new entrants. 

But okay, so your point is, and again this is fascinating 

because you‟re a Conservative, so you and the socialist 

Lingenfelter appear to be on the same page here, Rick, is 

that right? 

 

And Rick Swenson says: 

 

I don‟t say that you go through and have a willy-nilly 

royalty increase that isn‟t tied to what‟s going on in the 

reality of the world. I‟m just saying the current scenario 

we have right now where you‟ve got tonnage tied up to 

expansion and new construction means that the taxpayers 

have to upfront all those costs. 

 

And John Gormley says: 

 

They don‟t upfront them. They simply write them off. 

Which is the same thing you do any time that you develop 

a farm, you develop a business, you borrow money to 

invest on the stock market. 

 

[12:45] 

 

And I‟ll drop that conversation right there, Mr. Speaker. And as 

I said, the only reason I bring it up is the NDP seem to be 

parading Rick Swenson around as their best new friend, new 

best friend and some sort of an authority on potash royalty 

rates. Clearly in the last election, the people of Thunder Creek 

didn‟t think he was much of an authority or expert on anything. 

He ran against me as Leader of the Conservative Party. He ran 

against me — an opposition MLA at the time — and garnered a 

stunning 295 votes, Mr. Speaker, which was 195 more than I‟d 

given him. So to his credit, to his credit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

John Gormley wrote this article in The StarPhoenix on 

February 25th, 2011 about, on this topic, Mr. Speaker, “Potash 

royalties and the golden goose” is the title. And he says: 

 

The goose laid a golden egg every day. Supposing it must 

contain a great lump of gold in its inside, and to get the 

gold they killed the goose. To their surprise they found the 

goose differed in no respect from their other geese and the 

foolish pair, thus hoping to become rich all at once, 

deprived themselves of the gain they were assured day by 

day. [That‟s] Aesop‟s Fable, The Goose That Laid the 

Golden Egg. 

 

With NDP Leader Dwain Lingenfelter promising to raise 

taxes on potash mining, should he ever be elected, the 

helpful childhood lesson of Aesop‟s fable comes to mind. 

 

Before we talk of potash production taxes, the corporate 

capital tax resource surcharge, base payments, profit tax 

portions and accelerated depreciation rates for capital 

investments, the moral of the golden goose is simple: 

Short-sighted greed can end up making us poor. 

 

It is easy, quick and opportunistic for a politician to 

suggest that because Potash Corp. of Saskatchewan Inc. 



March 10, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6645 

and other miners are having a profitable year, we should 

jack up resource royalties. 

 

Responsible government, like the present one and its 

predecessors, continuously monitor the tax regime, 

assessing what is mined and what is paid back to the 

citizens of the province who own the resource. 

 

But upping royalties now would not only be bad policy 

but would also send a terrible signal to the rest of the 

world about an unpredictable and unreliable Saskatchewan 

investment environment. [And] Here‟s why. 

 

Royalty regimes, like any complex transaction designed to 

create a relationship and strive toward a mutually sought 

outcome, often take years to complete. 

 

Just last year, potash tax changes were made that 

re-established a minimum floor on taxable tonnes of 

potash produced and tweaked major changes made earlier 

by the Lorne Calvert NDP government in 2005 and 2003. 

 

Those changes had amended earlier tax changes in 1998 

and, before that, in 1990. 

 

The Calvert tax changes were designed to encourage a big 

expansion of potash capacity in order to meet anticipated 

increased demand in coming years. As a result, the NDP 

gave generous accelerated depreciation rates for capital 

investment. 

 

But committing billions of dollars in mine expansions 

doesn‟t happen overnight. In a process, from planning to 

completion, that will realistically take a decade, the potash 

industry began ramping up capital spending in 2007 and, 

continuing through 2020, will spend an estimated 12 

billion expanding mines. 

 

In 2009 and 2010 alone, as the world reeled from a 

recession that Saskatchewan refused to participate in, 

more than $4 billion was spent by the industry, much of it 

by PotashCorp. 

 

Mine expansions and existing mining activity have created 

more than 20,000 tax-paying jobs in the mines, building 

trades, engineering and support industries. 

 

In 2005, NDP cabinet ministers rightly pointed out that 

taking lower royalties during the expansion phase would 

pay off in the long run with dramatically expanded 

production, which would then be taxed on higher volumes 

and prices as the world beat a path to Saskatchewan‟s 

door. 

 

As witnessed in the glowing reviews of potash 

development during the BHP Billiton Ltd.-PotashCorp 

takeover battle, the world is enamoured with potash. As 

the global population increases, more food must be grown 

on fewer acres and an expanding middle class in China, 

India and other Asian countries needs more protein. 

 

Even this year, as capital investments continue, more than 

$300 million will be paid to the provincial government in 

direct royalties and mining taxes, not to mention millions 

more in sales taxes, income taxes and spinoffs from the 

increased expansion activity. 

 

To change the royalty and tax rules now, in the middle of 

the capital expansion phase, would be like your bank 

halfway through a five year, locked-in mortgage 

unilaterally increasing your good mortgage rate just 

because it thinks you should [be able to] pay more. 

 

Stability, certainty and security are critical to the 

continued development of this world-leading resource, of 

which 50 per cent of the world‟s known reserves are based 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

It is wise to remember that the remaining 50 per cent are 

somewhere else. 

 

From Australia to Bolivia, Ethiopia to Argentina, several 

dozen potential potash projects are underway, in addition 

to the 12 other nations that already mine potash. 

 

It‟s easy, at first blush, to differentiate an existing potash 

mine from an oil rig that can be moved out of a suddenly 

hostile oil royalty climate. 

 

This has prompted supporters of Lingenfelter to sniff, 

“What are potash companies going to do, move their 

mines?” [I think we just heard that.] Careful. [Careful, he 

says.] Enough other, lower cost areas can mean a 

slowdown in mining here, layoffs and eventually — if the 

gap is too wide — simply shutting down Saskatchewan 

mines all together. 

 

Even a cursory glance at potash tax rates is helpful. In 

Saskatchewan, royalties and production taxes amount to 

about 22 per cent of a potash company‟s net revenue. 

 

You know, there‟s that 22 per cent number that‟s such a 

nuisance to the NDP, Mr. Speaker. A far cry from 5 cents on 

the dollar — 22 per cent. That‟s 22 cents on the dollar. 

Yesterday in this House, the member from Walsh Acres and the 

Leader of the Opposition, and today again an array of other 

NDP members made that statement, that the potash companies 

in this province pay 5 cents on the dollar to the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And the reason I specifically mention the member from Walsh 

Acres is because she said, that‟s unconscionable. Well what‟s 

unconscionable, Mr. Speaker, is making that assertion. That is 

unconscionable to say those things, when in reality the potash 

corporations in this province pay 22 per cent royalty and a 40 to 

45 per cent marginal overall tax rate to government. Those are 

the facts, Mr. Speaker. Those are the facts. 

 

The royalty regime was largely developed during NDP years. 

They supported it then. We supported it then, Mr. Speaker. In 

opposition, we were fully supportive of the changes that the 

Calvert administration made to the royalties in the province at 

that time. And we still are, Mr. Speaker. We tweaked them 

somewhat in 2010 to deal with new entrants into the potash 

industry, and that had to be dealt with now, Mr. Speaker. 

Because until now, we‟ve gone 40 years in this province 



6646 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2011 

without any new entrants to the potash industry, and that‟s why 

that change was necessary. And the change that we made was 

to add a tax for those new entrants, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have some letters here, letters from interested 

parties. The first one I‟d like to read, Mr. Speaker, is a letter 

from the Greater Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce. And this 

letter is addressed to the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, 

and he will have read this re: royalty rates in Saskatchewan: 

 

Dear Mr. Lingenfelter: 

 

Our chamber is writing you to revisit and reverse your 

most recent public announcements concerning your new 

position, that the Government of Saskatchewan should 

increase potash and uranium royalty rates. We strongly 

believe this will have severe consequences for the 

industry, our economy, our people, and our province‟s 

future. 

 

At our meeting on June 22nd, 2010, with yourself and 

your Saskatoon caucus, we reviewed our strategic plan 

titled, fishing for piranha. This document was developed 

by our chamber in 2008, and the June 2010 meeting 

represented the most recent of several meetings with 

members of your Saskatoon caucus wherein we presented 

our strategic plan. 

 

In our plan we identified the need to attain competitive 

royalty rates for uranium, potash, and coal. Based on our 

chamber‟s research, Saskatchewan‟s royalty rates for 

these resources are the highest in the world, and for potash 

more than double our nearest competitor. Uncompetitively 

high royalty rates diminish investment, economic activity, 

and much needed career opportunities for our people. 

 

Concerning taxation and royalty structures, our chamber 

has consistently advocated for competitively priced, 

simpler, and more transparent structures. Our research 

clearly indicates that simple, transparent, competitively 

priced royalties and taxes are the best means for our 

province to build career opportunities and build a strong 

and broad tax base for our province. 

 

Long-term resource project investment decisions like 

those under way and under consideration in the potash 

industry depend on consistent and competitive 

government policy. Policy reversals and policy change 

surprises that adversely affect return on investment 

dramatically discourages investment in our province. In 

our chamber‟s view, that presents our province as an 

unstable place to do business. Investment in this industry 

is significant and long term. Stability is crucial in making 

an investment choice. To remind you of our previous 

discussion, we are enclosing another copy of our strategic 

document for your consideration. 

 

We are herein requesting that you reconsider and reverse 

your most recently communicated position. We remain 

hopeful that with more thoughtful reflection, your caucus 

can endorse our position that competitively priced, simple 

and easy to understand and easy to communicate tax on 

royalty structures are the best means to build our province 

for the current and future generations of Saskatchewan 

citizens. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t see any willingness of that side of 

the floor to look at their new position, to revisit that for the 

good of the province, for the good of the industry, for the good 

of mining, for the good of preserving thousands of jobs in this 

province. But they are sticking to their guns, Mr. Speaker, so 

far, on this ridiculous idea to dramatically raise mining royalties 

in the province as a means to save their political bacon, so to 

speak, in the upcoming election of November 7th, 2011, Mr. 

Speaker, just a few short months away. 

 

I also have letters of a similar nature from the city of Humboldt, 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Mining Association, oh boy, 

Areva. Oh, Areva really went at them. If time only permitted, 

Mr. Speaker, they gave reasons. 

 

Here‟s one I‟ll read in, from the town of Colonsay to the 

Minister of Energy and Resources: 

 

This letter is to advise you that I‟m not in favour of raising 

the royalties on potash in Saskatchewan. 

 

Business agreements to set royalties were made between 

the province and the potash companies, and I do not think 

the government should renege on these agreements now. 

Our community is seeing growth largely due to the potash 

industry, and we don‟t want to lose residents and future 

housing because of issues between the potash companies 

and the provincial government. 

 

We want Saskatchewan to remain a place to be for all, and 

I don‟t think raising royalties is the way to encourage this. 

 

Potash producers of association, Mr. Speaker, and the list goes 

on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d now read the motion into the record: 

 

That this Assembly commends the Saskatchewan Party 

government for its responsible handling of potash royalty 

rates, and condemns the NDP for its potash and resource 

royalty tax policies, which would put thousands of 

Saskatchewan people out of work. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the member from Thunder Creek: 

 

That this Assembly commends the Saskatchewan Party 

government for its responsible handling of potash royalty 

rates, and condemns the NDP for its potash and resource 

revenue and royalty tax policies, which would put 

thousands of Saskatchewan people at work. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? Being now the hour of 

adjournment, is the Assembly . . . or past the hour of 

adjournment. 

 

This Assembly is adjourned until Monday afternoon at 1:30 

p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6619 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6619 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6619 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Mobile Spay and Neuter Clinic 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6619 

 Listening to Rural Saskatchewan 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6620 

 Battlefords Citizen of the Year 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6620 

 University President to Retire 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6620 

 World Kidney Day 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6620 

 Trade With India 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6621 

 Follow-Through 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6621 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Physician Recruitment 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6621 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6621 

 Employment Trends 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6622 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6622 

 Support for Northern Housing 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6624 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6624 

 SaskTel Services 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6625 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6625 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Review of Potash Royalties 

  Furber ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6626, 6636 

  Heppner ......................................................................................................................................................................... 6628, 6637 

  Morin ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6630, 6637 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6631 

  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 6633, 6638 

  McMillan (point of order) ...................................................................................................................................................... 6634 

  The Speaker (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................. 6634 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6635 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6636 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6636 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6637 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6637 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6637 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 4 — Potash Royalties 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6638 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


