




















































Hansard: December 14, 2011


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 7A WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 14, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 201 

 December 14, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great 

pleasure that I introduce to you and through you to the rest of 

the Assembly, from Regina Coronation Park, grade 7 and 8 

students from Gladys McDonald School. And in particular I’d 

also like to introduce the teachers and guests that are 

accompanying them. 

 

The teacher is Nicole Blondeau — you just give us a wave. 

Thank you. Gail Kelln is a chaperone, Derek Finnick, Dale 

Flavel, Lori Kotylak, Ms. Kohli and Ms. Brown. Had an 

opportunity to say hi earlier and we’re to go and have a . . . 

We’re going to have an opportunity to talk later, Mr. Speaker. 

But I’d really like to have the rest of the Assembly join me in 

welcoming Gladys McDonald School and thank you through 

. . . This is your Assembly. This is your legislature. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have another announcement. To you and through 

you, I’d like to welcome Street Culture Kidz Project Inc. It’s an 

organization that I’ve been involved in for many years. And in 

particular, I’d like to introduce just some of the names on the 

list: Kim Sutherland, Torrin Leigh-Spencer, Mark Hess, Brenda 

Hosking, Lester Shepherd, Jordan Roseberry, Jason Cowan, 

Daven Dorma, Kadir Warsame, Todd Galloway, Mottika Red 

Star, Dennis Mazur, and Devon Floyd. And thank you so much 

for being here. 

 

They’ve got a number of initiatives, and they’re working with 

front-line, street-entrenched youth for many, many years now, 

and a number of housing initiatives that are certainly giving out 

some really positive outcomes. And I’d like to have the 

Assembly welcome and thank them for their participation in our 

community. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to join with the member opposite in introducing to you 

and through you to all members of the Assembly, certainly, 

Kim and the group from Street Culture. Now I know that Street 

Culture’s got a shelter called Doc’s house, but don’t get any 

ideas about the legislature here. So it’s good to tell the one joke 

that only one person up there understands and perhaps 

somebody over there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But anyway it’s good to see Kim Sutherland and the group from 

Street Culture here today. I join with the member from Regina 

Coronation Park in welcoming them. 

 

It’s also good to see in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, former 

member for Last Mountain-Touchwood, former Deputy 

Speaker in this Chamber, Dale Flavel, accompanying the group 

from Gladys McDonald. Please welcome him back to his 

Legislative Assembly, and all the guests as well. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all the members of the Assembly, I would like to 

introduce to you a group of 32 grade 12 students from Yorkton 

Regional High School. Their teacher, Mr. Perry Ostapowich, 

accompanies them along with Mr. Scott Wallis and interns 

Janelle Gervais and Sebastian Prost. We had opportunity to take 

a picture on the grand staircase and meet prior to the Assembly. 

And I’d just ask all members to welcome this great group to 

their Assembly. 

 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, one more introduction. In 

your gallery, in the upper part of the gallery, mayor of Yorkton, 

Mr. James Wilson, one of the best mayors I think we’ve had in 

many, many years and also a very good friend. I’d ask all 

members to welcome Mayor Wilson to his Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 

like to join in with the member from Yorkton in welcoming the 

mayor of Yorkton, James Wilson, to this House. We know he’s 

a very good leader in the city of Yorkton, and we welcome him 

here to his legislature. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of First Nations and 

Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It is indeed an honour to introduce to you and through 

you to members of the House members of the accomplished 

team of Regina Rams who were honoured in Vancouver at the 

Vanier Cup award presentations. Mr. Speaker, I had a chance to 

join members of the University of Saskatchewan Huskies and 

the Rams as they received their awards in Vancouver. 

 

In the gallery this afternoon, Mr. Speaker — and I’d ask them 

to just give a wave when I mention their name — we have Chris 

Bodnar. Chris is the first team all-Canadian punter with an 

average of 44.6 yards. Stefan Charles. Stefan received an award 

for the first team all-Canadian defensive tackle. 

 

Akiem Hicks is here. Akiem was presented with the first team 

all-Canadian defensive end award. He was also the Canada 

West nominee for the J.P. Metras Trophy presented to the CIS 

[Canadian Interuniversity Sport] outstanding lineman. The 

Rams just found out today, Mr. Speaker, that Akiem was asked 

to play in the East-West Shrine Bowl in St. Petersburg, Florida. 

We’ll all be cheering you on, Akiem. 

 

Brett Jones, Mr. Speaker, was awarded the first team 

all-Canadian offensive guard and was the Canada West 

nominee for the Russ Jackson Award presented to the CIS 

student athlete who best exemplifies the attributes of academic 

achievement, football skill, and citizenship. Brett was also the 

academic all-Canadian during his first two years in the Faculty 



202 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 2011 

of Engineering and Applied Science. 

 

Lastly, but not least, Mr. Speaker, joining them we have Rams’ 

defensive coordinator, Paul Dawson, who does an outstanding 

job mentoring these fine student athletes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the legislature to honour 

these outstanding student athletes and their coach in their 

legislature this afternoon. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I know I’m not 

supposed to include the Speaker in my welcome, but we very 

much welcome the University of Regina Rams team members 

and coaches here because both the Speaker, last year and years 

before that, had a son who was a U of R [University of Regina] 

Cougar, and I think you all know my daughter, Solveig Nilson, 

who is a U of R Cougar volleyball player. 

 

So the importance of being student athletes in our universities is 

a very crucial thing and I congratulate those of you who are able 

to get to that level of care. 

 

But I think the really positive thing for Regina, for the 

university, and for you as athletes who we’re proud of in our 

community is this long-term relationship the Rams has been 

able to build now for 12 years as the University of Regina team, 

and that builds on many, many decades of Rams football in 

Regina. And you all are people that we can be proud of. And I’d 

have to say to Chris Bodnar, I always thought I’d be watching 

you playing basketball, not football, but it’s still nice to see you 

playing football because, Chris, you were a very good 

basketball player as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to say congratulations on your honours, 

and we look forward to seeing you all working together next 

year with your fully recovered star quarterback, Marc Mueller. 

 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I want to also say greetings 

to the mayor of Yorkton and also to Kim Sutherland who is one 

of my constituents in Regina Lakeview. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 

to the members of this Assembly, I’d like to introduce a 

gentleman from my area and in fact a good friend of mine — 

and don’t hold it against him, but he was my first campaign 

manager a few seasons ago — Mr. Ken Burton. Mr. Ken Burton 

has joined us today. He’s newly a member of the C & D 

[conservation and development] organization in the RM [rural 

municipality] of Kingsley, and I’d like the members to extend a 

warm welcome to Mr. Burton. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have 

some guests to introduce, seated in your gallery this afternoon 

as well. 

 

And just before I do, may I just offer the comment that it must 

be Christmas because it’s a season that brings people together. 

And moments ago, we just had a former U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] Huskie offensive lineman introduce a group of 

Rams in the gallery. And I want to welcome them as well and 

congratulate them on their individual achievements in the CIS 

and for the Rams football team. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also on a sports note, in your gallery are two of, 

well the finest sports broadcasters in the WHL [Western 

Hockey League]. One is now retired, and I’m happy to report is 

helping me out in my job and has been doing that for a while. 

He used to do colour for the Broncos through a lot of the ’90s. 

His name is Everett Hindley. Members of this House will know 

him. Some have cut ads about him. 

 

But seated with him from Kelowna, seated with him from 

Kelowna is the voice of the Kelowna Rockets. He formerly was 

the voice, the play-by-play voice of the Swift Current Broncos, 

and his family was well known in Swift Current. Now they 

have relocated to Kelowna as well. But they’re together again, 

Mr. Speaker, and I just want to welcome Regan especially back 

to the province. I think the Rockets and the Pats get together 

later tonight and we want to say to Regan, welcome home and 

welcome to this Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to take this opportunity to introduce 

the Acting Chief Electoral Officer, Dave Wilkie, who is seated 

up in the Speaker’s gallery. I ask all the members to welcome 

him to his Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current regulations 

being enforced are creating challenges that create concerns for 

our traditional trappers. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued, and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation, 

regulations with respect to trapping regulations and firearm 

use in consultation with traditional resource users. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many trappers of northern Saskatchewan. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — Oral statements. Excuse me, members’ 

statements. You may do them orally. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Hudson Bay Riders Win Football Championship 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, Carrot River Valley is well 

known as the football capital of Saskatchewan. Now, Mr. 



December 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 203 

Speaker, I have stood in this Chamber many a time bragging 

about the Carrot River Wildcats, but this time, Mr. Speaker, I 

rise to speak about the Hudson Bay Riders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saturday, November the 12th, the Hudson Bay 

Riders won a provincial 2A six-man final in a nail-biting 62-20 

win over the Rosthern Longhorns. I give my condolences to the 

member from Rosthern-Shellbrook. I notice he’s hanging his 

head a bit. But, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to football and the 

opposing teams that have come to northeast Saskatchewan, the 

outcome is usually predictable. I do want to congratulate the 

Rosthern Longhorns for a great season though. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Hudson Bay Riders had a perfect 12 and zero 

season. Unfortunately the weather for the final was not as 

perfect as the Riders’ season was, and we had about 4 inches of 

snow. And although the field was cleaned, it was very slippery 

— not exactly perfect playing conditions. However the good 

people of Carrot River Valley are known to stare down 

adversity. By halftime the Riders had built up a 25-point lead 

and never looked back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like this Assembly to join me in 

congratulating the Hudson Bay Riders and coaches Gene Hauta, 

Ricky Anderson, Bradon Messer, and Trevor Wasilow on a 

super season. Thank you. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Saskatonian Honoured for Acts of Service 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, Corporal Matthew Hrycuik was awarded the Gold 

Life-Saving Award on Thursday, November 15th at Hugh 

Cairns Armouries in Saskatoon for saving two pilots from the 

twin-engine plane crash on April 1st, 2011. 

 

Corporal Hrycuik was nominated for the most prestigious 

honour given by the St. John Ambulance by its former 

president, Don McDonald, who said, “It shows what they’re 

able to do, and a young guy like that needs to be recognized.” 

 

The corporal describes his initial response to the accident by 

saying: 

 

Corporal Rachel Brower and I were heading southbound 

on Wanuskewin Road when we observed the plane 

dropping at an alarming speed. When we came upon the 

crash site, I started running towards the plane as Rachel 

dialled 911. While approaching the wreckage, I did a brief 

scene assessment. With exposed fuel lines split and 

expelling fuel, it was a life over limb situation. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, three years ago in Afghanistan, Corporal 

Hrycuik was recognized for outstanding service as well. The 

corporal provided life-saving first aid for over two hours until a 

medical evacuation was completed. The commander’s 

commendation reads, and I quote: 

 

His professional action within the early days of the 

rotation saved the lives of Afghan soldiers and enabled the 

rapid establishment of trust and respect between the 

Canadian team and the Afghan National Army. 

 

I ask all members in joining me to congratulate Corporal 

Hrycuik for his outstanding service to our community and our 

country. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 

Middle Lake Hosts and Wins 

Cross-Country Championship 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

Saturday, October 15th, my hometown of Middle Lake came 

together to host its first ever provincial cross-country 

championship. The cross-country meet was held at the beautiful 

Lucien Lake Regional Park, which is situated beside the village 

of Middle Lake. 

 

Middle Lake was able to accomplish this feat with the help of 

over 115 dedicated volunteers from surrounding communities. 

Hosting approximately 600 runners, plus spectators and coaches 

and attendants, Middle Lake put on a show to be proud of. 

 

Thirteen runners from Middle Lake competed in the six races 

held throughout the day, with one goal in mind — winning the 

1A school championship for the fourth consecutive year. At the 

end of the day, our runners were successful in their quest, 

capturing their fourth consecutive Saskatchewan High Schools 

Athletic Association 1A provincial cross-country 

championship. 

 

I would like to recognize the hard work and dedication of all 

event volunteers, with a special mention going to Trevor Otsig, 

the coach of Middle Lake Avengers as well as the main 

organizer of this provincial championship. Mr. Speaker, I ask 

all members to join me in congratulating the Middle Lake 

Avengers on winning this prestigious fourth consecutive 

provincial title. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

First Nations and Métis Education Gap 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Education is vital to 

our province’s future. If we’re going to build a truly prosperous 

province for the long term in which everyone has a chance to 

get ahead, achieve their full potential, and realize their 

aspirations, we need to get it right when it comes to education. 

 

This is true for all Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, but is 

especially true for our First Nations and Métis people. Last 

month economist Eric Howe released a report in which he said 

this: “Bridging the Aboriginal education gap is the most 

significant economic challenge confronting Saskatchewan. It is 

also our greatest economic opportunity.” 

 

According to Howe’s report, the social benefit of closing the 

education gap for First Nations and Métis people is $90 billion, 

and the economic benefit of closing the education gap amounts 

to 20 per cent more than all sales of potash in the history of 

Saskatchewan. This is not only a huge challenge for our 



204 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 2011 

province, but it is a huge opportunity. 

 

Unfortunately the Sask Party government’s track record on the 

issue of Aboriginal employment and education is weak, most 

especially due to their cancellation of the Aboriginal 

employment development program. And just last year under the 

federal Conservative government, over 1,000 First Nations 

people in our province were turned down for funding from the 

post-secondary student support program. We can no longer 

afford such short-sighted and irresponsible decisions from the 

provincial and federal governments. We need serious action to 

close the First Nations and Métis education gap in our province. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

North Battleford Educator Honoured 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives me 

great pleasure to rise in this House today to recognize the 

accomplishments of a long-time resident and an educator in 

North Battleford — that’s Mr. Roy Challis. 

 

Roy was recently honoured at the 2011 fall Saskatchewan 

School Boards Association general assembly. He was presented 

with two prestigious awards: a life membership and also the 

Award of Distinction. The Award of Distinction in particular 

honours school board members who demonstrate outstanding 

service to public education in Saskatchewan. 

 

Roy has been involved in education in one form or another all 

of his life, both as a teacher who supported all of his children in 

reaching their full potential and as a board member for the 

Living Sky School Division for 14 years. In 2004 Roy was 

elected to the Saskatchewan School Boards Association 

executive as the urban public representative, and in 2006 he was 

elected president, a position which he held for three years. 

 

Mr. Challis is also well known for his involvement in local arts 

and drama productions, often acting, writing, directing, and 

producing local plays that have brought countless hours of 

pleasure to the residents of The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to join me, along with the 

residents of The Battlefords, in congratulating Mr. Roy Challis 

on receiving this much deserved recognition. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Saskatoon Ambulance Service Marks 35th Year 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 2011 

marks the 35th year of MD Ambulance providing exceptional 

service to the people of Saskatchewan. They are a key part of 

our health care system’s efforts to put our patients first. Every 

day they make a difference in the lives of patients and their 

families by providing timely, high-quality emergency medical 

services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is important that their excellence be 

acknowledged, especially in such a challenging field. They 

deserve recognition and our gratitude for making sure that, 

every day, people in need receive responsible professional care. 

MD Ambulance is one of the premier EMS [emergency medical 

services] providers in the country. Their partnership with 

Saskatchewan air ambulance and role in securing a new mobile 

health bus for the Saskatoon Health Region are just two 

examples of how they have gone beyond what’s expected to 

help patients. 

 

Our government is open to using new approaches to improving 

the patient care experience and efficiency in the health care 

system. Mr. Speaker, it is the patients that benefit the most from 

increased efficiency, and that’s something we all want — better 

care for patients. We will be counting heavily on innovative, 

progressive partners like MD Ambulance as we plan the future 

of mobile health services in Saskatchewan. 

 

Congratulations to MD Ambulance on another great year and 

on 35 years of exceptional service. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

RxFiles Application Developed in Saskatoon 

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to congratulate a team of pharmacists in Saskatoon who 

developed an iPad . . . an iPhone application which is now 

available for purchase on Apple’s App Store. The application is 

called RxFiles. It is a database of prescription drug comparison 

information for health professionals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the RxFiles app [application] contains more than 

85 charts and 2,000 entries of comparisons. It provides practical 

information on advantages, disadvantages, selection, and usage 

considerations on each drug. This information helps health 

professionals make sound decisions in the best interest of the 

patient and their care. 

 

This application is part of a larger RxFiles initiative. The 

initiative is a not-for-profit service which receives funding from 

the sale of drug information resources and a grant from the 

Ministry of Health. This larger service provides academic 

detailing, a form of education outreach for physicians and 

health professionals in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, RxFiles is a well-respected service across Canada 

and has been serving health professionals in Saskatchewan for 

14 years. I would like this Assembly to join me in 

congratulating RxFiles on its innovative approach that enhances 

patient care by ensuring health professionals have easy access 

to drug information. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Power Outages 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are people 

living on Saskatoon’s west side who are very unhappy and 

frustrated. Some have experienced as many as five power 



December 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 205 

outages in the last week. Others have said there’s been nine this 

month alone. Saskatchewan residents deserve better service 

than this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What is the minister’s plan to ensure all SaskPower customers 

have a consistent source of power, something the folks in 

communities like Fairhaven have been without for months? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

we’re fully aware at SaskPower that there have been a number 

of outages recently on the west side of Saskatoon. Couple of 

reasons for this, Mr. Speaker. The majority of the outages have 

occurred as a result of high-voltage, underground cable failures, 

and essentially there are some faulty connectors and a faulty 

controller. And what we do know, Mr. Speaker, is work is 

under way to ensure that these are being replaced. 

 

More broadly based, Mr. Speaker, the main emphasis here is 

making sure that we’re making repairs and making sure that 

we’re revitalizing key aspects of the infrastructure, 

infrastructure that for years was overlooked by members 

opposite. 

 

And I’ll reference just a couple of figures, Mr. Speaker. In 2006 

the members opposite were in power, they invested, through 

SaskPower, $285 million; in 2007 in SaskPower, $280 million. 

In our first year, Mr. Speaker, $422 million in SaskPower 

infrastructure; in our second year, Mr. Speaker, $640 million. In 

fact in our first two years, we saw an 88 per cent increase in 

infrastructure investment in SaskPower because we know that 

we had to make up for the infrastructure deficit that the 

members opposite left. 

 

We continue that work. The work on the west side of Saskatoon 

is under way, and we’re endeavouring to make sure that it will 

be corrected just as soon as possible. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Just for the minister’s information, in the last 

seven years of government, the NDP [New Democratic Party] 

. . . in the last seven years of the NDP government, they 

invested almost 2.5 billion of capital investment in SaskPower. 

So the bottom line is the lights don’t always come on, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We have a Fairhaven mother who’s had to care for her children 

by candlelight. Bathing and feeding your kids in the dark might 

be an adventure once. The first time it’s fun, but it quickly 

grows old. We’ve got residents who are being hit with power 

outages when they try to make meals, when they’re getting 

ready for work in the morning, or when they’re making phone 

calls. 

 

To the minister: these people want to know what he is doing 

now, not two months from now, not three months from now, 

not four months from now, but in January when it’s minus 30 to 

assure them when they hit the power switch that there is in fact 

light, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we know in this instance that there are some specific 

challenges but, Mr. Speaker, SaskPower has decades of 

experience of providing safe, reliable, and affordable energy to 

the people of this province. That’s going to continue. 

 

In this instance, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, the majority of the 

outages have occurred as a result of a high-voltage, 

underground cable failure, and that’s mostly in and around 

connectors and a faulty controller. Those have both been 

replaced already. 

 

And as far as some additional steps, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

working to make sure that there are a number of positions put in 

place to ensure that we’re monitoring the quality assurance. Mr. 

Speaker, this speaks to a decades-old problem as far as 

infrastructure upgrades. We’re continuing this work, especially 

as it relates to the west side of Saskatoon. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

understand there’s going to be a meeting held tomorrow in 

Saskatoon, and SaskPower will have representatives there to 

ensure that we’re dealing directly with citizens. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The owner of 

Panago Pizza on Diefenbaker Drive estimated last week he had 

lost between 1,500 and $2,000 in spoiled pizzas and customers 

unable to call the restaurant. He is afraid that some of his 

customers have become frustrated and won’t come back. When 

he asked for compensation from SaskPower, he was told to 

bring in an alternate source of power. 

 

To the minister: does he think this small business owner and 

others should be compensated for financial and business loss 

due to persistent power outages? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, there’s a 

meeting that’s going to take place tomorrow in Saskatoon, and 

we’re going to make sure that SaskPower officials are there, 

Mr. Speaker. And we’ll make sure that the citizens understand 

that SaskPower has a process whereby customers can submit 

claims for damages. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again this is part of a process on infrastructure 

renewal, Mr. Speaker. We have a track record that speaks 

directly to making sure that we are helping to address the 

immediate concerns that the member is raising as well as the 

more structural concerns that have been decades in the making, 

Mr. Speaker. We’re committed to ensuring that the people of 

this province through SaskPower continue to have safe, 

affordable, and reliable power. And, Mr. Speaker, I know the 

officials are looking forward to the meeting tomorrow. 

 

[14:00] 

 



206 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 2011 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Some of this work 

might take months, it might take years. But the bottom line is, 

what is SaskPower and what is the minister doing to make sure 

that in January, in the height of minus 30 weather, that the 

power is on in the west side of Saskatoon? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. As we 

continue our work through SaskPower, making sure that we’re 

renewing infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, we’re also addressing 

some of the issues directly on the west side of Saskatoon. In this 

instance, Mr. Speaker, most of the outages have been caused 

directly as a result of faulty connectors and a faulty controller. 

Those have both already been replaced, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we can also say, Mr. Speaker, is that these immediate 

steps are also going to be bolstered by a continuous monitoring 

process, Mr. Speaker. We know that there’s an upcoming 

meeting. We’re going to have officials there, Mr. Speaker. And 

we’re going to make sure that, on behalf of SaskPower, the 

people of this province continue to have safe, affordable, and 

reliable power. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re looking forward to 

hearing citizen feedback at that meeting that’s forthcoming. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Shelter Accommodation 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Social 

Services has been housing many people in hotels like the 

Coachman, the Sunrise and the Quality Inn in Regina. There’s 

been one man who’s had to call the Coachman home for seven 

months, Mr. Speaker. He was housed in the Coachman for 

seven months at approximately $2,676 a month, or about $90 a 

day. He asked for an increase in his shelter allowance and was 

denied. The government has made the choice to house people in 

hotels rather than work with them to find affordable and 

appropriate housing. 

 

To the minister: why is this government choosing to pay huge 

hotel bills instead of addressing inadequate shelter allowances? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know 

specifically the case the member is talking about. But I can tell 

you that we have raised emergency shelter rates by 85 per cent, 

and we’ve increased the number of spaces by 130 since we 

became government. Mr. Speaker, we have new spaces in 

Saskatoon in the Salvation Army Mumford House. And we 

know that there is more work to be done in this area, Mr. 

Speaker. And we also know that our hotel usage has decreased 

considerably in the last year. In February 2010, we were using 

an average of 427 rooms a night, and last year it was 30. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know there’s more work to be done to ensure 

that people have a safe place to go in the evenings and at night. 

But we also know that every individual, their cases are looked 

at to find out why they are still in a hotel, and there’s always 

answers and reasons behind that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, being housed in a hotel for 

seven months isn’t emergency shelter and it becomes 

someone’s home. And a hotel is not a home, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We heard yesterday that Regina has the lowest vacancy rate in 

Canada, point six per cent. The average one-bedroom apartment 

in Regina costs $790 a month. Shelter allowance for a single, 

unemployable person is $459. Even if someone is eligible for 

the maximum rental supplement over and above this, this still 

puts them below the average one bedroom, if they can even find 

one, Mr. Speaker. While the core issue certainly is a lack of 

affordable rental units, the immediate issue is inadequate shelter 

allowances. 

 

To the minister: both people, renters and taxpayers, are paying 

for the failure to address people’s pressing housing needs. 

When will the minister recognize shelter allowances fail to 

match the reality of today’s tight rental market? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, we know that the vacancy 

rates right now are about the same as they were last year at this 

time. And we know that there’s an increase in the number of 

people in this province, so we are managing to keep up or get 

ahead of that pace. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we do know that there are people that are in 

shelters right now and there’s more work to be done. Some of 

the work that we’ve done in the last while is making sure that 

we have more affordable units on the market, more people that 

are buying into the idea of having the rental incentive program 

and affordable housing program. Right now we have 960 units 

that have been built since we became government; another 950 

are on the way. Places like Regina have got applications for 900 

rental incentive units. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s more work to be done. We know that, but 

we feel confident that working with the communities and the 

developers right around the province, we can address this issue 

that is part of one of the great parts of about a booming 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the government is currently 

paying for people to live in hotels. It costs about four times as 

much as they are willing to spend on shelter allowances. To the 

minister: she gave us some numbers, but how much is it costing 

us to house our citizens in hotels? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, knowing that 

people are living in a hotel or in a shelter isn’t something that 



December 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 207 

anybody wants to hear about. But doing this is not something 

that happened because we became government. The same thing 

was happening under the NDP. The only difference is we 

increased the amount of money that we’ve given to people in 

shelters. We’ve increased the amount of shelter spaces there 

are, and we’re working on making sure that there are more units 

for people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that we can’t do those alone, and that’s 

why we have about 200 non-government organizations that are 

working with us to ensure that we have places, and not only is it 

a home but a support for people. Mr. Speaker, the 

community-based organizations are working with our 

government, and together we’re going to make a difference to 

everyone in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Just to recap, Mr. Speaker, so the vacancy 

rate is at point six per cent in Regina. The average one-bedroom 

apartment is $790 a month, shelter allowance for a single 

person is $459. Again, even if someone is eligible for the 

maximum rental supplement, this still puts him or her — their 

total housing allowance — $69 below the average cost of a 

one-bedroom apartment, if they can even find one. 

 

The additional money that people pay to have a decent 

apartment comes out of their very limited living allowance, 

which means less food on the table or having to choose which 

prescription to fill. To the minister: taking everything into 

account — the low vacancy rate, the fact that the shelter 

allowances are not enough — is she prepared to immediately 

increase the shelter allowances so people can find adequate and 

affordable housing now? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the member 

opposite cares about this issue, as do all of us on this side of the 

House. That’s why we’re working extremely hard. That’s why 

we’ve got 5,700 units that are being prepared to be constructed 

in the next while. That’s why we’ve invested $309 million in 

housing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the vacancy rate that was talked about yesterday, 

there’s another part of it that makes everybody understand that 

there is work being done. They’re saying, “On the bright side,” 

and I’m quoting from the Leader-Post today: 

 

On the bright side, we’re seeing the market respond. On 

the condominium side, we’ve seen a two-fold increase 

(from 2010). We’ve also noticed an increase in 

rental-designated starts, not just in Regina but right across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

That’s close to 3,000 multi-unit buildings we’ve built in this 

province, a 44 per cent increase from last year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that the shelter rates are something that 

have to be addressed, but in the long run we ought to make sure 

that there are affordable units for people, that there are places 

for people to go at night and to look at their individual needs. 

Mr. Speaker, we will continue to work with the people in the 

province to make sure they’re pleased to call Saskatchewan 

home. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Housing 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 

the Minister of Housing was unable to provide a good 

explanation to reporters between the difference between social 

housing and affordable housing. To the minister: does she now 

understand the difference, and is she able to explain it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of 

people in this province who know all about affordable units and 

social units, and I’m one of them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the affordable units are 90 per cent of the average 

market rent and social is geared to income. But, Mr. Speaker, 

95 per cent of the seniors’ units in this province are social 

housing units, and these are the kind of units that didn’t see 

increases that were talked about yesterday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are building more units. That’s a part of our 

goal as the government is to make sure that there are units for 

people in the province. And not only that, we’ve indexed them 

through the cost of inflation seven times since we became 

government. Mr. Speaker, there is more work to be done, but 

when it comes to housing, our government puts this challenge at 

the front. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, to the hundreds if not thousands 

of people in affordable housing today, that’s cold comfort as 

they’re thinking about what to do. But here’s a quote from the 

minister’s scrum yesterday: “Right now we cannot have people 

staying in places that are below market value and just staying 

there.” To the minister: what is the purpose of affordable 

housing, if not to be below market value? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — We know that the affordable housing 

markets are 90 per cent of the average market rate. We know 

that. Social housing is geared to income. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, all of a sudden after being out of government 

for a number of years, the NDP now has a real concern about it. 

I wonder why they didn’t have a concern about it when they did 

not increase the benefits to seniors between 1992 and 2007, 

despite during that time having a 40 per cent increase in 

inflation. And the NDP did not increase shelter rates for 13 out 

of 16 of their years when they were in government, and at that 

time there was an inflation of over 30 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during that time when they were in government it 

didn’t look important to them to increase the shelter rates. Mr. 

Speaker, we know as government we have to increase them. We 

did it seven times in the last four years. There’s more work to 



208 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 2011 

be done, and it’s something that’s part of our policy as 

government. I assure you, Mr. Speaker, this issue is very 

important to us. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of 

Housing was not only confused about social housing and 

affordable housing, she was also very confused about who’s 

eligible for the rental supplement. Today I ask the minister does 

she now understand the difference about who is eligible and 

who’s not? Can she explain this to the House? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve explained to the 

member opposite a number of times, and I’ll say it again. With 

social housing, the rent is geared to income and affordable 

housing, it’s 90 per cent of the average market rent. Mr. 

Speaker, that is the premise we’ve been working on. It hasn’t 

changed since they’ve become government. And we know that 

there are a number of units, like 10,500 senior units in this 

province that are under social housing. The rest of them are 

under affordable housing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to affordability and what we are 

doing as government, we have decreased the number of people 

that are paying taxes by 114,000. We’ve decreased the debt. 

We’ve put money back into the pockets of people. Mr. Speaker, 

single, low-income seniors in our province right now have 

saved $1,200 per year in their pockets because of the taxes and 

the benefit changes. And if you’re a couple, it’s $2,000 per 

year. Mr. Speaker, there’s more work to be done. I know there 

is. But, Mr. Speaker, this is the work that we’re doing at this 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, my question was specifically 

about the rent supplement and who is eligible for the rent 

supplement. Would she please answer the question? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — People that are eligible for the rent 

supplement are families, Mr. Speaker, or people with a 

disability are eligible for our rental housing supplement. I think 

the member opposite should know that. We have about 5,900 

people right now that are benefitting from the supplement, and 

it’s something that we look at and we index. It wasn’t done 

under the previous government, and it’s the type of thing that 

we continue to look at. It’s an important part of our budgetary 

process as we go ahead. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 

in the media scrum, the Minister of Housing was asked what is 

the advantage of Sask Housing if rents are going to simply keep 

pace with the market. The minister responded with this, and I 

quote: “Because there are still some that are going to be able to 

have the supplements as well.” 

 

To the minister: is it really her view that the advantage of Sask 

Housing, that people there can live there, can still receive 

supplements? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I think again that the 

member opposite knows that in certain circumstances the rental 

supplements are available to people, Sask Housing tenants. For 

example, a single mother whose income fluctuates is often 

eligible for a top-up from both the rental supplement program 

and from the Saskatchewan employment supplement. Our 

income assistance divisions and housing authorities work 

together on these issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that the members opposite would like to 

just talk about what happened yesterday. I’d like to talk about 

what their concern was a number of years ago when we had 

people who were living in homes that were not kept up. There 

was no investment into the affordable housing. In fact the last 

year that they were government, they built 58 units. In the first 

four years we were in government, we built 968 units, Mr. 

Speaker. Let’s talk about who cares about people who are 

needing help from our government. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

very proud of the fact that we introduced the rent supplement. 

But the issue today is about the rents are increasing in Sask 

Housing. The tenants are very upset, so that’s where we’re 

focusing on this issue today. And that minister should be aware 

of it and not be talking about last year or the year before, or in 

the out years. 

 

I just want to ask her a question though. The minister repeated 

several times yesterday that if the rent in the government’s 

affordable housing units is not close to rent in the private 

market, there would be no incentive for people to move out. To 

the minister: has she changed the mandate of Sask Housing, or 

is it still to provide safe and secure housing to those who cannot 

afford other options? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the policies that we have in 

Sask Housing are ones that are always being reviewed because 

we’ve got to make sure that the homes we own as government, 

that the people of this province own, are geared to people who 

most need them, Mr. Speaker. And you know, what we are 

doing at the same time is making sure that people have more 

money in their pockets and making sure that people are in those 

housing units that belong to the government, if they have an 

opportunity to move forward because they’ve earned more 

money, let’s look at it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But at the same time, Mr. Speaker, I would think the members 

opposite should be pleased that our province is going ahead, 

that there are more people that are off the income tax rolls, that 

there are more people working, that our unemployment rate is 

one of the lowest in Canada. And together we are making sure 



December 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 209 

that Saskatchewan is going ahead. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 

the minister was asked the following question, and I quote, 

“Where would you find a better deal than social housing?” Her 

answer was this: “Well if we raise the rents and the rent is 

higher than you can get in the private market, they probably 

would move out.” 

 

To the minister: is that the Sask Party’s plan, to raise rent in 

affordable housing units so it is higher than the rent in the 

private market? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know whether the 

member opposite is running out of questions or what he’s doing 

because right now what we’re talking about is making sure that 

it stays 90 per cent of the average rent. Mr. Speaker, that hasn’t 

changed. 

 

But we also do know that there is more work to be done in this 

area. Mr. Speaker, we’re building affordable units, not just in 

Saskatoon and Regina and Prince Albert but right across the 

province. In fact our five point housing strategy talks about 

involving community partners, involving developers, involving 

builders, and making sure that right across a growing province 

there are units for people to be living in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know the members opposite are focusing on 

affordability because they don’t believe that there’s a bright 

future in this province. In fact they probably are the only nine 

people left in the province who don’t because the rest of them 

are on this side of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, of course we’re focusing on 

affordability, and it is the right thing to do. People are talking 

about that right across the province. So forgive us if we’re 

doing our job asking about affordable issues. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it was abundantly clear that as of yesterday 

the Minister of Housing had no understanding about the 

purpose of Sask Housing’s affordable housing units and when 

she chose to increase the rents. To the minister: now that she’s 

got her head around this, about what affordable housing’s 

supposed to be, will she do the right thing and cancel the rent 

increases? Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, out of the 10,500 senior 

units that are operated by Sask Housing, these are the social 

housing. None of these units are subject to increase. Out of the 

remaining, which is 3 per cent of the seniors’ units, they have 

an increase to their affordable housing. We’ve looked at why, 

what we can to do to make sure that it’s affordable. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I’ve told the member opposite that there’s another 

$1,200 in the pockets of single seniors and there’s $2,000 more 

in the pockets of couples. Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

didn’t look at this issue when they were in government because 

they didn’t increase seniors’ income benefits between 1992 and 

2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is it . . . the people that they have right now, 

their seniors are important to the people of this province, and 

making sure that we have double the seniors, the number of 

people on seniors’ income plan. And after this year’s election 

three times increased, they have tripled the amount of people 

under the seniors’ income plan, Mr. Speaker, three times of the 

amount of money under those people. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 29 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1997 

sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

privilege today to rise in the House to move that Bill No. 29, 

The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2011 

be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 29, The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2011 be read for the first 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 30 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 30, The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 30, The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 be 

read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 



210 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 2011 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, not surprisingly, the next 

sitting of the House. 

 

Bill No. 31 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments 

Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 2002 

sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 31, The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 31, The Enforcement of 

Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2011 be read for the first 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 32 — The Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders 

Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi sur les 

ordonnances alimentaires interterritoriales 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 31, 

The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2011 

be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I apologize. I move that Bill No. 32, The 

Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders Amendment Act, 2011 be 

now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved Bill No. 32, The Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders 

Amendment Act, 2011 for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of this 

Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 33 — The Residential Tenancies 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 33, 

The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2011 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General, Bill No. 33, The Residential Tenancies 

Amendment Act, 2011 be read a first time. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of this 

Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

Bill No. 34 — The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 

Corporation Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that Bill No. 34, The Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation Act, 2011 be now introduced and read 

the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Agriculture that Bill No. 34, The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 

Corporation Act, 2011 be read a first time. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of this 

Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I have a 

communication from the Lieutenant Governor. Please rise. 

 

Dear Mr. Speaker: 

 

Pursuant to section 67 of The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act, 2007, I hereby inform the Assembly 



December 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 211 

of the membership of the Board of Internal Economy 

effective November 24th, 2011 [that should have been 

December the 8th, 2011]: Hon. Dan D’Autremont, Chair; 

Hon. Don Morgan, Q.C.; Hon. Jeremy Harrison; Christine 

Tell, MLA; Doreen Eagles, MLA; David Forbes, MLA; 

Warren McCall, MLA. 

 

Yours sincerely, Dr. Gordon L. Barnhart, Lieutenant 

Governor, province of Saskatchewan. 

 

You may be seated. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Pursuant to section 286 of The Election Act, 

1996, I am submitting 95 copies of the report of the Saskatoon 

Northwest by-election, October 18th, 2010, to be tabled on 

Wednesday, December 14th, 2011. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 1 through 117. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled written 

questions 1 through 117, answered and tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 19 — The Assessment Appraisers 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of Bill No. 19, The Assessment Appraisers 

Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill will amend The Assessment Appraisers 

Act and make consequential amendments to The Assessment 

Management Agency Act. It also makes a related amendment to 

The Agrologists Act, 1994. 

 

The Assessment Appraisers Act provides a legal framework for 

the regulated occupation of assessment appraisers who value 

property for municipal property tax purposes. The Act and its 

regulations have been in effect since November 1st, 2002. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments proposed in this Bill are needed 

to do three things. One, first they will clarify the Saskatchewan 

Assessment Appraisers Association, SAAA’s role in certifying 

or licensing all assessment appraisers involved in valuing 

property for municipal property tax purposes, whether or not 

they are members of the SAAA or not. This will ensure the 

credentials of all assessment appraisers are verified. 

 

Second, amendments are needed to remove requirements related 

to the residency, employment, and membership, including one 

that exists in The Agrologists Act, 1994. This is to ensure that 

accreditation is based on knowledge, skills, education, and 

experience to better comply with the province’s commitments 

and obligations regarding labour mobility. 

 

And third, amendments will update the Act to the current model 

used for professions Acts in Saskatchewan, continuing 

government’s practice to refine and update professions 

legislation ensuring it meets the needs of the profession, the 

association, and the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will expand on each of these three goals in turn. 

In terms of the first group of amendments, the Bill will clarify 

and reaffirm that the association fulfills two roles: an 

accreditation and licensing role for members and a certification 

role for non-members.  

 

In 2002 the SAAA assumed the responsibility to verify the 

credentials of all assessment appraisers under The Assessment 

Management Agency Act. Clarification of the certification role 

is required to enable qualified assessment appraisers who do not 

wish to be members of the SAAA to work in Saskatchewan. 

Certifying the credentials of non-members includes verification 

of education and experience requirements as outlined in the Act 

and The Assessment Appraisers Regulations. The Bill ensures 

these individuals will meet the standards for proficiency and 

competency equivalent to the accreditation requirements for 

licensed members. Even though all assessment appraisers must 

be certified by the SAAA prior to working as an assessment 

appraiser, there is no requirement for them to become members 

of the SAAA. 

 

Also included in this group of amendments, Mr. Speaker, are 

requirements for the SAAA to maintain and annually submit a 

register of all accredited members and certified non-members to 

SAMA [Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency] for 

quality assurance purposes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second area of amendments will improve 

labour mobility. These changes clarify that licensing and 

certification are to be based on experience and education and 

remove requirements for residency in the province, 

employment, or membership in an association. These 

amendments include an amendment to The Agrologists Act, 

1994 that will allow qualified individuals who may not be 

agrologists to be certified to value agricultural land for property 

tax purposes. These qualified individuals would include rural 

assessment appraisers from other jurisdictions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize here that the amendments 

contained in the Bill, along with companion amendments to The 

Assessment Appraisers Regulations relating to qualification 

requirements, still ensure that only the qualified individuals will 

be able to be certified and licensed to assess land for property 

tax purposes. This includes agricultural land valuation. The 

proposed amendments and coordination with the regulations 

will set out the knowledge, skills, and abilities required to be a 

qualified assessment appraiser for property tax purposes. 

Agrologists will still be able to undertake agricultural land 

valuations, as will others who meet the education and 

experience that is required, and that will be set out in the 



212 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 2011 

regulations. 

 

[14:30] 

 

My ministry is continuing to work on regulations that meet the 

needs of the profession and that comply with the province’s 

labour mobility commitments and obligations. These 

regulations will be put forward once the amendments to the Act 

have passed in 2012, and will be developed in consultation with 

the SAAA, the Saskatchewan Assessment Management 

Agency, the Saskatchewan Institute of Agrologists, and the 

ministries of Agriculture and Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the third group of amendments in this Bill 

will update the Act to the current standards used for 

professional legislation in Saskatchewan. The proposed 

amendments in this respect include adding new provisions 

regarding the duty and objects of the association, ministerial 

bylaws, and restricted licences for those who do not have all the 

credentials outlined in the regulations, and could be used for 

trainees. 

 

These amendments also address issues raised by the SAAA 

related to regulating its members, including providing for the 

new accredited title, Licensed Assessment Appraiser of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments were developed in consultation 

with representatives of the assessment appraisers sector, 

municipal associations, and provincial governments over 2009, 

2010, and 2011. I would like to take the opportunity to thank all 

those individuals who took the time to provide input, advice, 

and feedback in the development of this legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill will assure the Saskatchewan Assessment 

Appraisers Association has a clearer direction regarding 

accreditation, certification, and membership issues. It will 

provide clarity regarding its role in the certification of 

non-member assessment appraisers and supports the ability for 

qualified individuals from other jurisdictions to perform 

municipal property tax evaluations, thus ensuring labour 

mobility. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, this Bill continues the government’s 

practice to consult with regulated professions, to refine and 

update legislation, ensuring it meets the needs of the profession, 

the association, and the public. The Ministry of Municipal 

Affairs intends to continue working with the assessment 

appraisal sector to ensure that clear and appropriate regulations 

for the profession are established to work in concert with the 

amendments contained in this Bill. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 19, The 

Assessment Appraisers Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister for Municipal Affairs has 

moved second reading of Bill No. 19, The Assessment 

Appraisers Amendment Act, 2011. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 

behalf of the opposition, I want to offer our comments and 

insight on this particular Bill. I also want to thank the 

information that was flown through to or certainly sent to us as 

the official opposition to make sure that we had the opportunity 

to look at it very briefly and offer our initial comments. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, the assessors in 

Saskatchewan play a very crucial role. And as the minister 

pointed out that every four years, every town and village, and 

certainly the people that have property in the province of 

Saskatchewan, have to have an assessor to come to their 

property and certainly look at what the property is worth and do 

the fine work that they do in this particular field, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think if we look at the Bill, An Act to amend The 

Assessment Appraisers Act, there’s a lot of different questions 

that pop up immediately. As an example, we look at their 

association. Did the association ask for this particular effort by 

the ministry? And if they didn’t, what kind of role did they 

play? Obviously, you know, if you have an association — a 

professional association — and if they’re telling people that 

they need help, as the case may be, that the . . . You’re seeing 

that there’s a lot of different professions that are not as full as 

they once were, and perhaps this might be the case in the 

province. 

 

So the assessors themselves are out there doing their work, and 

I’m not sure of their numbers, how many members did they 

have in their association, what the process was in making sure 

that they were part of this. And the kind of list goes on from 

two or three questions to all of a sudden we come up to 20 to 30 

questions. So I think it’s really important that, as the opposition, 

that we pay very close attention to what this Bill is trying to do. 

 

And I notice the key phrase that the minister used in some of his 

comments, mobility of trade. And I think what this is, Mr. 

Speaker — again as we’ve seen evidence over the last couple of 

days — there is a lot of Bills that are being attached to the New 

West Partnership where all of a sudden Alberta and 

Saskatchewan and BC [British Columbia] are forming this 

partnership. And we have to ask what the impacts are, not only 

for the environment, not only for workers’ safety, but for the 

associations as well, the professional associations. And that’s 

one of the reasons why, when you talk about the assessors in 

this particular Act, what does their association say about this? 

Do they want this thing to happen? Are they doing this under 

the gun in terms of being pressured by the government to allow 

this to move forward? These are some of the questions that we 

have to ask and we’ll certainly ask over the next several 

months. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I go back to the numbers. I’m not sure how 

many properties on a yearly basis that is being assessed. But 

obviously as you know, from what I understand, that the 

assessors go into these communities and they do assess what the 

property is worth. And of course that’s part of the taxation 

process. And these assessors certainly have gone through a lot 

of years of training. The experience is certainly there, and as I 

mentioned at the outset, that their work is quite valuable. 

 

That being said, Mr. Speaker, as you allow others groups and 

organizations from other jurisdictions to come in, and they 

don’t have to join your association but they can have the same 

blessing as the association members might have in terms of 



December 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 213 

being recognized by the people of Saskatchewan and 

recognized by the industry in general, does that create 

problems? That’s the big question that I have as a result of this 

Bill. So I think we have to really begin to dig into the whole 

notion of, is this being acceptable or accepted by the association 

themselves? 

 

Now I’m not sure how many years that are necessary to take the 

program to be a certified assessor, Mr. Speaker. And you look 

at some of the other jurisdictions that may want to come into 

Saskatchewan. Is it only from the Alberta and BC partnership or 

is it right across the province? Is there a shortage of all the 

assessors that we have in the province? Are there some constant 

complaints? Is the association supporting this move? These are 

some of the instinctive questions that we have as a result of 

hearing what the minister has to say. 

 

And granted, you know, there is always room for improvement 

when you talk about bringing in new people into different fields 

and trades. And assessing property is one of those trades and 

fields that may need extra people or extra bodies. I’m not 

arguing that. But I’m just making sure that the effort of trying to 

build up those numbers are done in a co-operative and orderly 

fashion, that this is not all about the New West Partnership and 

shoving this thing down the association’s throat to achieve what 

is a political plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I want to point out to the people that may be involved in this 

particular field, the assessors, there’s so many different 

challenges that they have and so many different evaluations that 

they have to incorporate, so many different properties that they 

have to adapt to when they do their assessing. And it is quite an 

art. 

 

And I will certainly point out that it’s not an art in the sense that 

you can allow some half-hearted people that don’t know exactly 

what they’re doing into your field. There’s always that turf that 

you want to protect. So that’s one of the things I think people 

ought to be worried about when it comes to this particular Act. 

 

And the people of Saskatchewan deserve a lot, Mr. Speaker. 

And certainly because all their properties — whether it’s in 

northern Saskatchewan or whether it’s in the cities or whether 

it’s in the towns and villages that are throughout our province 

— their property is impacted by this Bill. Because obviously the 

people that come to your homes to do the assessment of your 

property, then you want to make sure that that assessor or that 

person, that man or woman, are not only certified but they’re 

accepted by their association and that they have the 

Saskatchewan interests in mind and not bringing in other 

prejudices from other practices from other jurisdictions into our 

province. And that’s I think a key message that we would 

certainly want to bring forward. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s all about understanding what the assessor 

does. It’s all about the accreditation of the assessor to make sure 

that what they had to do to gain the reputation, and certainly 

gain the ability to be classified as a assessor, that we don’t 

discredit that, that we make sure that this is part of what the 

government does, is recognize those that have paid their dues, 

those that have the experience and those that know exactly what 

they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So as I mentioned at the outset again of this Bill, that people’s 

. . . the role of the assessor is vital. There are hundreds of 

millions of dollars at stake not only in property evaluations but 

in looking at the budgets of major cities, of towns and villages. 

And this is something that we can’t not take the time to 

understand as an opposition, but more so that we would ask the 

public to make sure they pay very close attention to what is 

being done here when you’re dealing with the assessors 

association in general. 

 

I did not note, in the minister’s comments or didn’t catch it if he 

did speak about it, the fact that the association themselves, what 

is their feeling towards this effort? Are they supportive? Is there 

some reservations on some of the fronts? I didn’t get that 

information. And of course, we want to make sure that we don’t 

take the minister’s word that this occurred. Because there is two 

things that ought to be first and foremost in people’s minds, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

When you hear a minister saying that we consulted with this 

association on this matter, people ought to know that “we 

consulted” could be a whole different meaning from their 

perspective to a whole different understanding from the 

association’s point of view. Because you can consult with 

people; it doesn’t mean you necessarily have their co-operation. 

And that’s the key point I’m trying to make here today, is that 

as they stand up and they say we consulted with their 

association, they seem fine with this, Mr. Speaker, that does not 

mean that they’re supportive of this. 

 

And a lot of times we find that this particular government will 

shove things down a lot of association’s throats, and this might 

be the case with this particular Bill. And that’s one of the 

reasons why we need to have that private consultation with their 

association to see if there’s some way that we can strengthen 

this Act or expose the weakness in this Act that they want 

exposed so the people of Saskatchewan know that this is 

something that needs to be looked at, that this is something that 

needs to be changed, and that we would want their association 

to speak up and to stand up and to bring forward those changes 

that they desperately may want, Mr. Speaker. And I underline, 

may want. 

 

Now I think one of the other points that we would raise is that 

people in Saskatchewan usually don’t have much involvement 

with the actual assessment of their property. What they do is 

they hire a bunch of assessors. And of course the towns’ and 

villages’ leaders, the mayors and council, they have more of an 

active role with the assessors. 

 

And SAMA itself has been around for many, many years. And 

they’re the association that does a lot of work, and they’re 

directed to do a lot of work. And they have had budgets that 

they’ve had control of, and they’ve been doing this kind of 

work for years and years and years. So as an agency, as an 

agency, what is their position on this matter? Are they 

supportive? 

 

Again going back to the demand; is there a demand for 

assessors? Was there a call by their association or the members 

or individual members or a sector of the association, they’re 

asking us to do this? Was there a specific problem that they 

wanted to help solve and they asked the minister to put this in 



214 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 2011 

place? And we don’t have that information. We don’t know that 

for certainty, Mr. Speaker. So that’s one of the things I think we 

need to make sure that we look at and we try and seek that 

information as best we can. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I said in the Bill, that the Bill, as per the 

minister’s comments, are quite straightforward, that they want 

to be able to bring in an assessor. And the assessor could come 

from different places in the country, I’m assuming, and that as 

long as they meet the association of assessors criteria and 

qualifications, they can actually do assessment in the province. 

And they don’t have to be a member, but the association has to 

certify their skill, has to certify their ability. 

 

And that’s kind of where I get a bit confused. Why would the 

association allow other assessors to come into our province that 

may have different ideas or different training or different tools 

that they bring from their jurisdiction and not have them 

become part of the provincial association? It kind of seems odd 

at times that if you look at the one example, one of the Bills 

yesterday when they said if you register as a company in one 

jurisdiction, you can be recognized in all the other three. In this 

case with the assessment association, they’re saying that you 

don’t have to be a member in Saskatchewan, but as long as 

you’re certified by these guys, you can certainly do the 

assessment of property in our province. 

 

So it’s kind of a contradiction here in terms of saying on one 

hand you don’t have to follow these rules in our province, but at 

the same time if you register to do business in BC, you can do 

business in the province of Saskatchewan. So is there an attack 

on the association of professional people in our province? And 

that’s kind of what we need to find out. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of challenges in this particular 

Bill that we can see almost immediately. There are things that 

we don’t like that we have a lot of questions on. We need to sit 

down and certainly speak with SAMA and with the association 

themselves to see how they feel about this particular issue. And 

again the questions we have is, why is the minister doing this at 

this time? Was there a desire on their part, or was there a heavy 

need on the industry part? Like how does that work? Is it 

something that they wanted? 

 

So again at the outset, this Bill primarily talks about making 

sure that we have access to more appraisers and people that are 

able to assess property properly in the province, and this is 

about allowing them to come into our province, do their work 

as long as they meet the certification of the association but do 

not have to be members. Now I don’t know if that’s generally 

accepted by the people of Saskatchewan. I don’t know, as I 

mentioned, whether the association likes that idea. I don’t know 

if SAMA cares otherwise in terms of as long as they get the 

work done. 

 

These are some of the things we need to find out about this 

particular Bill because it’s so important on two fronts. It’s so 

important on two fronts that this work be done properly. One 

involves the assessment of your home, and of course it involves 

the land taxes you pay to your city, town, or village. So we need 

to find that out, and we also need to do a contrast, a contrast of 

how some of these appraisers are actually trained in different 

provinces. Is Alberta’s training less than Saskatchewan’s? I, 

being a Saskatchewan guy, I would say yes, every other 

jurisdiction doesn’t meet our standards. Well, Mr. Speaker, is 

there a community college somewhere in BC that automatically 

offers appraisal courses for six weeks and, bang, all of a sudden 

they’re certified? 

 

So we have to make sure that what happens is the industry and 

the craft of these appraisers — the work that they do, the effort 

that they undertake, the training that they have, the standards 

that they set — is not lowered as a result of this particular Bill, 

of allowing other people that may have less experience, less 

desire, less professionalism into the province, and all they’ve 

got to do is prove that they were trained in this and they don’t 

have to be a member of the association. 

 

So that’s where I kind of . . . there’s a lot of red flags in that 

general area, Mr. Speaker. And we need to have that connect 

with the people that are involved with this industry, and mayors 

and reeves and councillors are also involved, school divisions 

as well. So you can see that we can speak on this particular Bill 

for the next two hours, if necessary. But obviously we have to 

make sure people out there in the province know exactly what is 

being done here. And we have to make sure that they have the 

opportunity to come back and to make changes or challenge this 

government or to provide information to the opposition. There’s 

all these avenues that they could take advantage of to make sure 

that their opinions and their take and certainly their comments 

and their solutions to this particular Bill, Bill No. 19, to make 

sure that the minister and the government and the people 

understand what this is all about. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, a lot more questions than answers from the 

minister’s initial comments. We will vigorously look through 

this Bill. We will investigate with all the stakeholders as to 

what the challenges may be. And we will fulfill our role as the 

opposition, and we will seek that advice. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, at the outset I said it seemed pretty 

straightforward. But as we know, there’s always ulterior 

motives with this government. And we look very carefully at 

every Bill that comes our way, and we shall continue doing so 

to ensure that this Assembly works as it should work and the 

people of Saskatchewan have as much information in front of 

them as possible. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 

Bill No. 19. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 19, The Assessment 

Appraisers Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 20 — The Planning and Development 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Municipal 



December 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 215 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of Bill No. 20, An Act to amend The 

Planning and Development Act, 2007. The Act to amend The 

Planning and Development Act, 2007, P & D [planning and 

development] Act, updates the municipal planning framework. 

The framework provides municipalities with clear, consistent, 

and effective tools for land use planning to promote economic 

growth, environmental stewardship, social and cultural 

development, and co-operative partnerships with other 

municipalities, governments, First Nations, Métis entrepreneurs, 

and interested stakeholders. 

 

Community planning engages the public to build a vision 

founded on the values and assets of a community and articulates 

this vision in a plan to attract and secure investment which 

meets the community’s goals and objectives into the future. 

This Act will improve the opportunities for intermunicipal 

co-operation, servicing, and dispute resolution, contributing to 

vibrant, safe, self-reliant communities and regions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through 2009, 2010, 2011, Municipal Affairs 

initiated extensive stakeholder consultations in a response to 

requests from municipal, business, and community stakeholders 

for legislative amendments to increase the transparency of fees, 

the range of eligible items for which fees and levies could be 

collected, servicing arrangements between municipalities, the 

application of architectural controls to development, and 

dispute resolution for district planning commissions. The 

amendments also respond to pressures arising from 

intermunicipal disputes, the need to improve the options for 

intermunicipal co-operation, the complexities of decision 

making in large planning districts, and regional infrastructure 

and servicing challenges. 

 

The consultations involved municipal governments and 

associations, industry sector groups, agricultural and 

environmental agencies, the heritage sector, planning districts, 

the transportation sector, professional associations, and 

provincial ministries. Mr. Speaker, the input from these 

consultations has been instrumental in developing these 

amendments and will make a substantial contribution to 

building the future of Saskatchewan’s communities. 

 

The amendments are designed to provide additional flexibility 

for municipalities to jointly plan and manage areas of common 

interest, improve the mechanics of decision making for large 

district planning commissions, provide the minister with the 

ability to delegate approving authority status to a district 

planning authority, provide dispute resolution processes for 

district planning commissions and district planning authorities, 

increase municipal flexibility to effectively service and cover 

the cost of development, and address incidental housekeeping 

items. 

 

I will take just a few minutes to share some details of the 

amendments. 

 

Additional flexibilities being proposed for municipalities to 

jointly plan and manage areas of common interest. Proposed 

changes create a new framework for planning, providing four 

rather than two options for municipalities to plan jointly and 

manage areas of common interest. To help facilitate joint 

planning initiatives, intermunicipal development agreements are 

proposed to help manage growth pressures at the urban-rural 

fringe. These agreements are an expeditious option for 

municipalities to address a variety of challenges, such as joint 

planning, dispute resolution, infrastructure management, and 

environmental stewardship. This type of co-operation is being 

demonstrated around Estevan, east of Regina, and throughout 

Saskatchewan where intermunicipal planning is proving 

beneficial. 

 

Joint initiatives set the stage for more formal partnerships, and 

we are pleased to see the beginnings of 12 potentially new 

district planning commissions as a result of incentive funding 

from the planning for growth program. The proposed 

amendments will improve the mechanics of decision making for 

large district planning commissions by providing flexibility in 

the district plan and a mechanism to address local land use 

issues which do not affect other members of a district. 

 

Under the proposal, municipalities affiliated with the planning 

district will be able to prepare a district plan which can function 

in one of two ways: where local plans do not exist, the district 

plan may contain both regional and local policies; alternatively 

where local plans do exist, the district plan will provide broad, 

regional direction to its members. This flexible approach 

ensures existing districts are not impacted and better 

accommodates large planning districts, such as WaterWolf with 

35 municipalities and one First Nation. In this situation, it is 

impractical to have a single plan that meets the needs of all the 

communities, and it is cumbersome to amend, requiring 

complementary resolutions from all participating 

municipalities. 

 

The proposal also provides the opportunity for district planning 

authority to be granted approving authority status. DPA [district 

planning authority] are corporate bodies authorized by their 

member councils to make planning districts on official 

community plans and zoning bylaws, administer the planning 

process, and issue development permits. A DPA with approving 

authority status would have expanded authority for planning 

and zoning under the P & D Act and would have the autonomy 

to approve subdivisions, thereby enhancing local and regional 

capacity. Although there are currently no district planning 

authorities in the province, there is one district planning 

commission considering this transition. This amendment would 

provide the opportunity for the DPA to offer expanded, 

centralized, and professional planning and development 

services. 

 

New provisions have also been prepared, consistent with The 

Cities Act and The Municipalities Act, to provide dispute 

resolution processes for district planning commissions and 

district planning authorities. Where a municipality and a 

planning district is unable to resolve a dispute with other 

members and has requested withdrawal or where a planning 

district has requested dissolution, the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs may refer the matter to the Saskatchewan Municipal 

Board. These amendments provide a non-political process for 

resolving municipal disputes and encourages intermunicipal 

co-operation and provincial interest. 

 

As the province continues to enjoy sustained growth, it is 



216 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 2011 

essential municipalities have flexibility to effectively service 

and cover the cost of development. Municipalities that recover 

the true cost of servicing new development reduce the demand 

on the province to provide additional infrastructure funding and 

reduce the infrastructure deficit to the community.  

 

The P & D Act currently provides municipalities with a variety 

of tools to recover the cost of managing and servicing new 

development. These include zoning bylaw fees or subdivision 

fees, and servicing fees, and development levies. The proposed 

amendments will ensure zoning bylaw and subdivision fees 

established by municipalities are rational and transparent to the 

public and development industry. Changes to development 

levies and servicing agreements provide municipalities with the 

flexibility to enter into agreements on lands outside of their 

jurisdiction if they are directly servicing a subdivision or 

developments. Provisions allowing for the negotiation of 

municipal utility parcels as part of servicing agreements have 

been added as well. This will ensure adequate land is set aside 

for the installation of municipal public works. 

 

Several general housekeeping issues raised by stakeholders 

since the adoption of the P & D Act have been addressed, 

including clarifying development of appeal board membership, 

architectural controls, bylaw notification requirements, and 

exemption from subdivision approval for federal rail 

development. 

 

Amendments requested by municipalities and the development 

industry which have not been addressed within this proposal 

include the request by SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities], SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association], and the cities of Saskatoon and 

Regina to expand the list of fees and levies to include fire 

suppression infrastructure and facilities. Home builders and 

developers opposed the provisions which they believe do not 

account for the impact on current and future homeowners, 

renters, consumer spending, housing affordability, or economic 

investment into major centres and more broadly Saskatchewan. 

They also oppose the shift from funding this type of 

infrastructure and facility through new development rather than 

general taxation. As a result, this provision has been removed 

and will be considered in future discussions with the sector and 

development industry. 

 

Also not addressed in the request, to provide for municipalities 

to specify architectural details such as colour, texture, and type 

of materials as a condition of a discretionary development 

permit or contracting zoning approval. Tools already exist 

within the P & D Act to provide for the establishment of 

architectural control districts to maintain the character or theme 

of neighbourhoods. 

 

Finally, request to change the servicing agreement process to 

allow subdivision approval to be granted prior to the signing of 

a servicing agreement was considered impractical as it does not 

protect the interests of the municipality, and providing 

mechanisms to permit the collection of fees or levies following 

annexation without subdivision or redevelopment will require 

additional analysis and discussion. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I’m confident that these amendments 

maintain local autonomy, increase local flexibility to address 

the development concerns, provide greater clarity in community 

planning processes, and enhance intermunicipal opportunities 

for co-operation. I would also like to note we received broad 

support from the municipal sector, the Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities, and the Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association on these amendments. I 

would urge each and every member of the House to review and 

support this Bill. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move second 

reading of Bill No. 20. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister for Municipal Affairs has 

moved second reading of Bill No. 20, The Planning and 

Development Amendment Act, 2011. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m also 

pleased to join the debate and certainly offer our insight on Bill 

No. 20. And what I would point out, Mr. Speaker, is that this 

particular Bill certainly is rife with challenges and questions 

and problems that we foresee, and that’s why it’s nice to be able 

to get up here today and explain some of the challenges that we 

see and our perspective on this Bill. So certainly from the 

opposition’s perspective, I am quite pleased to join the debate. 

 

It’s always important to point out that when you looked at the 

problem of trying to cope with growth, that is always a 

work-in-progress. Mr. Speaker, from 2001 the province of 

Saskatchewan has seen a lot of the economic growth that we’re 

still benefiting from this day, and we’re pleased to see that 

growth continues. Now what people ought to know out there in 

the province of Saskatchewan is that the growth will continue in 

spite of this government, just that Saskatchewan is great in what 

they do. The business community, the people are certainly are 

in tune with what needs to happen. We have oil and gas. We 

have diamond. We have forests. We have the works coming to 

the province. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And the province of Saskatchewan is rich. We’ve always 

maintained that. And now you look at how the people have 

come and finally recognized our province after a number of 

tough years in the ’80s. It’s nice to see that that growth 

continues in the ’90s and certainly in 2000 and beyond. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would point out, I would point out that the 

district planning commission, which I think is really a concept 

that we need to look at, that as you look at how Saskatchewan 

has developed . . . And I can remember a headline in 2001. And 

it certainly pointed out and the headline read that 

“Saskatchewan’s star is shining bright” in terms of the 

economy. That headline still stuck in my mind because we can 

see that there was a lot of activity, things were starting to move, 

and things were going really great, Mr. Speaker. And what 

happened at the time of 2003 when the election came along, the 

people of Saskatchewan gave the then government, NDP, the 

opportunity to continue that work, Mr. Speaker. And you can 

see that as times went on, we got better and we got stronger as a 

province. People were moving to Saskatchewan, and the 

economy was really beginning to boom, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what we’ve told the caretakers of that economy, the 

Saskatchewan Party, is don’t mess it up. That’s what we’ve 



December 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 217 

said. The four years that you’ve had, please don’t mess it up. So 

now we’re looking at these particular Bills here, Mr. Speaker, to 

make sure they don’t do that, that they don’t mess it up. And 

that’s why I think it’s important that we pay very close attention 

to what this minister and other ministers are proposing because 

you want that economy to keep building and to keep moving, 

Mr. Speaker. Certainly the great opportunity that the province 

has enjoyed and will continue to enjoy to this day is making 

sure that we continue building the future, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

what is really, really important. 

 

And from our perspective as an opposition party, we view some 

of the Bills that are being brought forward very closely. We 

look at them. We scrutinize them because, Mr. Speaker, we 

don’t want to see, we don’t want to see anything impede that 

plan for Saskatchewan that was developed a number of years 

ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I point out that when we spoke about the challenge of 

growth that the NDP had, certainly, Mr. Speaker, we had to 

grapple with some of the issues that are being mentioned in this 

particular Bill. Now we don’t have no problem with a district 

planning commission as long as it complies with a number of 

principles, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what’s really important: that 

it’s fair to all the parties, that it’s fair to all the people that are 

being involved. Because obviously you want to be able to have 

these districts of activity. You want them to be able to 

coordinate and to co-operate and to communicate with each 

other. That part is a fair point to make.  

 

We’re not arguing that at all because obviously as you get these 

hubs or these areas that are co-operating, you want to see that 

continue because in the long run it’s good and it’s healthy for 

the people of Saskatchewan. And we in the opposition certainly 

support that notion. But you’ve got to make sure it’s based on 

the principle of fairness, Mr. Speaker, that you’re not pushing 

one partner away or one core value of that planning area, 

pushing that aside and not incorporating their position or their 

principles, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the point I would use is you often see that in a lot of the 

environmental groups. You see this in the Aboriginal groups 

where sometimes when you look at the urban sprawl, is there 

some problems that that will create in terms of First Nations 

traditional territory? Is there any kind of problems it may create 

environmentally? Are we doing this right to make sure that 

there’s a number of principles intact? 

 

And that’s the key thing that I would attach to this particular 

Bill. Because while the minister is certainly alluding to things 

like a co-operative partnership, talking about resolving disputes 

and arguments, talking about fees, talking about intermunicipal 

co-operation, but then in the next breath talking about picking 

winners and losers. You have to be very careful here because if 

we don’t plan this right, if you don’t go, move forward with the 

right attitude under these district planning commissions, there 

are going to be problems. And how are these commissions 

going to be established, Mr. Speaker? We don’t know that. 

 

So the theory of trying to make sure that you have regions that 

are highly interactive, not only from the business perspective 

but from the municipal perspective, and involving as many of 

the players in the region as you can — nothing wrong with that 

theory. It’s certainly something that the people of Saskatchewan 

would applaud and that the people of Saskatchewan would love 

to see happen on a grander and greater scale, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s why they talk about vision. And that’s why when we 

opened up some of the discussions on this particular Bill . . . 

We certainly saw the vision many, many years ago that we 

needed to create these hubs of economic activity that I think 

would be attached to the same concept that the minister now 

rephrases as a district planning commission. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s thousands of examples here in the 

city alone and northern Saskatchewan where people have gotten 

together and regions are starting to form. And yes, it’s not just 

about developing a subdivision; there are greater and grander 

plans and strategies and visions attached to that particular 

concept. 

 

So I would say, Mr. Speaker, when the minister alludes to 

things like fees which seems to pop up quite a bit . . . When you 

talk about expansion, you talk about development, and so on 

and so forth, fees are always top of mind. When you talk to any 

local leader, when you talk to a business person, fees are always 

in, well certainly, in the back of their minds. 

 

So I would say that the transparency of fees . . . Like I don’t 

know any person in the province that would say, well the fees 

weren’t transparent. They are very capable business people, 

very shrewd people. They know what fees are being put in 

place. So as the minister brings that particular aspect to the 

forefront in his point, saying that the fees need to be 

transparent, he leads people to believe that these fees were 

hidden. Fees that governments have on any fronts are always 

transparent. They’re there for a purpose, and they’re there to 

administer what I think is a cost of the province when you talk 

to different people, as an example that he used, development of 

certain subdivisions. So, Mr. Speaker, there is a lot of 

information here that we really need to pay attention to. 

 

And I want to go on to the First Nations, you know, if I can, Mr. 

Speaker, and the Métis as well. We know that they’re also 

involved with a lot of the developments not just within their 

areas but also within the cities. I’m very proud and honoured 

that one of the First Nations in my area, the English River First 

Nation has the Grasswood Esso, or Grasswood service centre. 

It’s about maybe a couple miles out of Saskatoon, but that’s 

where I stop and gas up, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And they’ve got a hotel there. They’ve got a gas station. 

They’ve got a number of convenience stores there as well. So 

it’s just fantastic to be able to see that English River has set this 

business up, I think it’s got to be at least 12, 13 years ago. And 

they’ve been doing very well. It’s a joint venture partnership 

between Tron, and I know that they probably participated in a 

district planning process then. And I hope that they’re part of 

the process now because obviously they are doing very well. 

And they’re an example and they’re one of the people that I will 

speak about, one of the groups that I speak about when I 

mention First Nations. 

 

You look further to, further west, Whitecap. I know with their 

chief who has done a tremendous amount of work, not only in 

terms of building a brand new economy, creating jobs for his 

people, but Chief Bear is one of the people that could give us an 



218 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 2011 

incredible amount of advice and insight as to how the First 

Nations need to be part of a district planning commission. 

 

So that’s the point I’m trying to make to the people of 

Saskatchewan, that is not just about SUMA. It’s not just about 

the developers. It’s about the environment. It’s about the role 

that the First Nations and Métis people could play. So you’ve 

got to make sure that you involve all the different players under 

a district planning commission scenario, as indicated by the 

minister and the Bill he’s trying to bring forward. 

 

So instead of us talking about co-operative relationship, talking 

about intermunicipal development, talking about dispute 

resolution, talking about the fee, picking winners and losers, my 

advice to the minister is that this is probably one of the most 

important Bills that he will deal with for a long time, Mr. 

Speaker, and he’s got to get it right. He’s got to get it right. 

Because we’ve seen evidence and we have certainly read a lot 

of these stories of some areas that have had this problem before 

where the urban sprawl is just creating enormous pressures on 

smaller communities next to these cities. It’s creating 

environmental nightmares when you’re talking about how 

they’re dealing with the increase in growth.  

 

And certainly it’s also talking about how we needed to learn the 

lessons of that particular . . . some of the examples throughout 

the world on how we need to do it in Saskatchewan to make 

sure that we mitigate the challenges that the minister may speak 

about when he talks about planning for a certain area. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I again point out that there are a lot of 

people, a lot of people that are keenly interested in participating 

in this district planning commission. You know, they certainly 

are. Yes, they’ll make sure that the fees are transparent, that 

there’s a place that they can have their arguments and that 

they’re kind of settled after a while. And they can certainly 

make sure that they do their part to build a certain area because 

if they’re all built together, all the players build this together 

with the same principles and the same ideas, then the district 

planning commission makes good sense. It makes good sense. 

 

And it certainly allows, I think, the economy of Saskatchewan 

another added bonus in the sense that you have certain regions 

that you don’t have to worry about overall. And you know that 

there are some really good groups and organizations involved in 

planning for a certain region and planning for a certain area 

which then allows you to do two things: is identify your role as 

the government to say, okay what is it that this district planning 

committee needs to help us accommodate the strengthening of 

the economy in your area? And it’s not so much as the 

government handing them money, it may be simple things as 

fixing roads. It may be simple things as making sure that they 

have advice on some areas. And that, I think, is pretty key. 

 

But the other point is that after you’ve got those professional, 

dedicated, educated people doing the work that’s necessary, that 

really plans the area well from the many aspects that I spoke of, 

it allows you to look at other areas, to concentrate on other 

areas and other regions that need the assistance, that need the 

support, and that need the attention. And as you begin to do 

that, you build a stronger, braver, newer Saskatchewan. And 

certainly that was the vision that we had as a government. And 

we would certainly hope that the government of the day today 

would not try and do anything to mess up that initial vision and 

the groundwork that was done to bring Saskatchewan to where 

it is today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would point out that the local and regional policies . . . I’ve 

known a lot of people in Saskatchewan, travelled a lot of places 

during my time here, and I know wherever you go, you see a 

vibrancy in the people of Saskatchewan. They are committed, 

and they have some very innovative solutions. And sometimes 

they sometimes misunderstand each other. And if you get a 

regional or a district planning commission together, that’s 

where I think that greater minds will meet, and the common 

good of Saskatchewan will certainly be the theme that many of 

the people will certainly try and build upon. And if they get 

them in a room together, I’ve seen so many times that they’re 

willing to resolve some of their differences and do the work 

that’s necessary to solve the problem in that area and continue 

building their communities and their towns. 

 

And that’s the important point that I wanted to raise, is that as 

you have a commission established, it’s not about fees. It’s not 

about having this big fight. It’s not about a huge demand and 

drain on the government finances. It’s about empowering the 

people, the communities, and the ideas and the concepts they 

have and making sure that you are guided by a number of 

principles, whether it’s respect for First Nations, involving the 

Métis, watching how it impacts the environment, making sure 

that you’re not hurting businesses to help other businesses set 

up by picking winners and losers, making sure that you don’t 

slant the power of the district planning commission to favour 

others as opposed to our local people. These are some of the 

pitfalls that you have to really be careful of and you have to 

really watch, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So Bill No. 20, again you know, it appears that it’s just simply a 

housekeeping item, that the minister wants to set up a district 

planning commission and do all this kind of work to make sure 

that we continue building. But it’s much grander, it’s much 

greater than what I think the minister is able to express in this 

Bill today. But as an opposition, I want to point out that the 

people out there that have seen this kind of thing being 

undertaken and spoke of these things 20 years ago, that they 

know what they thought of 20 years ago. And that’s certainly 

what the NDP thought of 10 years ago when they started 

building this economy of which you’re seeing a great amount of 

benefits coming from today. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I go back to the point that when you look at 

the impression that the minister wants to give to this Bill, is that 

we will handle the disputes of different parties under this 

district planning commission. Now I want to know how that 

mechanism is being established. Because obviously if we have 

a dispute — it may be between a land developer and say a 

neighbouring town or village — who is going to resolve that 

dispute? Who is going to appoint the people to sit on that 

committee, so to speak, of this commission, to determine who is 

right: a big, large developer from downtown Calgary, or the 

kind folks of a small community next to the place that this 

person wants to, you know, to buy. Is there any value in the fact 

that you’re from Saskatchewan? Does that help you? Is it all 

about just the big developers and it’s not about the people, then 

you can see the disconnect, Mr. Speaker. And that’s exactly the 

principles that we as the NDP team want to make sure is part of 



December 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 219 

any of that original plan of growth that we developed some 10 

years ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Now obviously there is always the opportunity for a clash of 

opinion, a clash of ideals, so we need to know from the 

minister, fine, that you have some blessing from SUMA. We 

don’t mind. SUMA’s a great organization. They’ve got a great 

history, and they will certainly add to the solution. But with all 

due respect to SUMA, we must reach out to other groups to 

make sure that we do this right, that we do the district planning 

commission and the ideals behind it, we do it properly, we do it 

fairly, and we do it sustainably. 

 

And that’s one of the biggest words that we’ve heard over the 

last number of years, given some of the challenge to the 

environment, is that we have to have sustainability of our 

communities. We’ve got to incorporate that in our minds of 

how we conserve energy, how we develop our water and sewer 

systems, of how we develop our park systems, how we keep the 

natural habitat in and around our community as pristine as 

possible, how we kind of consume things on a constant basis. 

We have to incorporate that because we do live in an area that 

has finite clean water, finite clean air, and certainly land that is 

in really good shape. 

 

So we have to incorporate that kind of a challenge within this 

whole district planning commission. And that’s why it’s 

important to point out to people, is this incorporated in this 

planning commission? Are the environmental qualities and the 

environmental monitoring and the environmental strategies, are 

they attached to this commission? And I would suggest, Mr. 

Speaker, that they’re not because the minister didn’t make any 

comment or any reference to that. 

 

Our First Nations and Métis participation, is it guaranteed in 

this particular planning commission? That has not been 

identified in this Bill whatsoever, and that’s one of the reasons 

why we’re offering our opinions today, that there is so many 

things that might be missed under the guise of district planning 

commissions, as the Bill points out. 

 

We think that there are many things that are deficient in this 

Bill, and that’s one of the reasons why the opposition will take 

the time to explain what we envision that is attached to this Bill 

and the fact that many, many people know that this Bill goes 

way beyond the minister’s understanding. And that’s why he’s 

basically made a few small points attached to what he thinks is 

the complete package for a district planning commission Bill. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have some distance to go on this Bill. I 

would hope that the minister can backtrack a bit to the late ’90s 

and early 2000-2001 and begin to see what people like Eric 

Cline had to say. People like Lorne Calvert, people like Eldon 

Lautermilch, Joanne Crofford — these people that have helped 

certainly shaped the future of this economy. They had some 

great concepts. They had some great ideas, Mr. Speaker. They 

had some great people beside them that developed this whole 

economy and developed this whole theme. And they wanted to 

make sure that if the development occurs, that it’d have the 

principle of fairness, the principle of balance between the 

environment, the economy, the principle of inclusiveness to 

make sure that the First Nations, Métis, the small towns and 

villages, and those people that the government might not think 

are important, that they be included in this vision and this plan. 

 

And as I mentioned at the outset in some of my comments, that 

this is not a good province for any of us unless it’s a good 

province for all of us. And that’s one of the themes and the 

principles that we incorporated when we began developing this 

economy that the province now enjoys. We are proud of that 

history, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why this Bill, Bill 20, when you 

talk about a district planning commission, there is much, there 

was a much grander vision attached to a district planning 

commission that the minister spoke about. And people of 

Saskatchewan have to know it, that there was a great strategy in 

place, and it just so happens these guys are benefiting from that. 

 

But we’re proud of our history. We’re proud of our history. And 

I know there’s many occasions that the Premier gets up and puts 

on a show about how great his government is, ready for growth, 

and on and on. On this side of the House, we know that he just 

inherited that. He inherited that booming economy. He has 

admitted time and time again. And my message to him and his 

team: don’t mess it up. 

 

So when you have Bills like this, when you have Bills like this, 

make sure you don’t just take, pick pieces up to make sure you 

want to incorporate your own values on some of these Bills. 

Pick up the whole package because the whole package is well 

thought out, and the package is including a lot of people that 

this government currently is not including, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s our message to them. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I was blessed to have the opportunity to 

share a number of conversations and being in the same room as 

people like Romanow, as people, as I mentioned, like Eric 

Cline, Lautermilch, Sonntag. These are people that are no 

longer here today, Mr. Speaker, but their work is being felt here 

today. And the work that they’ve done and the vision and the 

thought they put through in designing this economy, we’re 

enjoying today. 

 

Those guys over there are claiming credit for it, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re claiming credit for it, and so be it. So be it. We’re not 

going to argue. We’re not going to beat our own drum. But the 

longer and the grander speeches that they might want to make 

about how they built it, the whole rest of the province just kind 

of rolls their eyes and say, yes okay, whatever. You know that’s 

exactly what they say, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So my point is, enjoy. Enjoy the fruits of our labour as you 

embrace this new economy, and enjoy and have fun. Have fun 

because eventually what’s going to happen is you’re going to 

have to stand up on your own two feet based on what you’re 

able to do and based on the mistakes that you’re going to make. 

And we’ll see you, we’ll see where this government takes this 

economy, Mr. Speaker. Because at the rate they’re going, Mr. 

Speaker, and the lack of vision they have on Bills like this, 

you’re going to see that this province of Saskatchewan is 

actually going to start going backwards, Mr. Speaker, primarily 

because, primarily because they don’t heed the advice of people 

that designed the economy that they’re benefiting from by 

making sure they incorporate all aspects of that master strategy 

and that master plan, Mr. Speaker. 



220 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 2011 

And the point that I would make, Mr. Speaker, is that any time 

you do a Bill that talks about district planning on strengthening 

the local economy and the regional economy and therefore 

strengthening the provincial economy, please take into account 

that there were some great minds before you and before me and 

before others in this Assembly that really thought things 

through. And listen to the advice that they’ve given you and 

make sure you take that advice and incorporate that in some of 

the Bills, as in this Bill that you’re trying to propose, because 

it’s going to be of great service to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know the future of anything in terms 

of how strong the economy will get. I pray that the work that 

was done will continue building. But if we start moving away 

from the core values of inclusiveness, of fairness, of respect for 

the working man, of taking care of the environment, of looking 

after others that are less fortunate than us, then what happens, as 

this Bill indicates, you exclude people. If you don’t incorporate 

the proper values, then you’re going to fail. And that’s the 

problem I would point out to the minister, is be careful on any 

Bills that you propose, that you look at incorporating many 

other values, not just your own agenda because your own 

agenda is only as far as you can see, as far as I can see is 

short-sighted, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So whether it’s the district planning commission talking about 

incorporating local and regional policies, we on this side say: be 

inclusive of environmental challenges; be inclusive of the 

Aboriginal people; be inclusive of the small towns and the 

villages. Look at the history. Look at the advice afforded in the 

past. Seek leadership from other places and other sectors and 

other parties because, in the long run, if you put together a good 

plan in place and it strengthens the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan and strengthens all people of Saskatchewan, the 

people on this side believe in those core values. And that’s why 

we would support some of these Bills. 

 

But we see that they’re not, they’re not doing the necessary 

work. They’re not doing any vision. They’re not doing any 

planning, not being fair in their process. Then why would we sit 

here and say, yes okay, we would support that? And that’s one 

of the roles of the opposition, Mr. Speaker. That’s one of the 

roles of the opposition is to hold this government to account. 

And if they have Bills like this that come forward that are 

instrumental to the building of our economy in general and they 

lack vision, it lacks support, it lacks all the necessary aspects, 

then, Mr. Speaker, we have to make sure that we remind them 

that they don’t know everything about building any economy, 

that they must seek advice from all these sectors. 

 

And it’s on that point, Mr. Speaker, that I know my colleagues 

have a lot more issues that they want to raise on this particular 

Bill because there is a lot at stake in this particular Bill. And 

we’ll pay very close attention to this Bill. And on that note, Mr. 

Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 20, The Planning and 

Development Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 27 — The Education Amendment Act, 2011/ 

Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l'éducation 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

to move the second reading of Bill No. 27, The Education 

Amendment Act, 2011. To meet the Premier’s commitment for 

students to start the 2012-13 school year after the Labour Day 

long weekend, I am proposing a number of necessary 

amendments to the Act. This change will mean that students 

and their families can fully enjoy the last long weekend of 

summer as they do in other provinces including British 

Columbia, Manitoba, and Ontario. 

 

First, Mr. Speaker, I propose to amend the definitions of 

academic year and school day in section 2 to read as follows: 

 

“„academic year‟ means that portion of a school year 

commencing on the first school day and ending on the last 

school day of that school year, as those dates are 

determined in accordance with section 163 and the 

regulations.” 

 

And: 

 

[the] “„school day‟ means a day within a school year on 

which instruction is given to pupils or examinations or 

other educational activities involving pupils are conducted, 

and includes time authorized by a board of education or 

the . . . [Conseil des écoles fransaskoises], as the case may 

be, for the purposes of non-instructional time as prescribed 

in the regulations”. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also propose to repeal many of the existing 

provisions that concern the school calendar and instead shift 

them to the regulations. This is where such detail is typically 

addressed and it allows for greater flexibility. To support this, 

first I propose to amend section 163 and replace it with 

provisions that will introduce the concept of an instructional 

day. I also propose to set the earliest instructional day as the 

first day following the Labour Day and the latest instructional 

day as June 30th. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments will also continue to 

allow the Minister of Education to set the school year at 200 

days or less. However, with the proposed amendments, it would 

allow for the same number of school days in future years unless 

it is changed. At present and for the last several years, this has 

been set at 197 school days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that boards of education and 

the Conseil des écoles fransaskoises will continue to set specific 

timelines for the opening and closing dates of schools. They 

will also set the school hours of operation and the general 

schedule of operation for the school year. Boards will also 

retain the autonomy to allow teachers to begin working earlier 

to prepare for the school year. 

 

I also propose to repeal section 164 to 167. These sections 

include provisions on school hours, holidays, vacations, and 



December 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 221 

variations in the length of the school year. The topics addressed 

in these sections will now be covered in the regulations. To 

allow for this, the authority of the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council will be expanded in the Act to make regulations on 

these provisions. 

 

To support the development of these regulations, ministry 

officials have requested input from our education partners. As 

you can imagine, Mr. Speaker, an opportunity to hear from all 

of our stakeholders including teachers, boards, and school 

division executive is vitally important. The partners who will be 

invited to present recommendations around the regulations are 

as follows: the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation or the STF; 

the Saskatchewan School Boards Association or the SSBA; the 

League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 

Superintendents, known as LEADS; and the Saskatchewan 

Association of School Business Officials, known as SASBO. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have separately last month met with 

representatives of the Saskatchewan School Boards Association 

and the League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 

Superintendents to discuss the proposed amendments to the 

school year. And last week I had the opportunity to meet with 

the STF, LEADS, SASBO, and the SSBA to get their input on 

this issue as well. 

 

[15:30] 

 

I would like to stress that around school hours, holidays, 

vacations, and variations in the length of the school year, 

nothing has been finalized. We are listening and we’re going to 

get input. The process of developing regulations will allow the 

opportunity to hear from all of the stakeholders. We envision 

that the regulations will still allow school divisions the 

flexibility to set their own school year calendar in consultation 

with teachers, parents, and the local community. Mr. Speaker, 

with these changes we look to effectively balance the 

instructional needs of students with the professional 

development interests of teachers and boards of education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m also proposing a series of additional changes 

to the Act. With these changes I aim to repeal obsolete 

provisions, provide some clarification around the new education 

property tax regime, and support the borrowing process of 

boards of education. The education council is a dormant 

ministry committee that has not operated in decades. Because of 

this I propose to repeal provisions that reference this council. 

There is also the technology supported revolving fund. It was 

used to fund the delivery of correspondence courses delivered 

by the ministry. Boards of education have now been responsible 

for the delivery of distance education since 2009. As such the 

fund is no longer required. I propose to repeal provisions that 

reference the fund. 

 

I also propose merging the two teacher classification and 

certification boards into one. Through the government’s review 

of agencies, boards, commissions, and committees, it was found 

that the role and composition of the two boards overlap. This 

will allow the Teacher Education, Certification, and 

Classification Board to be established and to establish an appeal 

forum for those teachers who wish to appeal a certification 

decision of the ministry. At the present time there is no 

opportunity for a teacher to appeal a decision to not be issued a 

certificate allowing them to teach. This appeal committee will 

operate similarly to other appeal bodies common to other 

professional organizations in the province. 

 

Initial consultations on the obsolete provisions and the new 

teacher board were initiated in the fall of 2009. It included 

SASBO, LEADS, the STF and SSBA, and both boards. Details 

on the composition of the new board and the appeals committee 

will be set out in the teacher certification and classification 

regulations. The term of the members, vacancies, and 

membership, what constitutes a quorum, and the expenses will 

also be addressed in the regulations. The Chair will be 

appointed by the Minister of Education and is expected to be a 

senior official of the ministry. We will be developing the 

regulations and consulting with the existing boards prior to 

passage of the regulations and implementation of the new 

board. 

 

I also propose changes to the Act to reflect new copyright laws 

and tariffs. These changes will allow the Minister of Education 

to make payments on behalf of the education institutions like 

boards of education and independent schools to a collective 

society as defined in the Copyright Act Canada. Respect of 

copyright is encouraged in Saskatchewan schools. Authors, 

publishers, artists, and other creators are entitled to fair and 

reasonable compensation when their works are copied for 

educational purposes, and these amendments provide for that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you know, in the 2009 budget the Government 

of Saskatchewan introduced significant changes for funding the 

province’s education system. We moved forward to achieve a 

fair balance of the resources allocated to school divisions. We 

did this by cutting and capping education property taxes and 

setting province-wide rates for each of the three major property 

classes — residential, commercial, and agricultural. 

 

As the government, rather than the boards of education, set mill 

rates for education property taxes, the unique situation in 

Lloydminster required specific wording to address the tax 

situation. Legal counsel and the Ministry of Municipal Affairs 

have noted a deficiency in the existing authority. I propose 

corrective wording that clarifies the authority for different mill 

rates to be set on properties within the Lloydminster school 

divisions. All parties have agreed to the corrective wording. 

 

To ensure that we are in accordance with The Tabling of 

Documents Act, I propose changes that will require boards of 

education to table their annual reports and financial statements 

before the Legislative Assembly. The requirement is the same 

as for our regional health authorities. The information required 

to be included in the annual report is similar for boards of 

education and the regional health authorities. With the 

government now setting province-wide education property tax 

mill rates instead of individual boards of education, the funding 

that boards of education receive should be considered as part of 

the ministry’s overall financial report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also propose changes that will allow boards of 

education and the Conseil des écoles fransaskoises to appoint 

professional auditors when they choose. In the past, the Act 

prescribed when a board of education was to appoint an auditor. 

Boards of education are fully aware of the need to appoint an 

auditor, and we have granted them the discretion to select their 



222 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 2011 

auditor at a time when it is most appropriate for them. The 

auditor they select will need to be a professional accountant in 

Saskatchewan and cannot be the chief financial officer for the 

board in the preceding year or have had a prior contract with the 

board other than as an auditor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, changes are also required to support school capital 

projects as a result of changes to the education property tax 

approach. Government has committed more than $391.2 million 

since November of 2007 to move forward 38 major capital 

projects and about 710 additional smaller school capital projects 

across the entire province. This represents a record high 

investment in school infrastructure over a four-year period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will recall that we recently announced that the 

government/board share for capital projects is 65/35 share. To 

support school divisions in meeting their share of capital 

investments, I propose a number of amendments. First, I 

propose to remove the requirement for boards of education to 

obtain approval from the Saskatchewan Municipal Board for 

loans, and shift the approval process to the Ministry of 

Education. I also propose to remove the ability of boards of 

education to issue debentures and establish sinking funds 

related to borrowing, and instead use the more established 

means of financial institutions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is important that we also remove the specific 

amounts for tendering for capital equipment and vehicles. By 

setting out the amounts in regulations, we can more easily be 

adjusted over time. These rates have not been adjusted in a 

decade. They are less that those prescribed in the New West 

Partnership Agreement. 

 

I also propose to broaden the terminology used to refer to 

school facilities to recognize the boards of education operate 

more than just schools. Examples of this include board offices 

and transportation or storage buildings. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I’m proposing an amendment to retain the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board to provide an arm’s-length 

financial oversight of boards of education financial 

management when required. As a result of the changes to the 

role of the Saskatchewan Municipal Board with respect to 

boards of education, a separate statute, The Education 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 is also being introduced 

to address the related changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, internal and external consultations were held on 

the proposed amendments to the Act. An initial consultation 

meeting was held with SASBO on April 1st, 2011 to discuss the 

new financial-related amendments. The organization is 

generally supportive of the proposed financial- and 

capital-related amendments. SASBO was also asked to share 

the proposed amendments with chief financial officers who are 

their members for comment. The SSBA and LEADS were 

likewise shared a summary of all of the proposed amendments 

with opportunities for feedback. The STF was consulted on 

changes to the Act. They have also indicated to the Ministry 

that they look forward to providing input on the proposed 

changes affecting the school year. 

 

The amendments I am bringing forth ensure that the Act is 

updated to support changes to other legislation, education 

taxation, and policy. The amendments on changes to the school 

year meet the commitment made by the Premier at the start of 

the school year for students. It will also allow us to go to our 

education partners — teachers, schools, and boards — to start 

the conversation on important topics like holidays, vacation, 

length of the school day, and variations in the length of the 

school year. I am pleased to move therefore that Bill No. 27, 

The Education Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second 

time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 27, The Education Amendment Act, 

2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I 

recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve got about an 

hour and 20 minutes to speak on this particular Bill. I am 

looking forward to taking the time necessary to express a lot of 

the concerns that I have on this particular Bill and we in the 

opposition have as well, Mr. Speaker. We certainly want to 

point out that there are many, many difficulties with this 

particular minister and this Bill and certainly the commitment 

of that government towards education in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I notice that she prefaced her comments on the Bill by speaking 

about the amount of money they’re putting into education, Mr. 

Speaker. And those contracts and that work was started many, 

many years ago. And we certainly are pleased to see that there 

are new schools being built and that there is a future for making 

sure that as many communities are supported in getting some 

brand new schools as possible. That’s what the government’s 

all about, and certainly we want to continue building on that as 

well. 

 

As the demand increases for new schools, Mr. Speaker, as an 

official opposition, the NDP aren’t going to put a stop to 

schools that are necessary. And people out there should know 

that we have supported many school groups that have come 

forward in the past four years asking for the NDP support and 

certainly asking us to lobby on their behalf — there has been 

many cases where we have — and lobby on their behalf in 

saying, yes, we will support that notion. Because there is no 

question that some of these schools, or some of these 

communities that need new schools ought to get new schools, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s simple as that. It has nothing to do with 

politics. It has everything to do with demand and need and to 

ensure a good, solid, stable future for education in our province. 

 

So I think one of the things we want to point out is all the 

projects that are on the list to be achieved and to be built, the 

NDP would support that. Education is one of our platforms, Mr. 

Speaker, something that we absolutely support 100 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker. And what we are not about to do is politicize that 

process because there is a very rigorous process to determine 

which schools are going to be built. And there is a criteria based 

on the condition and the safety of students, based on the number 

of students, and the list goes on. And there’s a number of 

different groups that also, Mr. Speaker, that also are involved 

with deciding which schools should be built. I’m assuming that 

the SSBA’s involved. I’m assuming that STF may have some 

role. I’m assuming obviously that the government has a role as 

well. So there’s a number of groups that would be involved 



December 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 223 

with deciding which schools would be built. 

 

Now after all that consultation and the schools are determined, 

and the fact is that a school is warranted in one of the richest 

neighbourhoods of any of the larger centres, as an NDP Party 

we would support that because we would respect the fact that 

there was a process in place, there was fairness, there was 

criteria, and there was certainly co-operation. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, that I think is really important to tell the people out 

there that it is not only the Saskatchewan Party that is making 

the commitment towards education and building these new 

schools. The NDP would honour those commitments, Mr. 

Speaker, because it’s the right thing to do, Mr. Speaker. It is the 

right thing to do. 

 

Now the minister can chirp from her chair saying, well why 

didn’t you do them? The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, we 

never enjoyed the wealth that they had. We haven’t enjoyed the 

wealth that they currently have right now, Mr. Speaker, and I 

can almost guarantee you, Mr. Speaker, that we would’ve put 

more money into education had we had the money that they 

have, Mr. Speaker, instead of spending it on their friends and 

certainly their business partners, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’ll point out that, in reference to the school system, we 

applaud the commitment towards the construction of new 

schools. It is great. It is something that we fundamentally 

believe in and is one of the basic planks in what the NDP stand 

for, so rest assured that we are going to support the continued 

construction of new schools. It doesn’t matter where they are; 

we support that notion that education, investment into education 

is absolutely critical to the future of our province. And we 

would applaud that investment, and we’d ask for more, Mr. 

Speaker, because it’s the right thing to do. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve often maintained that when you look at 

the relationship of the partners — and I go back to the premise 

of this particular Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker — the fact that the 

minister said, we consulted . . . And they like using that word 

consulted. And people out there know there’s a difference 

between we consulted and we got agreement, versus the notion, 

we consulted. There’s a huge difference. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Because I know STF was not happy with this government. They 

were not happy because the first time in 78 years, they had a 

strike. First time in 78 years, we’ve seen thousands, hundreds if 

not thousands of teachers out here that were protesting the fact 

that, as the minister likes to refer to the elephant in the room, 

where there was no discussion on the education funding model. 

And there was nothing of that sort, no support towards the 

teachers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And at the end of the day, when you throw out the fact that 

we’re going to invest so many hundreds of millions into 

schools, we accept that. But in the meantime, you can’t treat the 

association, the federation of teachers, and the teachers 

themselves, you can’t treat them like the manner in which you 

treated them and still expect them to respect the fact that you’re 

putting more money into building new schools. 

 

New schools are great if they have great staff, if they have 

adequate staff, and they have a full complement of staff, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s another basic, fundamental principle that 

the NDP support, Mr. Speaker, is that you can’t just have 

buildings. You’ve got to have the staff and a full complement of 

staff to support that. And I think overall, whether it’s the SSBA 

or whether it’s the STF, I think they would give this minister 

and this government a failing grade, a failing grade of how 

they’ve handled education, all the while just pushing up for all 

the public to see, oh we’re putting all this money into new 

schools. 

 

It’s good. It’s good they’re building new schools, as I 

mentioned at the outset. But there are other issues that you’ve 

got to address. And this Bill really highlights, really highlights 

their non-respect for the teaching industry, their non-respect for 

the people that are involved with educating our young people, 

and it shows it in spades, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And one of the things that really, really struck me in this 

particular Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the financial oversight 

that the minister alluded to towards the end of her comments of 

these boards. Now I’m trying to figure out, Mr. Speaker, what is 

the role of that financial oversight committee that she spoke 

about. Does she not trust the board of education, the people that 

make the decisions, how do we want to spend our budget? 

Don’t you trust them to do their own kinds of work? And I 

would suggest that if you put a financial oversight committee in 

place, that means you don’t trust them. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the points, when you start 

talking about number of measures in place to watch what the 

school boards are doing, it begins to make a lot of people out 

there become very concerned of how this government is treating 

our educators and our board of directors that support the 

educators in teaching our young people and making sure they’re 

taught well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now one of the things that I think is important is that when the 

minister talks about respect — I’ll only give her one good 

example today, Mr. Speaker, as she’s chirping from her chair — 

when she talks about respect, she . . . This announcement to 

change the school year, to change the school year, it came in the 

middle of the campaign, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And she had a 

Bill drafted to bring into the Assembly before she met with the 

SSBA. So the question is, what kind of respectful relationship is 

that? 

 

Your leader makes a commitment during the election to change 

the school year, as the Bill indicates here, and then you go 

ahead and draft a Bill and you bring the Bill to the Assembly 

here. And then you go meet with the SSBA after the fact. 

Nobody, nobody was consulted on this. So when you do that, 

when you do that, people don’t like that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If 

you’re a teacher and all of a sudden this was thrown on your 

lap, people will begin to say, why are we shown such 

disrespect? That’s the common theme that I’m picking up, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I would point out, when you have a Bill drafted to change a 

school year, no consultation, no respect for the teachers, no 

respect for the school boards out there that have had, that plan 

all these things out, and then you propose, you draft up a Bill 

with all these amendments . . . It’s a fairly big Bill. It’s a fairly 



224 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 2011 

thick Bill. This wasn’t drafted overnight, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

This took maybe weeks. And the minister met with the SSBA a 

week ago and said okay, well we had our consultation. That’s 

the fundamental point that they make a lot of times to the 

media, to the opposition, is why consult with us after you’ve 

made a decision? That just doesn’t sit well with a lot of folks 

within the SSBA and certainly amongst the teachers 

themselves, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I look at the school boards, the school boards themselves. 

The government said, okay we don’t want you guys setting mill 

rates or collecting land taxes. We’re going to stop you there, but 

we’re going to fund you; we’re going to fund you as our grand 

commitment to education. But they’re not going to tell you 

what that funding is till after 2011. And the minister’s 

comments to the SSBA was, it’s about the elephant in the room. 

That’s how she basically spoke about the fact that everybody 

needs to know what this funding model’s about, but she’s not 

going to talk about it. But she did say there is an elephant in the 

room, but I’m not going to talk about it. 

 

Well it’s nice to notice the elephant. But the whole meaning 

behind saying there’s an elephant in the room is you want to 

talk about it. And that’s typical of the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 

Speaker, is they will talk about something that’s very apparent, 

but there’s no solution and no leadership to it and no resolution. 

That’s what it’s all about, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So all that stuff catches up to you after a while. It’ll catch up, 

Mr. Speaker. We on this opposition are just going to simply be 

patient, and we will wait. Obviously we’ve been given the 

instructions to wait, and we shall. We’ve been given the 

mandate to sit here with nine members for the next four years, 

and we shall. And we shall, Mr. Speaker. We shall because 

obviously, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day this thing will 

come around again. What goes around comes around, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And on education, on the education front, you can flag the fact 

that you’re spending 2 or $300 million on new schools — that 

was a done deal; we support that — but in the meantime, you’re 

treating all other aspects of the education system with 

disrespect, and that goes down from setting the school year in 

the middle of an election and drafting a Bill before you even sat 

down with the SSBA, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what’s 

fundamentally wrong with a lot of the Bills that are being 

brought forward. They’re done out of sync, they’re done in 

disrespect, and they’re also done with, I think, malice at times, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s unfortunate. That is very unfortunate that the people 

of Saskatchewan can expect that from a government, Mr. 

Speaker, because there’s a lot of school boards and a lot of 

teachers that are just not happy with the manner in which they 

have been treated. 

 

So you look at the future of the school divisions — everything 

from the oversight that the minister spoke about, the fact that 

she doesn’t want to talk about the elephant in the room but she 

notices it, doesn’t want to talk about the teachers’ strike, 

doesn’t want to talk about the fact that they can’t set mill rates 

in order to collect property taxes to adequately meet the needs 

of their school division, that they can’t set the school year, and 

they can’t figure out their funding model — and these are our 

critical partners in education. 

 

They begin to ask, what is their future role with this minister? 

What is their future role with this government? Why even sit in 

these school divisions if you have no power, no ability, no 

respect? And the bad thing is when that begins, when the whole 

local control begins to deteriorate, Mr. Speaker, when it begins 

to deteriorate where all of a sudden the local people are saying 

okay, okay Minister of Education, you don’t want to respect us 

on all these fronts. We’ll walk away. You figure it out. We’ll 

walk away from that responsibility and you figure it out.  

 

And what happens? You can see a collapse of a lot of the rural 

school systems. You’re going to see a lot of the teachers 

become discouraged in that industry because (a) they’re 

disrespected, and (b) they’re not paid properly. You’re going to 

start seeing administrators leaving for other fields of 

opportunity. And you’re going to start seeing the education 

system itself begin to collapse, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Why? 

Because you don’t respect the local decision makers. You 

corner them, and then you don’t deal with their issues, and 

furthermore you hurt their staff. 

 

And you go bang, bang, bang, bang. You start taking shots to 

the jaw about five or six times, Mr. Speaker, from this 

particular government, you begin to wonder well who is our 

friend there? And people will quickly realize — and they will 

realize; it’ll take them time but they will — that these guys 

aren’t friends of education. They want to do away with the local 

school boards. They want to do away with any autonomy and 

control that these boards have. They want to do away with any 

kind of control by other local groups over their mandate, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And after a while, they’re insisting that they have this great 

mandate. That will be the death knell of that particular party 

because, Mr. Speaker, people watch very carefully, people 

watch very carefully how they handle that mandate. And if they 

sense arrogance and if they sense the fact that they’re going to 

take over everything, they will send them a message. And you 

will start seeing that message being delivered fairly soon. 

 

Now I know SSBA and STF, I know a lot of these groups and 

organizations are watching. They’re a bit weary. They’re a bit 

weary of all the fights they’ve been having because they begin 

to get concerned saying, well why am I fighting with my own 

government? Why are we fighting with these guys? They’re 

supposed to represent us. And what is their agenda in having 

these fights with us? What is their agenda? And that’s the 

problem. They can’t figure it out. 

 

What is the endgame for this minister and education? Like what 

is it? What is their endgame? Are they going to do away with 

the school divisions altogether? Are they going to determine 

whether they will set the future for teachers’ salaries? Are they 

going to remove all local autonomy from all boards? Are they 

going to take away the local decision-making ability of different 

leaders and different people? That’s the question they have, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. That is the question they have. 

 

So I’m going to say to the minister that the notes that you have 

brought forward, the comments that you have made, I can tell 



December 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 225 

you right now with STF and SSBA, not speaking to any of their 

members, that they have one thing that they would say to you, 

Madam Minister, today. They’re not going to compromise their 

principles on their role. They’re going to hold steadfast. They’re 

going to hold steadfast, and they’re going to stay the course on 

what they think is a principled position that they have on a 

number of fronts when they challenge your government. They 

are not going to blink, Mr. Speaker. And that’s going to be their 

message to you eventually. 

 

Right now at this stage of the election cycle, it’s not a great 

time, but that time will come. That time will come, Mr. 

Speaker. And they can laugh and they can have their fun now, 

but eventually, as I mentioned at the outset, what goes around 

comes around. And I think the Sask Party will soon find out, 

will soon find out that arrogance is not something that they 

should use in their benches today. And ignorance of some of the 

challenges that some of our people feel out there is not another 

thing, is not another thing that they should be sitting on because 

that is something, that is something that people of 

Saskatchewan will quickly certainly send a message. And if 

they’re displeased with this government, they’ll get the 

message, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They’ll get that message. 

 

So I look at again some of the comments that they made, and 

we just pick up the concepts. As the minister rattles off a few 

probably useful tools and maybe a few good ideas, she’ll throw 

in another five or six bad ideas. But people won’t pay attention 

to some of the small housekeeping items that she thinks are 

great news for the education system. What she will do is bring 

along all the doom and gloom that people are suspecting she’s 

going to do, and she’ll try and dress it up to be as positive as 

possible. 

 

And that’s why she uses the wording, we consulted. There’s a 

big, significant difference between we consulted versus we 

reached an agreement, Mr. Speaker. There is a big difference 

between a forced agreement and agreement that is applauded by 

all parties. And I can tell you right now, based on that 

minister’s experience in education, that she has not done the 

work necessary to get the educators, the school boards, and the 

school system properly positioned to take advantage of this 

economy that’s in place now. She has not done the work that is 

necessary, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why I think that as an 

opposition, this Bill, this single Bill, An Act to amend The 

Education Act is going to be receiving a lot of attention. 

 

And I can tell the teachers or the educators or the boards that 

are out there today that, be patient, you know, and give us the 

advice that is necessary. We will listen to that advice. And we 

know that if we’re going to build a brave new Saskatchewan, 

we need local boards of education in place. We need regional 

boards. We need the French community. We need the Catholic 

school. We need all these schools and organizations to be part 

and to be architects of a brave new education concept for 

Saskatchewan. We need their advice. We need their input, and 

we need their guidance. And, Mr. Speaker, as long as we have 

that and they can give us that information, we can fight back as 

best we can, given our nine members. 

 

But guess what? Four years moves along fairly quickly. And, 

Mr. Speaker, there will be a time and an opportunity to judge 

this minister and that government’s commitment to education 

from the educators’ perspective and the administrators of the 

education systems. And that time always comes every four 

years. So I tell them today, enjoy. Laugh it off and have fun, but 

what goes around comes around. And it’s a matter of being 

patient, being pragmatic, being intelligent of what needs to be 

done. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And eventually things will come our way where we don’t see 

this minister propose these kind of Acts in the future because it 

is absolutely disrespectful to all the people that she’s supposed 

to represent as the minister, Mr. Speaker. Whether it’s the 

teachers’ assistants that were fired last year or whether the 

first-time teachers’ strike in 78 years or they’re taking away the 

taxing powers of the local boards, it is one shot after another. 

 

And I can remember sitting in Meadow Lake one day, and the 

member from Meadow Lake brought forward . . . Somebody 

dropped off a letter at one of the houses I was building saying, 

it was not my decision to let go of the teachers’ assistants; it 

was the school board’s choice. Now why would he do that, send 

a letter to the households in his hometown? And the reason why 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh yes, there was a letter. I seen 

that letter; I kept it in fact. And I’ll try and find it for you. But 

he blamed the school divisions for the teachers’ aides being 

fired. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, why would he do that? Why 

would he do that? Because he wants to avoid the responsibility 

of the tough decision that the school boards have to make. He 

placed all the onus on the school boards making that decision 

when in fact he knew, he knew that the education cuts to that 

school division would result in the teachers’ assistants being cut 

because they targeted teacher aides. That’s what they did. So 

when they lose all their jobs, you’re confused. Next you get a 

letter saying, it wasn’t me. That’s not leadership, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I told him I had a copy of that letter. I’ll try and find it. I 

don’t know where it is, but I do have a copy, and I will present 

it to him. Now the minister today is denying he ever wrote that 

letter and had it delivered. I’d like him to hear him say that. I 

notice there’s a bit of silence over there, Mr. Speaker, because 

that letter was drafted, and I did read it. And I’ll undertake to 

get that letter, and I will try and present it to this Assembly if I 

could find it. 

 

But that’s my point. That’s my point, Mr. Speaker. That’s my 

point. You can’t set school years in the middle of an election. 

You can’t consult after the Bill has been drafted. You can’t 

corner the school divisions. Because what happens at the end of 

the day? They’re going to get angry with you. They’re going to 

make sure that they don’t forget how you were treated. And 

that’s exactly what I think Bill No. 27 is all about, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s a continuing onslaught on the school divisions. It’s a 

continuing onslaught on the teachers. It’s a continuing 

onslaught on local groups and organizations that support the 

school divisions. 

 

And all the while the minister keeps talking about 307 million 

in new schools. Well, we support that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We 

support that. We’re really happy that’s being done, and we 

wouldn’t change it. We wouldn’t change it because the bottom 



226 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 2011 

line is that list of schools, that list of schools was . . . Who 

decides who builds these schools is a group of people that are 

committed to education. Now one thing that the government 

does do on a constant basis, and we done it as well, is we 

incorporated other people to help us decide which school should 

be built. That’s the fair way to do it, which schools should be 

built. 

 

And that agreement is a good agreement. You keep that 

agreement because you have good advice. You have 

stakeholders and you have some really solid people that’ll do 

the right thing and build schools where they should be built, 

where the demand is, where the safety of the school is a 

problem, where the student population demands it. That’s how 

you do it. 

 

But we need to stop talking about the fact that this is an 

agreement put in place. These people decide where the schools 

are built. It’s a co-operative effort. And the money’s there. 

Good. Leave that alone. But let’s deal with these other issues. 

But you notice the minister keeps going back to that, oh, we’re 

building more schools. Well come on, you’ve said that about 30 

times already. I think we get it. The schools are being built. You 

know, we think they’re being built. So build them already. 

Build them already. Let’s stop talking about it; build them 

already. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I also had the opportunity to talk to a few 

teachers — no names. And I went to a meeting in Buffalo 

Narrows and the Premier just happened to be flying into 

Buffalo Narrows to meet with their local candidate. And as they 

were walking through the school, he mentioned, oh, Buffalo 

Narrows needs a new school. And people were quite happy with 

that. But then the question I had after that, as I said, well is he 

prepared to put the Twin Lakes school of Buffalo Narrows 

above all the others that had been identified as the priority? Is 

he prepared to do that? And I didn’t hear no answer at all. 

 

So Buffalo Narrows needs a new school because Buffalo 

Narrows deserves a new school, not because it’s politically 

advantageous to build it. It should be built because they need 

the new one, not because we had a visit by the Premier to the 

community. 

 

Valley View in Beauval needs to be replaced because these are 

aging facilities, and they need to make sure that the schools are 

safe. Mr. Speaker, there are many things in the province that 

need attention. And instead of the minister’s focusing on that 

attention to increase the amount of school capital so we can 

build more schools for the future of our province, she talks 

about cornering school divisions on accountability, reducing 

their role to the tax so they can have a full complement of staff 

including teachers’ assistants. And they should also stop 

bullying SSBA around by setting school years without their 

permission and even prior knowledge. 

 

And that’s the point, Mr. Speaker. It’s not about the Bills that 

we sit up here and we argue about. It’s about the intent. It’s 

about the treatment. It’s about the respect. And that’s why we 

say we need to take the time to study the Bill to see what the 

residual effects of some these Bills are, and these changes and 

the rules they’re putting in place, to understand what the 

impacts are. And that’s why it’s necessary to take the two or 

three months that is required to really understand the Bill and 

reach out to the stakeholders, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I have a lot more I want to say on this, and I can go on for quite 

some time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I can, but at this stage of the 

game, Mr. Speaker, I know we have other Bills to deal with. So 

therefore I’ll adjourn debate on this particular Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 27, The Education 

Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 28 — The Education Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2011 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

to move the second reading of Bill No. 28, The Education 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2011. The proposed 

amendments to The Municipal Board Act are consequential to 

the changes proposed in The Education Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you know, in the 2009 budget the Government 

of Saskatchewan introduced significant changes for funding the 

province’s education system. We moved forward to achieve a 

fairer balance of resources allocated to school divisions. We did 

this by cutting and capping education property taxes and setting 

province-wide rates for each of the three major property classes: 

residential, commercial, and agricultural. 

 

The changes to the education property tax approach resulted in 

clarifications to how we manage funding education 

infrastructure projects. Mr. Speaker, you will recall that we 

recently announced the government/board share for capital 

projects is a 65/35 per cent share. To support school divisions in 

meeting their share of capital investments, I propose repealing 

sections of The Municipal Board Act that require boards of 

education to apply to the Saskatchewan Municipal Board for 

authorization to pursue application for loans. Local property 

owners are no longer affected by school board capital project 

costs. Instead the cost of servicing capital debt will be funded 

by a dollar-for-dollar increase in the operating grant paid to 

boards of education. In recognition of this, I will shift the 

approval process to the Ministry of Education. The ability of 

boards of education to issue debentures and establish sinking 

funds will be removed as they will be encouraged to use more 

established borrowing means such as financial institutions. 

 

The Saskatchewan Municipal Board will still continue to 

provide an arm’s-length financial oversight of boards of 

education financial management when required. For example 

when warranted, the Saskatchewan Municipal Board may make 

orders requiring boards of education to resolve financial 

difficulties or, when appropriate, appoint an administrator to 

oversee the board. Upon request of the Minister of Education, 

the Saskatchewan Municipal Board may also conduct inquiries 



December 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 227 

into the fiscal management of a board of education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also propose repealing references to the board 

. . . to the educational council in the universities of Regina and 

Saskatoon statutes. The education council is a dormant Ministry 

of Education committee that has not operated for decades. 

 

The Saskatchewan Municipal Board and Municipal Affairs 

were consulted on the proposed amendments and are supportive 

of the changes. An initial consultation meeting was held with 

the Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials, or 

SASBO, on April 1st, 2011. This meeting was held to discuss 

all new financial- and capital-related amendments. SASBO was 

also asked to share the proposed amendments with chief 

financial officers who are members for comment. The 

organization is generally supportive of these amendments. 

 

The Saskatchewan School Boards Association and League of 

Educational Administrators, Directors and Superintendents 

were likewise shared a summary of all of the proposed 

amendments with opportunities for feedback. 

 

The policy direction of the provisions of The Municipal Board 

Act will continue to apply to municipalities and other local 

authorities. 

 

The amendments I am bringing forth ensure that legislation is 

updated to reflect new processes for boards of education to 

pursue application for loans. This is important to address as 

there have been significant investments in school infrastructure 

since November of 2007. 

 

I know the member opposite loves to hear how the 

Saskatchewan Party has, this Saskatchewan government has 

committed more than 391.2 million to forward 38 major capital 

projects and about 710 similar small capital projects across our 

province which — he loves to hear it — represents a record 

high investment of school infrastructure over a four-year period. 

Ensuring these boards of education have a clearly defined 

process for pursuing the application of loans is important in 

supporting this investment. So I am pleased to move therefore 

that Bill No. 28, the Saskatchewan consequential amendments 

Act, 2011 be now read for a second time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 28, The Education Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 

I’m pleased to stand today in the Assembly to offer our points 

and our complementary points as the minister talked about more 

debt for the school divisions. Certainly you look at The 

Education Act that we spoke about earlier, that this certainly is 

in line with what we think is another further challenge to many 

of the school divisions, that she’s now allowing them to assume 

more debt and make more loans. 

 

And that’s exactly what the problem is, Mr. Speaker, is how . . . 

But the question that we have is, how many loans have any of 

the school divisions taken prior to this government coming into 

power? We need to know those figures. Is it going to be 

increased? Obviously the local school divisions and the local 

communities need to come up with some of their own money if 

they want to have a new school built. And they want to see 

some local commitment. Fair enough. But you know, if you 

don’t allow the school divisions to be able to give them taxing 

powers so they can raise their own money through the tax base 

as they do with say, for example, some of the hospitals that are 

being proposed . . . 

 

I think it’s in Shellbrook, I think, where they have a levy on 

some of the properties around the community. I think it’s $150 

a month that they allow them to . . . The RMs I think are 

collecting this and that’s their contribution towards building a 

brand new hospital in Shellbrook. And I certainly wish 

Shellbrook and the area great luck in getting that facility 

because obviously they would need it and they would want it. 

 

Now do the school divisions have the same option here? And 

based on the fact that the minister wants to hold what I think is 

the line on property taxes, they’ve stripped the school divisions 

of the opportunity to tax property, you know, within their 

school division. But hold it;, we’re going to save you, is what 

this Bill is about. We’re going to allow you to assume more 

debt. You can borrow more money. 

 

Now again out of that $391 million that the minister alluded to, 

how much of that would be covered under this Bill, under that 

debt? Is it 35 per cent of it? Is it a 35 per cent? That’s the 

questions that we need to know. Because as you look at some of 

the information that we got on education in general, if you think 

you’re going to have trouble meeting some of the commitments 

today, the Sask Party are going to have trouble meeting some of 

the commitments. 

 

Look, we have over 5,000 new students in the province and yet 

we have a number of teachers losing their jobs. The teaching 

staff have been pushed down. The educational assistants, as I 

mentioned, they got rid of them. And there’s also a number of 

students that have intensive needs. So you combine all those 

factors in place. That also adds to the challenge of educating our 

young people, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[16:15] 

 

This all adds challenges, but the solution again for that minister 

and the Saskatchewan Party is, guess what? You can borrow 

money. You know, and how is a school division that have 

problems in making sure that the full complement of staff, 

they’re making sure that they have the autonomy to do these 

things, to make sure that they make all the adjustments to 

changing the school year, to making sure that they have the 

proper staff to maintain their facility, and to also hire the staff, 

and then to look at the increase in students, look at the special 

needs that are out there, and given all those factors, not having a 

funding agreement, to add that on top of the burden? 

 

And now, guess what? You need to go find some money. We’ll 

let you borrow money. We’ll give you the authority to borrow 

more money. How could you borrow money from a school 

division that has no taxing powers and has no funding formula 

in place? How could that, how could that happen? How are they 

going to pay that? Are they going to chip in at their next staff 

meeting? Are they going to do fundraising, bake sales and 

raffles and that kind of thing? That’s the thing we . . . That’s the 



228 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 2011 

point we have to ask them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is, how is it 

that you can put all these opportunities, you disguise them as 

opportunities when they’re really challenges? 

 

And did the minister consult on that front? Did the minister 

consult on that front? Did she say to the SSBA, hey folks, guess 

what, we’re going to let you guys borrow money now. And, yes 

okay, but yes, the borrowing of the money, how are we going to 

pay that back? Well we’re not going to let you tax any more. 

You can’t tax any more. And we’re not going to give you your 

funding agreement. And the teachers are at this percentage, and 

we agreed to that. We’re going to hold the line that you guys 

don’t start charging people property tax. 

 

But on the other side, when you talk about hospitals, yes go 

ahead and collect 150 bucks a month from each of the people 

that are staying in these RMs. So why is it good on one front 

and is bad on the other front? It’s simply because we think that 

this government does not know what they are doing, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And that is the problem. That is the problem. 

 

So on the education model, just from looking at some of these 

notes and hearing what the people are saying, we know that 

there’s a lot more information out there, that there’s going to be 

a lot of organizing to deal with this particular issue, and there’s 

going to be a lot of agony amongst the school divisions in 

trying to figure this baby out. And that’s exactly what we meant 

when we said, don’t mess it up. Don’t mess it up. Don’t bring 

your philosophies in there, the conservative philosophies to try 

and figure out what the future of Saskatchewan is, because 

Saskatchewan is a much more caring province to say, 

everybody on their own. We need to begin to help each other 

out and build the economy based on, again as I mentioned, 

respect, and making sure that we have decent facilities, decent 

homes, and a bright future for everyone, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a 

bright future for everyone. 

 

And in order to achieve that, you’ve got to embrace two or three 

groups, and one of them is educating the future, the future 

leaders of our province called students. And this government 

has totally disrespected those associations and those groups of 

people. They have ignored the teachers, and they haven’t given 

them no resources to operate yet recognizing their pressures. 

And now to say as a coup de grâce, guess what, you can borrow 

more money. So I don’t know how the school divisions are 

going to borrow more money when they don’t have any money, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. That is a pretty tough order to fill. 

 

So obviously we have a lot more questions and comments on 

this particular Bill. And given the time frame, Mr. Speaker, of 

at least two or three months before we are back in the Assembly 

to bring forward our other debates and other issues, I want to 

point out that we will be back on this Bill, and there’ll be a lot 

more pointed discussions on the challenge of education in the 

province of Saskatchewan afforded to the people by those guys 

across the way. And that’s not what the people of Saskatchewan 

envisioned when they gave this government the opportunity to 

govern. I think that time is coming to an end, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and I think that arrogance and being comfortable in 

those chairs will soon catch up. And that time is coming, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. So on that note I move that we adjourn debate 

on this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 28, The Education Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 21 — The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of Bill 21, The Commissioners for Oaths 

Act, 2011. This Act modernizes Saskatchewan’s legislation for 

appointing commissioners for oaths. It removes provisions that 

are outdated or unnecessary and updates language. 

 

Mr. Speaker, commissioners for oaths are the officials that 

administer oaths, affirmations, and statutory declarations for a 

variety of uses in Saskatchewan. In effect, when a person makes 

an oath, affirmation, or declaration for a Commissioner for 

Oaths, it has the same effect as if that individual had given 

sworn testimony in court. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Commissioners for Oaths Act dates back to 

the 1940s and has very few changes that have been needed 

since that time. In fact the Act has not been comprehensively 

reviewed in many years. After an ad hoc amendment that was 

passed in 2010 to correct a deficiency dealing with military 

officers, we decided to conduct a thorough review. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the ministry has gone through a review of its 

processes related to appointments for commissioners for oaths 

and has found and corrected several inefficiencies. However, 

more can be done with legislative amendments. This Bill 

removes the distinction between appointments for 

commissioners for oaths “in and for Saskatchewan” and 

commissioners for oaths “without Saskatchewan.” We find 

these concepts to be unnecessary in today’s mobile society. In 

removing the distinction, we are following the lead established 

by other provinces such as British Columbia, Manitoba, and 

Ontario. The Bill removes the requirement to be a Canadian 

citizen or a British subject as a qualification for appointment. 

These concepts are outdated and in fact likely violate the 

equality provisions of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation also provides a modernized 

appointment process with as much possible being done online 

and electronically. It also introduces the concept of more 

rigorous screening of applicants. Regulations will enable 

training and evaluation processes before an appointment is 

issued. 

 

Finally, and perhaps most significantly, Mr. Speaker, this Act 

will update the designation of persons and classes of persons 

who are commissioners for oaths without having to apply for an 

appointment. These people are commissioners simply by virtue 

of their status or office. 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, lawyers, members of the Legislative 

Assembly, court officials, and senior military officers have long 



December 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 229 

been recognized in legislation throughout Canada as 

commissioners for oaths without needing to receive an 

appointment. Provincial court judges need the specific ability to 

administer affidavits, declarations, and affirmations. Also there 

are other groups whose members often apply for appointments 

and for whom fee exemptions have previously been granted 

under the regulations. These include police officers and 

government officials. By designating these people as 

commissioners “by virtue of their status or office,” it avoids the 

bureaucratic waste of them applying for appointments and my 

ministry processing these many applications. 

 

You will note, Mr. Speaker, the types of government officials 

who qualify under this provision will be designated in the 

regulations. My officials are conducting in-depth consultations 

with the ministries to determine which officials actually need to 

be commissioners for oaths. Further, Mr. Speaker, these 

designations will terminate as soon as the individual ceases to 

hold the office or have the particular status that allows him or 

her to administer oaths. 

 

We feel that time is right to update our commissioners for oaths 

legislation and that is why, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move 

second reading of Bill 21, The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 

2011. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved second reading of Bill No. 21, The Commissioners 

for Oaths Act, 2011. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

again pleased to rise today to give our insight on this Bill. 

Obviously we paid very close attention to this Bill, and we want 

to make sure that the minister was quite clear as to the purpose 

of the Bill and what his intentions were. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I was quite pleased when the information 

came forward, when the minister indicated that the MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] were not going to be, the 

power to be acting as a commissioner of oaths was not being 

taken away from the MLAs. And that was quite important 

because in my office we often get people that come to see us 

and they give us, they ask us to sign for them as a commissioner 

of oaths. And it is really a valuable service to many people in 

my area, primarily for two reasons. Number one is they don’t 

have access to lawyers, and of course the more prevalent reason 

is that they don’t have access to, you know, to the money to hire 

lawyers. 

 

So I think the Commissioner for Oaths, in terms of recognizing 

that there are independent officers — whether they’re police 

officers or whether they’re judges or MLAs or they’re in the 

Canadian Armed Forces or whether they’re a member of the 

courts — that these people are out there in the public, and they 

really serve a valuable amount of people that need a 

Commissioner for Oaths to witness the signing of their 

documents. So I’m pleased that that option is still there for a lot 

of people. 

 

Now obviously the question that we have is what is the purpose 

of the Bill. Is this simply a housekeeping Bill? Is there other 

groups or organizations that have asked to be given this 

privilege? And when I say it’s a privilege, people come up to us 

and I tell them very carefully that I’m not going to commission 

your oath here if I don’t see you sign the document. You’ve got 

to sign it in front of me. And once they’ve signed, then of 

course I will sign. So it’s a privilege to be able to help people 

and it’s also, you know, you have to be careful as well. 

 

So when the minister talks about the amendments to this 

particular Act, what is the impact? What was the need behind 

this Bill? And is it going to be a better service to the people of 

Saskatchewan overall? 

 

And again if you have about 200 people in one town that can 

actually act as a Commissioner for Oaths, you know that’s 

probably helpful, you know, in my area. But in certain other 

areas, all of a sudden you have 6 or 700, it becomes kind of a 

problem because if every Tom, Dick, and Harry can be a 

Commissioner for Oaths, it becomes a bit of a circus. 

 

So I just want to make sure that we find out what the intent of 

the Bill is, why it’s being proposed at this time. Again what 

consultation did the minister have? And while they may be 

identifying some of his powers to a point, I’m quite pleased that 

at the very least that he’s recognized the independence of the 

MLAs to continue serving the role of Commissioner for Oaths 

as a service to many of our constituents. So on that note, Mr. 

Speaker, I would adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 21, The Commissioners for 

Oaths Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 22 — The Commissioners for Oaths Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 portant 

modification corrélative à la loi intitulée 

The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of Bill No. 22, The Commissioners for 

Oaths Consequential Amendment Act, 2011. This Bill goes 

hand in hand with The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011. 

That Bill consequently amends two other Acts. 

 

This one, which is bilingual, amends a bilingual Act, The 

Evidence Act. Mr. Speaker, in all of the consequential 

amendments, the only item being changed is the reference to 

commissioners for oaths, in and for, I emphasize, 

Saskatchewan, or commissioners for oaths, emphasis on the 

word, without Saskatchewan, as the case may be. 

 

In the case of the bilingual amendments, Mr. Speaker, The 

Evidence Act currently permits affidavits to be sworn outside 

Saskatchewan for use in Saskatchewan courts by a 

Commissioner for Oaths, emphasis on the word, without 

Saskatchewan. 



230 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 2011 

As a result of the change in The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 

2011 that eliminates the distinction between appointments in 

and for and appointments without Saskatchewan, the English 

and French versions of this Act are being changed to refer to 

Commissioner for Oaths for Saskatchewan without reference to 

“in and for” or “without.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 

22, The Commissioners for Oaths Consequential Amendment 

Act, 2011. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 22, The Commissioners for Oaths 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2011. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again I 

would point out that this a fairly straightforward Bill. I think we 

made our points on the Bill previously, that this has some 

connect. And certainly from our perspective, as always we will 

look at the Bill and continue seeing if there’s any connection 

with the original Bill, for this is certainly a complementary Bill. 

So we will certainly again seek advice from a number of groups 

that may give us advice on this particular Bill and the other 

Bills attached to it, and we’ll certainly have the opportunity to 

debate them as time goes on. So on that point, Mr. Speaker, I 

move that we adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

[16:30] 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 22, The Commissioners for 

Oaths Consequential Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 23 — The Occupational Health and Safety 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to move 

second reading of Bill No. 23, The Occupational Health and 

Safety Amendment Act, 2011. These amendments are aimed at 

improving workplace health and safety in the province by 

supporting the Government of Saskatchewan’s goal of 

eliminating all work-related injuries and illnesses. 

 

Before commenting on the proposed legislation, I would like to 

offer my thanks to the members of the Occupational Health and 

Safety Council for their important work and to the broad 

spectrum of business and labour stakeholders who participated 

in the consultations on changes to the Act. I would also like to 

thank the staff of the ministry of Labour Relations and 

Workplace Safety for their input throughout this process and for 

their contribution in making workplaces right across the 

province safer and healthier. 

 

We are seeing positive results from both targeted public 

education campaigns on safety and stepped-up enforcement 

measures. There has been a 572 per cent increase in the number 

of occupational health and safety prosecutions between 2007 

and ’08 and 2010 and ’11. Occupational Health and Safety has 

also increased the number of workplace inspections it has 

conducted each year since 2006 and 2007. In fact there was a 34 

per cent increase in the number of inspections in last fiscal year 

compared to ’06-07. As a result, the time loss workplace injury 

rate in Saskatchewan dropped 22 per cent between 2007 and 

2011. 

 

In spite of that improvement, Saskatchewan still has the second 

highest workplace injury rate in the country. Each year about 

40,000 injury claims are made with to the Workers’ 

Compensation Board. This is simply unacceptable. Workplace 

injuries can impose a profound emotional and financial toll on 

victims and their families and friends and on their communities 

and the places that they work. We must do more to reach 

everyone’s goal of Mission: Zero — no workplace injuries, no 

workplace deaths. It is with that in mind that I support these 

amendments to The Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1993. 

 

This legislation will enhance the duties of employers, 

supervisors, and suppliers as they relate to occupational health 

and safety. It will create a duty for prescribed owners to 

designate a prime contractor and for that prime contractor to 

coordinate site safety at work sites where there are multiple 

employers or self-employed persons. In other words, every 

owner must take care to ensure those that they hire are 

competent and take action when non-compliance with The 

Occupational Health and Safety Act comes to their attention. 

 

This legislation will establish procedures related to the creation 

and greater effectiveness of occupational health committees and 

health and safety programs. The amendments further require 

employers and other parties to provide training and supervision 

of employees, as well as maintenance of equipment to ensure 

the safety of all workers. 

 

On the enforcement side, the legislation will increase the 

investigative authority for occupational health officers in the 

course of their duties. In addition the amendments call for an 

increase in the maximum fines and range of penalties for 

occupational health and safety violations. These changes will 

serve as a significant deterrent to ensure that people will follow 

the Act and are consistent with the best practices from other 

jurisdictions. 

 

In fact it is a fact that over 500,000 days of productive work are 

lost each year in Saskatchewan and annual claim costs exceed 

$200 million. If together we are able to improve safety 

practices, it will lead to cost savings as a result of reduced 

workload injuries and increased overall workplace productivity. 

 

The amendments support the Government of Saskatchewan and 

its partners’ efforts to improve safety practices and standards in 

all sectors to reduce workplace injuries and increase workplace 

productivity. They also reinforce Saskatchewan’s perspective 

that it is the responsibility and effort of workplaces, not 

government, that is the key to prevention of occupational injury 

and ailments. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second 

reading of Bill No. 23, The Occupational Health and Safety 

Amendment Act, 2011. 



December 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 231 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved second reading of Bill No. 23, The Occupational 

Health and Safety Amendment Act, 2011. Is the Assembly ready 

for the question? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

again pleased to stand today to certainly speak about the 

minister’s Bill. And any time you look at the amendments of 

The Occupational Health and Safety Amendment Act, 2011, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s important that we pay attention. 

 

The reason why it’s important that we pay attention because 

every year in the Assembly we stand up and we have a motion 

of silence for people that may have lost their lives on the job but 

more so as well, those people whose family were affected as a 

result of their loss of life. And it’s really a difficult, difficult 

moment for many, many people. And it’s always nice and I feel 

great when we take that time in the Assembly here to have that 

moment of silence of the people that may have passed while 

they’re doing their job. And it’s always a moment that we take 

time to think of that family, think of that person. And it’s 

always quite a difficult time when you hear some of the names, 

all the people being named. And you think, you start thinking of 

them. And half the time you don’t know where they’re from, 

but you know that there is a great loss of that particular family, 

and you can say a silent prayer. And it’s always something that 

I enjoy doing here in the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I applaud the comment of Mission: Zero. That’s 

something that I think that the government always has to keep 

in the forefront. Because obviously if you want to have no 

workplace injuries, that’s the standard we should all adopt. 

That’s the standard that we should certainly keep in mind 

because as I mentioned at the outset, is if we have one death, 

it’s one death too many. If we have injuries in any workplace, 

it’s obviously something that we don’t want to see happen. But 

we know it happens, as you have construction and as you have a 

number of other things that are occurring in the province, you 

know that there are risks to workers and people in general. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I noticed that the information that we got is there 

was some consultation with different groups on The 

Occupational Health and Safety Act. And I think that 

consultation is always valuable. We’ve had so many people 

give us information as to what the challenges were in their 

workplace, and it’s always great to have those people come 

forward. And it’s always greater is if you could listen to some 

of the advice that has been brought forward, and it’s something 

that you could certainly learn from. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I looked at . . . One of the examples I could 

certainly think about today is that when we toured the potash 

mine, I’m not sure which mine it was, but as we went down the 

shaft — this was a couple years ago — we went a long ways 

down. I think it was about 3,500 feet. And anyway as we went 

down the shaft, we talked about what would happen if we have 

a collapse. Even though the potash is supposed to be a stable 

rock, the mine shaft is stable, what would happen if you had a 

collapse? You know, what would happen? 

 

And I guess some of the occupational health and safety rules is 

that you have to have these life cabins where you can actually 

have workers survive up to seven days with water and food and 

all the safety things within that trailer that’s underground. And I 

understand that’s one of things that they had put in place and 

were putting in place. And they explained the safety features — 

that if there is a collapse and there is no escape from that mine 

shaft, that at the very least the workers would have their lives 

spared, and they’d have a place that they could go and survive 

until they’re actually . . . help comes. 

 

Now as we spoke about that during our tour, I found that 

actually pretty cool because you have workers down there, and 

you have people that have families and children and so on and 

so forth. And even though the rock is stable, at least you had a 

backup plan in the event that a major accident occurred and 

then you’re cut off from escaping the mine. 

 

Now I can remember that there was reference to another mine 

collapse in the country at the same time. Now I’m not certain, 

again I’m just doing this from my memory, I’m not certain if 

this accident happened shortly after or before that, but there was 

a loss a life. There was quite a few miners that did perish in that 

mine collapse. And the question that you have to ask is that, 

were the same standards applied to that mine as the province of, 

as our province did? And to this day, I don’t know if that was 

the case.  

 

But I can tell you that I sure felt a lot better after that tour of 

that potash mine because it really reaffirmed to me that the 

workers that were down in that shaft had some input as to what 

they thought were good safety measures, and the safety 

measures were put in place. And that really, I think that people 

of Saskatchewan should know, that was really something that 

was very special to me and certainly to our government at the 

time. 

 

So I think as we look at The Occupational Health and Safety 

Act and the minister alluded to the fact that he’s had 

consultation, that is very important to know. And because there 

is so many people out there that give you some valuable advice, 

that you ought to incorporate that valuable advice into some of 

the work that you’re doing on these Bills. 

 

The other point I would raise, Mr. Speaker, is that the auditor 

also spoke about the fact that there were infractions that were 

increased under this government’s watch. And while the 

infractions were noted, the cause of the infractions was not 

investigated further. I think that was the gist of what the auditor 

had mentioned in terms of the workers’ safety in some of the 

work that she done to investigate this whole notion of what I 

think is a government duty. 

 

And we have to start asking ourselves, well shouldn’t we 

investigate the cause of the accidents as opposed to just noting 

that the accident occurred? Because obviously if you investigate 

the cause of that accident, it could make the workplace safe 

because you could eliminate that threat later down the road. 

And that’s exactly what I think the auditor was trying to speak 

about. And that’s why I think the minister should be well 

advised to really coordinate his efforts on this front with the 

auditor to say, well okay it’s being noted, but there’s no further 

action in terms of finding out how the workplace infraction 

happened. Then it becomes problematic in the sense that this 

may occur but it could have more drastic circumstances. 

 



232 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 2011 

So again, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s so many things that we 

could speak about on this particular Bill. It’s not a great thing to 

have as a province. You know it was noted that we have the 

second highest workplace injury rate in Canada. There’s 

obviously something wrong somewhere, and I would suggest 

that perhaps not investigating thoroughly enough the cause of 

the infraction as opposed to just noting the infraction, I would 

suggest that that probably has a lot to do with that high rate. 

 

Right now, as the unions would tell you, that they are prepared 

to give great advice. The unions are prepared to give you some 

solutions to some of the long-standing problems because the 

unions, from all the information I got, they highlight Mission: 

Zero as the mantra when we talk about workplace safety. So 

right from the government perspective to the union perspective, 

Mission: Zero is the accomplishment, but there are different 

paths as to how you can accomplish that. And I would suggest 

not noting the infractions but actually checking the basis of 

those infractions, why they occurred, would be a good first step 

in terms of knocking down those numbers and trying to become 

a more responsible government when it comes to worker safety. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, again the second highest workplace injury 

in Canada is not something that we should be proud of. So we 

need to make sure, we need to make sure that the ongoing 

consultation with the stakeholders, especially the unions 

because they have, like I mentioned, they have great experience 

— it’s all their members at risk — that they would certainly 

have the audience of the minister on a pretty constant basis, a 

consistent basis so they can offer their insight as to how they 

can bring those numbers down, and pray that we have a 

Mission: Zero objective and accomplish that one of these days. 

It’s a difficult task, but we have to take the time to make sure it 

happens. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know other members of my caucus will 

want to speak on this Bill at greater detail and certainly at a 

later time. And as always, as the Bills are being introduced — 

and I’m certainly explaining this to people back home — our 

option is to explain the Bill and to thank the minister for the 

information, but other colleague members are to have the 

opportunity to debate the merits of the Bill and put their points 

forward and try to amend the Bill and so on and so forth. And 

that process takes time. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So the two or three months that we have before the spring 

sitting, we will take the time to invite the stakeholders, the 

unions, the industry, and the different people that are out there 

that could give us some advice on how we strengthen this Bill 

and all work towards Mission: Zero. We are all committed to 

that, and we will certainly continue building on that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I thank the minister for his information. We 

have a lot more to say on this Bill. But given the time frame 

we’re under at this point, I would move that we adjourn debate 

on this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of Bill No. 23, The Occupational Health and 

Safety Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Requesting leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont has 

requested leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you seated in your gallery I am pleased to see two 

surprise guests here today. Both my mom and my dad are here 

today, so a little bit of a surprise. I don’t know what they’re 

doing at this time of day. I guess actually I do know. There was 

a funeral here this afternoon. But a pleasure to see both of them 

here today. And this is Craik Wotherspoon and Faye 

Wotherspoon. And you know, I think that Craik probably gives 

me a little bit of the passion that I have in this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, and I think Faye gives me all of the sensibility that 

hopefully I bring to the Assembly. If not, maybe I didn’t have 

that part transferred from my mother.  

 

My dad’s been an educator for many, many years in 

Saskatchewan, born in Melville, Saskatchewan, and son of an 

elevator agent with the Wheat Pool, and currently a principal 

for Raymore and which has him in Regina here today. And my 

mom does the good work for Scotiabank after raising us as 

children and staying at home, and went back to work and 

worked for the Scotiabank for many years and manages their 

customer service and many other aspects there, lots of their 

audits and activities and making sure everything’s being 

handled properly. So sometimes she also has some good advice 

on the file of finance. But it’s a pleasure to have both of them 

here today and certainly a very important part of our lives and 

lucky to have them so involved in the activities that we have 

from a political nature as well. 

 

I know that my father was one of the most regular door 

knockers that I had on Saturday afternoons during this last 

election. And the one thing with Craik is he feels that he should 

be able to convince almost everybody that their support should 

come our way, so he tries this angle and that angle and this 

angle. He’s a pretty effective door knocker, Mr. Speaker, and a 

real pleasure to work with — both of them in so many ways and 

of course just appreciate all of their support. So nice to have 

you here today, mom and dad, and I’d like to have all members 

of this Assembly provide you a warm welcome. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 24 — The Advocate for Children and Youth Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 



December 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 233 

with the member opposite in welcoming his parents to the 

Legislative Assembly. I think it’s wonderful when families 

come, especially this time of year. I’d like to encourage them 

not to spend too much money Christmas shopping. There are 

better things they could do by making donations to other 

political parties, but I leave that to them to decide how they 

wish to spend their money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise today to move second 

reading of Bill No. 24, The Advocate for Children and Youth 

Act. This Act will help children receiving services from the 

government and publicly funded health entities. In addition to 

creating a separate piece of legislation for the advocate, this Act 

will clarify the advocate’s power to address complaints related 

to publicly funded health entities. It will allow the advocate to 

conduct research in the area of children’s rights, and it will 

allow government ministries and agencies to co-operate in 

sharing information with the advocate, thereby creating a more 

welcoming environment for youth to bring forward their 

concerns. 

 

The new Act will replace The Ombudsman and Children’s 

Advocate Act and will set out the powers and responsibilities of 

the newly termed “Advocate for Children and Youth.” 

 

When the advocate’s office was created in 1994, the 

Ombudsman had responsibility for the administration of the 

office of the advocate. However, in 2000 the Ombudsman’s 

oversight of the advocate’s office was removed from the 

legislation. As such there is no need for the Ombudsman and 

advocate to be governed by the same statute. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the separation of the statutes helps give the public 

clarity about the services available to them. Having two statutes 

will reduce any public confusion as to roles and responsibilities 

of these Independent Officers. The new legislation supports the 

distinctive duties, responsibilities, and offices of these 

Independent Officers of the legislature. To clarify, Mr. Speaker, 

both the advocate and the Ombudsman have jurisdiction over 

the same entities; however, the Ombudsman deals with 

complaints about services provided to adults, while the 

advocate deals with complaints about services provided to 

children and youth. 

 

The second important piece of this new legislation is the 

jurisdiction of the advocate over publicly funded health entities. 

The Bill more clearly defines the advocate’s authority to 

include regional health authorities, health care organizations 

and affiliates, and the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, the advocate will now have 

jurisdiction to conduct research relating to the rights of children 

and youth. The advocate will have the mandate to start working 

in this interesting and complicated area of children’s rights, 

either on the advocate’s own initiative or at the direction of the 

legislature. 

 

The next major point in this new legislation allows for 

government ministries and agencies to share information 

voluntarily with the advocate to help promote simpler, quicker, 

and non-adversarial dispute resolution. Currently most 

complaints to the advocate are resolved using non-adversarial 

approaches. Only about 5 per cent of complaints are resolved 

using the formal investigation process. The remaining 95 per 

cent are resolved using negotiation, mediation, and conciliation 

where voluntary access to information helps reach a resolution. 

The new Act will provide clear authority for ministries and 

other government agencies to voluntarily provide the advocate 

with access to information. 

 

This Act also ensures children and youth the greatest possible 

access to the advocate. Operators of group homes, foster homes, 

and other facilities will be required to provide the children and 

youth in their care with information on how to contact the 

advocate. They must also provide a means for them to do so in 

private. All communication between child or youth and the 

advocate are privileged. 

 

You will note, Mr. Speaker, the addition of the term, youth, in 

the title of the Act. Older children or youth do not consider 

themselves children. Many of them do not believe that the 

advocate’s services are available to them. Changing the name of 

the officer to the Advocate for Children and Youth helps reduce 

the confusion and the reluctance of youth to seek help from the 

advocate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act was drafted after detailed consultations 

with the current Children’s Advocate, Bob Pringle, 

Ombudsman, Kevin Fenwick, and the ministries of Health, 

Social Services, and Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

Consultations were also held with representatives of regional 

health authorities and numerous publicly funded health care 

providers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to move second reading of Bill 

No. 24, The Advocate for Children and Youth Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved second reading of Bill No. 24, The Advocate for 

Children and Youth Act. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased to stand on behalf of the official opposition and, of 

course, offer our continued opinion on a number of Bills and in 

particular this Bill as well. 

 

I think there’s no question that this is an area that needs a lot of 

attention because obviously the minister had pointed out that 

he’s expanding the name and thus the mandate of the Children’s 

Advocate to include youth. Now, Mr. Speaker, there is a lot of 

questions when it comes to the future of our youth. I think that 

the office that has the independence to look at all the issues 

facing our youth and the children is an office that we certainly 

lean on on many occasions to seek advice from and get some 

solid points from as well. 

 

So I looked at the Bill overall very quickly, Mr. Speaker. There 

are some things we want to ask. And as you expand the role for 

any particular department or in this case a independent office, 

we need to know if there is adequate monies for that office to 

make sure that they can do their duties and fulfill the 

obligations attached to that office. 

 

And that’s one of the things that’s really important to us is that 

there are so many children at risk and now it’s youth at risk. 

And you look at the problems we have right across 



234 Saskatchewan Hansard December 14, 2011 

Saskatchewan that we need to do something. We need to make 

sure that we can alter the direction for many families that have a 

most difficult time, a most difficult time. 

 

And you see some of those challenges surface at very critical 

times like Christmas. And you know that sometimes it’s a 

celebration for some families, and sometimes people have a 

really, really tough time during the festive season for a number 

of issues. And as you would know, Mr. Speaker, there is that 

challenge that the province has. 

 

So as I look at some the parts of the Bill that are really 

important, when you’re an advocate for children and youth it 

brings in a whole host of questions as to what the mandate is 

going to be like, what the challenge that this is supposed to 

address. And we’re hoping, from the official opposition 

perspective, that this simply isn’t a name change, that along 

with the name change comes a new mandate and along with the 

new mandate comes all kinds of activity within government to 

respond to this crisis. And that’s the important message that we 

have in relation to this particular Bill. 

 

So I would point out that the Bill and the language certainly is 

something that we applaud. Because increasing the mandate to 

include youth is really, really important that we do this. And 

that’s why, when we seen the Bill come forward, we told our 

staff to have a close look at this. Because it is something that is 

necessary and certainly something that is needed. 

 

So we have a bunch of questions, and we certainly want to see 

what the, who the minister may have consulted with. And again 

I go back to the earlier comments: consultation is a lot different 

to consulted and had agreement with. And that’s what we 

always look for, Mr. Speaker, is the last phrase — and had 

agreement with the following groups. And that’s pretty darn 

important in any Bills, Mr. Speaker, because it’s one thing to 

consult but it’s another thing to get agreement from the 

different parties that you consult. And I tell people that may be 

listening that the language that the government uses is quite 

important. So when they say that we consulted with this group 

and that group, people might think, yes okay, they consulted 

with that group and these groups supported them. That’s not the 

case. Many times it’s primarily consultation. It doesn’t 

necessarily mean agreement. So it’s important that that is noted. 

 

And as I indicated to the caucus, that this debate is going to 

have a lot of effect on my area as well as my colleague’s area. 

Because as we know, northern Saskatchewan has a great 

amount of challenge in dealing with youth and dealing with 

children, primarily because of the poor houses, you know, the 

lack of jobs, the training that is necessary — the list goes on. 

We see that in the forest fringe as well. We see that in some of 

the small towns and villages. We see that in the inner cities. 

And we have to address this problem because it’s been out there 

and it certainly needs the attention that it warrants. 

 

So in looking at the Bill overall, there are some sections that 

we’re quite interested in. There are provisions in there that we 

want to pay attention to. And the biggest thing, of course, is we 

want to make sure that we check if the government affords this 

Bill with the proper amount of money. And that is the key 

thing. So I think people out there should know that we intend to 

do that. 

So again we have people that have been researching this Bill. 

We intend to continue paying attention to it. It’s very, very 

important to the future of Saskatchewan. We hope that some of 

the intent on this Bill would have some positive effect on the 

Minister of Education because she’s obviously got some 

problems in that field. So we need to fix that area to 

complement this area as well as housing, and the list goes on 

and on and on, Mr. Speaker. So it all is connected and it all is 

important. And as an official opposition, we will certainly 

continue paying very close attention to this file. So, Mr. 

Speaker, based on that note and the lateness of the hour, I 

would move that we adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 24, The Advocate for 

Children and Youth Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this Assembly do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 

until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:59.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 201 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 201 

  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 201 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 201 

  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 201 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 202 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 202 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 202 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 232 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 202 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Hudson Bay Riders Win Football Championship 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................... 202 

 Saskatonian Honoured for Acts of Service 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 203 

 Middle Lake Hosts and Wins Cross-Country Championship 

  Kirsch ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 203 

 First Nations and Métis Education Gap 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 203 

 North Battleford Educator Honoured 

  Cox ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 204 

 Saskatoon Ambulance Service Marks 35th Year 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................... 204 

 RxFiles Application Developed in Saskatoon 

  Parent ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 204 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Power Outages 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 204 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 205 

 Shelter Accommodation 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 206 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 206 

 Housing 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 207 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 207 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 29 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 209 

 Bill No. 30 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 209 

 Bill No. 31 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 210 

 Bill No. 32 — The Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi sur les ordonnances alimentaires interterritoriales 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 210 

 Bill No. 33 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 210 

 Bill No. 34 — The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation Act, 2011 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 210 

TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 210 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 211 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 211 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 19 — The Assessment Appraisers Amendment Act, 2011 

  Hickie ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 211 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 212 

 Bill No. 20 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2011 

  Hickie ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 215 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 216 

 Bill No. 27 — The Education Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l'éducation 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 220 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 222 

 Bill No. 28 — The Education Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 226 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 227 

 Bill No. 21 — The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 228 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 229 

 Bill No. 22 — The Commissioners for Oaths Consequential Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 229 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 230 

 Bill No. 23 — The Occupational Health and Safety Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 230 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 231 

 Bill No. 24 — The Advocate for Children and Youth Act 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 232 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 233 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


