




















































Hansard: March 21, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 34A  MONDAY, MARCH 21, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6789 

 March 21, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if all members 

will join with me in welcoming a group of students, the newly 

elected executive of the student union from their University of 

Regina. Here with us today is the president-elect, Kent 

Peterson. Kent, if you’d just stand up and give a wave. With 

him, vice-president of operations and finance, Haanim Nur. As 

well, vice-president of student affairs, Melissa Blackhurst. 

Melissa. As well, vice-president-elect of external affairs, Paige 

Kezima. 

 

This is the new group executive who will be looking after the 

affairs of the students at the University of Regina, and I know 

they’ll do an excellent job. And in addition to the post that they 

hold, all four of these young leaders will also take positions as 

student union representatives at the University of Regina senate 

and that too is a big responsibility. And I welcome you here to 

your Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education and Employment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

you and through you, I’d like to join the Leader of the Official 

Opposition in welcoming these University of Regina student 

leaders. We’re absolutely delighted that they’re here joining us 

in the legislature today, and we welcome their leadership and 

participation in university affairs in the broader community 

within Saskatchewan. And so I just want to reiterate, I join with 

the Leader of the Official Opposition and ask all members to 

help welcome these student leaders to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the Leader of the Official Opposition and the minister in 

welcoming these students in my capacity as critic for Advanced 

Education. I know Kent, Haanim, Melissa, and Paige will do a 

great job representing the concerns of students at the University 

of Regina, and I certainly look forward to working with them in 

the months ahead. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, 

seated in your gallery, it’s my honour to join in welcoming 

students here and the many other guests that are here, but as 

well someone very special to me, Mr. Speaker. My beautiful 

and intelligent wife has joined me here today. Of course she’s a 

grade 5-6 teacher at W. F. Ready. And the students aren’t in 

school here today, nor are teachers; they have a day off here 

today, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to have her join us here 

today. I ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in 

welcoming my wife, Stephanie Wotherspoon. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan renters who are 

facing a combination of rising rents and low vacancy rates in 

many communities across the province. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

petition also recognizes that a majority of Canadians now live 

in provinces with rent control guidelines, including Manitoba, 

British Columbia, Ontario, Quebec, and Prince Edward Island 

and that the argument that the private market would deliver 

sufficient affordable housing in the absence of rent control has 

proven to be false. 

 

And the prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to consider enacting some form of rent 

control with a view to protecting Saskatchewan renters 

from unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are on behalf of citizens in 

Saskatoon, Regina, and my community of Moose Jaw. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present petitions in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. And we know that freedom from poverty is an 

enshrined human right by the United Nations and that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security. 

Saskatchewan’s income gap between the rich and the poor 

continues to grow, and now one in five children in 

Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. And we know citizens 

living in poverty have long identified affordable solutions. I’d 

like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

I do so present. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of Northern Trappers Association Co-operative. The 

fur industry has so much potential for our northern trappers. It 

is a way to educate and empower our northern youth and to 

connect them with their culture. And the prayer reads as 



6790 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2011 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the provincial government to recognize that Northern 

Trappers Association maintains the traditional values of 

hunting, trapping, and also brings in millions of dollars to 

the provincial economy every year from the process of fur 

harvesting combined with the economic spinoff to the 

tourism sector and to the local economy; and in so doing, 

to cause this government to stop turning their back not 

only on northern trappers but all people who live and 

work in northern Saskatchewan; and in so doing, to cause 

the provincial government to immediately reinstate the 

funding to the Saskatchewan northern trappers 

association. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of Stanley Mission and La 

Ronge. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of my constituents who live in the 

community of Hampton Village. 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes, including education property taxes; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to 

neighbouring communities to attend schools that are 

typically already reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the constituency of Saskatoon Massey Place in the 

neighbourhood of Hampton Village. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan concerned 

about the introduction of Bill 160, specifically that, if adopted, 

the legislation will make hearing human rights complaints less 

accessible to victims of human rights violations if the Bill was 

introduced without any public consultation and if the Bill has 

been sold on the basis of aims and goals not contained in the 

Bill itself. And the prayer reads as follows: 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Government of Saskatchewan withdraw 

Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative Assembly 

of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public consultations 

informed by a public policy paper before any amendments 

to the Human Rights Code, the law that supersedes all 

others in our province, are even considered. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon and 

Aberdeen, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of our 

finances by the Sask Party. They allude specifically to the two 

consecutive deficit budgets, to the two years of debt growth 

under the Sask Party. And all of this happening at a time of 

unprecedented highs in revenues, Mr. Speaker, and coming at a 

consequence to Saskatchewan people now and into the future, 

this year alone adding $400 million in debt to the books, the 

public debt of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and $4.2 billion, Mr. 

Speaker, over the next four years, representing 55 per cent 

increase in total debt, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Estevan. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

International Day for the Elimination of Racial 

Discrimination 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The International Day 

for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination was March 21st. 

This day was proclaimed in commemoration of the tragic events 

in Sharpeville, South Africa in 1960. 

 

This is a day that reminds us of the destructive nature of racism. 

Racism prevents individuals and groups from achieving their 

full potential. It is essential that we all work together to make 

our homes, communities, and province intolerant to racist 

attitudes. We must learn from the tragedies of the past, and 

together we can create a brighter tomorrow. The International 

Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination reminds us of 

our collective responsibility for promoting and protecting this 



March 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6791 

idea. Let us honour the memory of those who died in 

Sharpeville and other racist incidents by redoubling our efforts 

to eradicate all forms of racism and racial discrimination. 

 

This weekend held Regina’s Spring Free From Racism event. 

This was a mini-mosaic of clothes, food, music, and dance that 

raises local awareness of other races and cultures. 

 

Provincially, nationally, and internationally, let us translate 

good intentions into legal standards and the will to uphold them. 

Above all, Mr. Speaker, we should cherish the rich diversity of 

humankind and respect the inherent dignity and equality of 

every human being. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Spring Free From Racism Event 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, Regina is a diverse city and 

the home to many different people from many different cultures 

and languages as is the province of Saskatchewan. We must 

however continue to learn to embrace our diversity and draw 

from the strengths that it offers. That was the meaning of the 

event held this weekend, Spring Free From Racism, which for 

the past 12 years marked the International Day for the 

Elimination of Racial Discrimination drawing from many 

thousands of people to enjoy food, entertainment, and cultural 

events at the Regina Italian Club. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this event was formed in 1995 with the help of the 

cultural unit of the Regina city police services and several other 

community organizations to address the issues faced by 

immigrants and visible minorities at work and in the school 

system. And the committee continues to unite many individuals 

and community organizations committed to living our 

province’s motto: from many peoples, strength. Through events 

such as the one held this past weekend, the Spring Free From 

Racism committee hopes to educate people about how harmful 

racism can be and to foster respect, dignity, quality, and justice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we thank the organizer, Barb Dedi, and all of the 

committee who came out to embrace and all the people who 

came out to embrace our cultures, enjoy the food, the laughter, 

the entertainment, and above all an attitude of inclusion and 

friendship. Let’s all do our part, Mr. Speaker, to carrying that 

attitude beyond the boundaries of the one-day celebration so we 

can help build a society that is truly free from racism. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Z99 Radiothon 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Awaiting the birth 

of a baby is a tremendous journey filled with many joyful 

moments. Unfortunately there are occasions that unexpected 

complications arise, and some babies are born needing special 

care. These situations are what make the 24th annual Z99 

radiothon so important. The neonatal intensive care unit at the 

Regina General Hospital cares for these at-risk, fragile 

newborns who need the best equipment possible to help them 

get better. 

 

When the NIC [neonatal intensive care] opened in 1976, 

approximately 50 infants were transported to the unit per year. 

Today the yearly admission rate is around 750, and on average 

21 babies are in the unit each day. While some babies stay in 

the NICU [neonatal intensive care unit] for only a few hours for 

observation, others spend several months. 

 

For over a decade the Z99 radiothon has been supporting this 

special unit. The proceeds from the 2011 Z99 radiothon will 

help purchase Giraffe OmniBeds, over-bed warmers, and other 

essential equipment such as blanket warmers and breast milk 

warmers. 

 

I would ask all members of this Assembly to recognize all who 

participated in raising a whopping $381,172 for the General 

Hospital’s neonatal intensive care unit. With continued support 

from our communities, Saskatchewan babies will receive the 

best care when they need it most. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, on Thursday and Friday, Z99 

morning show hosts, CC, Lorie, and Buzz broadcast live from 

Regina’s Cornwall Centre to raise funds for the new Rawlco 

Centre for Mother Baby Care. For 36 hours, hundreds of 

interviews, lots of laughs, tears, and love, CC, Laurie, and Buzz 

led the raging masses to achieve something bigger than any one 

of us. Together we raised funds for the Regina General 

Hospital’s Rawlco Centre for Mother Baby Care. This year’s 

donations will help purchase Giraffe OmniBeds, over-bed 

warmers, and essential equipment such as blanket warmers and 

breast milk warmers. 

 

This year’s 24th radiothon, Mr. Speaker, raised $380,172. Over 

the years, this radiothon has raised more than $3 million for the 

NICU. Regina and surrounding communities are truly amazing. 

Our collective generous giving goes to much-needed equipment 

for babies care at the Regina General neonatal intensive care 

unit. Please join me as we thank every person involved in the 

24th annual Z99 radiothon. CC, Lorie, and Buzz, you continue 

to amaze us. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Social Work Week 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise in the 

Assembly to announce that the government has designated 

March 20th to the 26th as Social Work Week in Saskatchewan. 

The theme of this year’s commemoration is Social Workers for 

Dignity and Inclusion: Upholding Human Rights. 

 

Social workers are professionals concerned with helping 

individuals, families, groups, and communities enhance their 

individual and collective well-being. They aim at helping those 

in the community develop their skills and the ability to use their 

own resources to resolve problems. 

 

In the case of older adults living in our province, the 

compassion and expertise of social workers helps them to lead 



6792 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2011 

fuller lives and enjoy more comfortable, independent 

retirements. In addition to tremendous dedication they provide 

Saskatchewan seniors, social workers provide an invaluable 

service to individuals requiring support and skills development 

within our school settings — community organizations, 

hospitals, the corrections system, just to name a few. 

 

Mr. Speaker, social work is not a 9 to 5 job. Poverty, abuse, and 

injustices do not recognize weekend breaks. A family friend 

and leukemia survivor, 6-year-old Paige Hansen had this to say 

about her social worker: “Mommy, I always feel better after I 

talk to him, and he makes me laugh even when my story is sad. 

And mommy, that’s pretty good, huh?” Mr. Speaker, I agree. 

 

I invite all members of the House to join me today in 

recognizing the efforts of these dedicated professionals as part 

of Social Work Week in Saskatchewan. The hard work and 

commitment of social workers makes our province a better 

place for all Saskatchewan people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Prince Albert Team Wins AAA Championship 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, this past Saturday the 

Prince Albert Mintos won a 3-2 hockey game over the 

Saskatoon Contacts to become the Saskatchewan Midget AAA 

champions. This will be their third midget AAA banner to hang 

from the rafters at the Art Hauser Centre in Prince Albert. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as a former Minto, I am exceptionally proud 

of Prince Albert’s newest champions. Congratulations to Adam 

Fauchoux, Tad Korzan, and Jason Duret for scoring the three 

goals in the 3-2 victory. I also want to congratulate Tim 

Leonard — a former teammate of mine — the head coach who 

has, by the way, been the coach for all three of the midget AAA 

champions. To the team, the parents and volunteers and 

everyone who works with the team, congratulations on a job 

well done. The entire city of Prince Albert is proud and will be 

cheering you on as you move to the next level of competition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in wishing the 

best of luck to the Mintos as they head to the Western 

Regionals in Moose Jaw later this month and on to the Telus 

Cup National championship in St. John’s, Newfoundland later 

this month. Thanks so much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

The Good Old Days 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s been a 

while since we’ve seen general tax increases in the province of 

Saskatchewan. They happened in the dark past, but these 

increases are not forgotten. I would like to take a few seconds to 

review just who was responsible for the decades of tax 

increases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition raised taxes in the 

1970s, he raised taxes in the 1980s, and he raised taxes in the 

1990s. The NDP [New Democratic Party] even brought in the 

new millennium with tax increases. Mr. Speaker, I don’t know 

about you, but that sounds like a lot of tax increases. Mr. 

Speaker, there might be more NDP tax increases than there are 

old K-tel records. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, if there was ever a K-tel record that no one 

wanted, it would be the NDP’s pocketbook tax hits. Alas, Mr. 

Speaker, K-tel faded away. Hopefully the Leader of the 

Opposition will follow suit as well after the November 7th 

election, and so should his job-killing resource tax hikes which 

will harm each and every one of us. 

 

So as the NDP taxman recollects his good old days of tax hikes, 

bell-bottoms, and lava lamps, he’s probably singing to himself, 

I was the taxman and you’re working for no one but me. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

College Governance Issues 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Advanced 

Education is continuing to desperately scramble away from the 

mess he created at Carlton Trail Regional College and St. 

Peter’s College. But it begs the question: why did he sit on the 

Meyer Norris Penny report for over a month if the allegations 

within it are so significant that a CEO [chief executive officer] 

has been fired? 

 

Last Monday when 40 community members came to the 

legislature, the minister said he had the report but was waiting 

to release it because “. . . that way we can make sure that local 

stakeholders are positioned and prepared . . .” To the minister: 

why did he waste time ensuring his people on the ground were 

positioned and prepared instead of doing the right thing as soon 

as he got the report? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education and Employment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much for an 

opportunity to bring the people across the province up to date 

on this. Mr. Speaker, as this report was brought to our attention, 

Mr. Speaker, we actually took it to Justice. And that was part of 

an ongoing conversation. As you can see, Mr. Speaker, we not 

only came forward with the report today, Mr. Speaker, but 

we’ve said that there was a second part, a follow-up, Mr. 

Speaker, so that we could ensure that, as Justice requested, we 

could gather more information on this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is about making sure that we were serving the interests of 

students and taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Speaker, so that 

we can continue to move forward on our aggressive agenda 

regarding advanced education. More than $2 billion invested in 

post-secondary education for the students of this province, Mr. 

Speaker — we know there’s more to do but it’s a solid track 

record. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’d just like to remind our guests that 

they’re not to participate in any form in the debate. I recognize 

the member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 



March 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6793 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has been involved in 

this entire process from the very beginning. It’s simply not 

believable that he only found out about problems when the 

Meyers Norris Penny report landed on his desk recently, over a 

month ago. 

 

To the minister: when was he first made aware of potential 

ethical and governance concerns related to this merger, and 

what did he do when he received that information? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, upon receiving, upon 

receiving, Mr. Speaker, the report, what we were able to do, Mr. 

Speaker, is be in contact with Justice. We made sure that we 

wanted to . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, to the origins of this, Mr. 

Speaker, what I would like to do is quote from the actual 

proposal itself. This was submitted in June 2010. Mr. Speaker, 

to the origins: 

 

In 2007, between April and October [that is before the last 

election, Mr. Speaker], under the guidance of SPC [that is 

St. Peter’s College] and the Carlton Trail Regional 

College board, senior management teams meet 

approximately 20 times with respect to pursuing 

partnership/merger discussions and planning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question to the member opposite: when did he 

know, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has very selective 

hearing this morning, Mr. Speaker. The question was, when was 

he made aware of concerns for the very first time? And, Mr. 

Speaker, his story is not adding up. 

 

I have here an email dated May 14th, 2010. It was sent by 

concerned staff at Carlton Trail Regional College to the board. 

It outlined serious concerns and states, “There are several 

ethical questions that are prominent.” 

 

Two days later, on May 16th, two of the board members replied 

to that email and they copied their responses to the minister. 

The minister received the whole chain of emails, including 

serious ethical questions being raised by staff members at 

Carlton Trail, as well as the completely inappropriate manner in 

which some of the board members chose to handle those 

concerns. 

 

To the minister: when he received those emails back in May, 

why did he choose to ignore them and do nothing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much. Mr. 

Speaker, as we know, there was a two-phase process here. What 

we saw was the institutions actually coming forward, putting 

together their proposal, Mr. Speaker, and then what we 

promised and what we’ve undertaken is to actually then do our 

due diligence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite, the question relates to, 

that relates to, Mr. Speaker, directly, in June, this is a quote 

from the proposal, Mr. Speaker. And I quote: 

 

Meeting with Cam Broten for approximately two hours. 

After addressing and answering his questions, Cam 

appeared to be somewhat comforted that his original 

claims were unsubstantiated and commented that in 

general he supports the concept of the merger. 

 

Close the quote, Mr. Premier. This is June, Mr. Premier. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the individual who wrote that 

report is a convicted fraud artist hired by that minister, Mr. 

Speaker. That individual has charges pressed. And I will take 

my words, what I say in this Assembly, over what someone 

writes in a report, never shares with me, and claims that I said 

something. A minister ought to have more integrity than that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the emails that was copied to the minister 

last May, a board member with strong connections to the Sask 

Party wrote, “It is very unusual to have a letter such as this 

come to the board.” And she then chastised the staff member 

for bringing forward serious ethical concerns. 

 

Another email from a board member that was copied to the 

minister last May said: 

 

When will the staff start concentrating on doing their job 

and let us do ours? Do they not realize that they don’t have 

a say? They are employees. They need to do the best job in 

their position and stop whining. 

 

So the minister received an email a long time ago outlining 

concerns. To the minister: why did he do absolutely nothing 

when concerns were raised? Why did he ignore emails? Why is 

he passing the buck? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I think what we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, and this is 

within the report, Mr. Speaker, is that there were — and this is 

very troubling, Mr. Speaker — there were efforts to silence 

people, Mr. Speaker. This is . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’d ask the members to 

allow the minister to respond to the question. The Minister of 



6794 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2011 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we know, 

across that community there was a broad-ranging debate and 

dialogue. Mr. Speaker, it’s one of the reasons that we went with 

an independent third party. But, Mr. Speaker, there were a 

number of people commenting. Again we can only go 

according to the report, and obviously that’s going to be, that’s 

going to be a standard that we’re all going to be have to be held 

to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Certainly there are a number of questions, Mr. Speaker. Those 

are some of the very questions that we’re responding to, and 

have been for the last number of days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me quote from the proposal, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Talked briefly with Dwain Lingenfelter regarding the 

merger. After answering a few of his questions, Dwain 

indicated that he would like to visit the college this 

summer and in general he supported the concept of the 

merger. 

 

I close quote, Mr. Speaker. What can I say? We’re doing our 

best to make sense of this. Obviously there have been a number 

of meetings, Mr. Speaker, and that applies to members on both 

sides of the aisle. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, does the minister realize how 

ridiculous his argument is? The person he is quoting from, they 

fired because he’s a liar. The person he’s quoting from, they 

fired because there’s now serious accusations, backed up 

accusations that he was stealing. And now he’s using him as the 

justification for what he did. Give me a break. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last May the director of finance for Carlton Trail 

Regional College, Andy Burgess, submitted a six-page memo to 

the board outlining significant financial accounting 

irregularities. I’ve received emails showing that two of the 

board members wanted the director of finance to come to the 

next meeting to explain the problems. But that was shot down 

by other board members, especially Islay Ehlert, Sask Party 

candidate for the nomination in Melfort, and one of the 

minister’s appointees to the Carlton Trail board. She responded 

saying, “This is totally insubordination. There is no need for 

Andy to attend and as a board member I refuse to meet and 

allow him to continue to disrespect our organization and its 

structure.” 

 

To the minister: Islay Ehlert is the one who informed him of the 

concerns raised in the other staff’s earlier email. Why should 

we believe that Ehlert was not also telling the minister about all 

the problems at St. Peter’s? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, this is an opportunity for us 

to obviously continue to research into this. We’ve said this over 

the course of the last three days, four days, Mr. Speaker, as 

these additional pieces of information come up. 

 

The question for the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, from 

Massey Place: did he have a two-hour meeting, Mr. Speaker, 

with the individuals that were putting together this proposal, 

Mr. Speaker? That’s a pertinent question. 

 

As far as the accuracy, Mr. Speaker, I will leave it to others, 

Mr. Speaker. As we have said all the way along, Mr. Speaker, 

let’s make sure we all understand not just what’s been 

contained in the proposal but what’s been contained in the 

number of submissions that have gone public over the course of 

the last number of days. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister seems to miss that he 

is the individual responsible for this merger. He is the one that’s 

been backing it from the very beginning. 

 

This question, Mr. Speaker, if I met with Mr. Kobussen: he 

approached me after U of S [University of Saskatchewan] 

convocation one day. We had coffee for about 45 minutes at 

Caffe Sola. I’m a polite person. I will meet with people for 

coffee. That report does not reflect my remarks that I made to 

him. 

 

What is also not accurate, Mr. Speaker, here, is the minister’s 

record on this entire file. We know that he gave direction to this 

merger. He wanted it to happen. He approved the joint CEO; he 

approved the transition board. He has been involved every step 

of the way. 

 

When serious concerns were sent to him last May, he did 

nothing. When he was copied on emails from concerned staff 

people when they were told that they were just whiners by the 

board, he did nothing. When a report landed on his desk 

outlining serious concerns, he did nothing. He sat on it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

What the minister fails to understand, Mr. Speaker, that he is 

responsible for this mess. When will the so-called minister 

stand up, stop blaming everyone, including the critic — he’s the 

minister; he makes the decisions, for crying out loud — stand 

up, quit blaming others, and take responsibility for this entire 

mess? It’s yours. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I think this morning we 

made it very clear. We have accepted responsibility. In fact, 

what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker, is actually going through and 

ensuring that within the ministry, I have a far greater 



March 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6795 

understanding, Mr. Speaker, of our capacities and where we 

need to go as far as, as well as looking at our institutions. That’s 

our obligation; that’s my responsibility, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we can look at, Mr. Speaker, is the 

discussions. Twenty times a meeting occurred between April 

and October 2007, Mr. Speaker. The origins of this, Mr. 

Speaker, predate this government, Mr. Speaker. Are we 

interested in finding ways . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I find it interesting that some of 

the opposition members would find it that they wouldn’t really 

want to hear the answer. And I’ll ask the opposition members to 

allow the minister to respond. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Are 

we looking at ways, across the province, to ensure that there’s 

increased opportunities for students, as referenced on page 8 of 

the Meyers Norris Penny report? Yes, we are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on page 10, is there more opportunities for us to 

look at academic laddering, Mr. Speaker, to take those students 

that have programs within SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology], stream the elements and 

programs, Mr. Speaker, to actually see if they can be then 

channelled into university, if and as they’re interested, Mr. 

Speaker? Yes, they are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we came forward with this document. We made 

the right decision, Mr. Speaker. The decision was no, not to go 

forward with this merger. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Investments in Health Care 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions are to 

the Minister of Health. Mr. Speaker, on August 14th, four 

babies at Royal University Hospital had insulin added to their 

IV [intravenous] instead of blood thinner. A report 

commissioned in 2007 identified overcrowding and 

understaffing as a problem at the RUH [Royal University 

Hospital] pharmacy. The minister would have known about 

these problems long before the August 14th incident. 

 

To the minister: what is he doing today to ensure that more 

babies’ lives are not put in danger? Is he finally going to act on 

information he has too long ignored? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Highways and Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our 

government is very concerned for the families involved, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s my understanding that the health region is moving 

towards rectifying that situation and, Mr. Speaker, we have 

faith in the health region to react appropriately and take any 

measures that are necessary. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party is spending 

money getting private surgery centres to do day surgeries, and 

they gave a 40 per cent wage increase to the CEO of the 

Saskatoon Health Region. Meanwhile, they ignore a report 

calling for more staffing and resources at the RUH pharmacy. 

The minister found the money to invest in the private health 

system, and to give a 40 per cent wage increase to the 

Saskatoon Health CEO. Is he now going to find the money to 

provide the proper staff and resources to the RUH pharmacy, or 

is he going to continue to risk the lives of young children? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Highways and Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, our 

government is very concerned for the families affected by this 

issue. Mr. Speaker, we have every faith in the health region to 

take appropriate measures. Mr. Speaker, our government has 

made health care a priority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, health regions are funded appropriately. We’ve 

taken all kinds of measures that the members opposite wouldn’t 

in health care, Mr. Speaker, to build capacity. A perfect 

example of that, Mr. Speaker, is in physician recruitment, which 

is a major issue right across the country right now. Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve increased training spaces for doctors; we’ve increased 

training spaces for residents, Mr. Speaker — something those 

members opposite would never do. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is a problem of three 

years standing and I don’t know how the minister can refer back 

to what we did not do on a problem that this ministry has 

known about for three years and done nothing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in last year’s budget, health regions asked for an 

increase of 7 per cent funding, and the minister gave them half 

that and told them to find efficiencies. We heard it’s going to be 

another tough year in the health region funding this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has record revenues coming in. The 

third quarter financials show they have an extra $1 billion, yet 

children’s lives are being put in danger because of the 

government’s failure to properly fund the health region. 

 

To the minister: is he going to commit today to properly fund 

the health regions so more children don’t receive insulin instead 

of blood thinner? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Highways and Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 

I’ve mentioned on the previous questions, our government’s 

very concerned about that situation and we have faith that the 

health region will take the appropriate measures to rectify it. 

Mr. Speaker, health regions in this province are funded 

appropriately, unlike when the members opposite were in 

government, Mr. Speaker. 



6796 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2011 

I have a copy of a news release put out by the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview when she was the associate Health 

minister, Mr. Speaker, when she thought it was good news that 

25 health districts were expected to run deficits. Mr. Speaker, 

not under this government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, last year the minister told the 

health regions to find efficiencies. Now we know what those 

efficiencies are, Mr. Speaker, and what the consequences of 

them are. Mr. Speaker, can the minister today assure us that the 

health regions won’t be asked to find efficiencies instead of 

receiving the staffing and funding to make the RUH pharmacy 

and other such danger spots safe for children, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Highways and Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, this government has been 

funding health regions appropriately. We’ll continue to do so. 

As far as specifics, Mr. Speaker, just a couple more days and 

the member opposite will be able to listen to the budget and get 

more specifics. Mr. Speaker, health care is a huge priority to 

this government and it will continue to be so. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Administration of Health Region 

and Long-Term Care Issues 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, there are many people here today 

from the Sun Country Health Region that are very frustrated 

with the Health minister’s failure to listen to them. The Sun 

Country board’s mismanagement of the region and the 

minister’s inaction to correct the problems has led the people of 

Sun Country to lose faith in the board and in the minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister appoints the board and the minister 

can get rid of the board. The people of Sun Country deserve a 

competent board, not just political appointees. To the minister: 

when is he going to do his job and fire the board and appoint a 

new board that will clean up the mess in the Sun Country 

Health Region? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Highways and Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister of Health and this government have faith that health 

regions around the province will continue to do good work. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s no secret that there’s been issues in Sun Country 

with long-term care facilities. Mr. Speaker, long-term care is a 

huge priority of this government. I think we’ve shown that very 

clearly with 13 new long-term care facilities moving around the 

province, which those members opposite would never move 

forward. And, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to the next question 

to continue the debate on long-term care in this province. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — We had this comment about health or highways. 

Now we’re seeing the Highways answers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a quick look at the health careers website shows 

another interesting pattern in the Sun Country Health Region. 

Mr. Speaker, they have 27 support service position vacancies, 

58 nursing vacancies, 11 physician vacancies, and 48 other 

health position vacancies compared to only one management 

position vacancy. The number of position vacancies in Sun 

Country that they have is significantly higher than any other 

health region. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: there’s money allotted in the 

budget to all of these 145 vacancies. Where’s that money and 

what’s it being used for? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Highways and Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

member opposite refers to physician vacancies. Part of the 

problem with physician vacancies in this province is that for 

many years under the NDP, nothing was done, Mr. Speaker. 

There was no training space increase. This government, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve increased training spaces for physicians from 60 

to 100, for residents from 60 to 120. 

 

Looking at long-term care issues, we understand that there is 

short-term pressures, Mr. Speaker, for international medical 

grads, Mr. Speaker. Under the members opposite, they would 

only recognize grads from six countries. Mr. Speaker, we’re 

opening it for qualified physicians right around the world. Mr. 

Speaker, we recognize there are short-term pressures, but we 

believe that we’re taking the right measures to rectify this over 

the long term. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, there was no answer to my 

question in that. I don’t know what the minister was going on 

about, but I think if we’re going to talk about doctor vacancies, 

he should speak to the people in Wakaw and in Spiritwood and 

in Big River and in Leader, and talk about how successful that 

their campaign is doing for those communities — zero. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sun Country board has fired their CEO and are 

paying him $187,000 in severance while he leaves the region in 

chaos. And the minister’s fine with that. Sun Country’s running 

a $25 million deficit in their own ’09-10 financials, and when 

asked where the severance money was coming from, the board 

chairperson said, and I quote: “Our finance people will find the 

money.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, despite town hall meetings, calls, and letters from 

residents at the area, both the minister and the member from 

Cannington have sat back and allowed five long-term care beds 

to close in Wawota, all to save $110,000. They’ve done nothing 

to keep those beds open. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: since the region has $187,000 to 



March 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6797 

pay in severance, is the minister going to demand that they find 

the $110,000 to keep the beds open so seniors can stay in their 

communities? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Highways and Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

those long-term care beds are obviously a concern to our 

government. The minister has met with stakeholder groups from 

Wawota to discuss this matter. The decision how to deal with 

those, however, is the health region’s. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, long-term care is a huge priority 

to this government, Mr. Speaker. I mentioned the 13 long-term 

care facilities that are moving ahead. Mr. Speaker, not only that, 

but recently the minister has announced, at the request of 

communities all over this province, that the long-term care 

formula changed from 65/35 to 80/20, Mr. Speaker — 80 per 

cent paid for on this side. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was something that was asked for for years 

under those members — that was their formula — and they just 

never got around to it, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, long-term 

care is a priority for this government and will continue to be so. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all the communities that 

are on that list of 13 would rather have the deal that Amicus 

got, where 100 per cent is given by the government. And, Mr. 

Speaker, there is a pattern of mismanagement and political 

incompetence emerging in the Sask Party government. There is 

a pattern of rewarding political friends at the public’s expense. 

Evidence of this is clear today with what is going on in the 

Carlton Trail community college merger and the happenings in 

Sun Country Health Region. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will he admit that he has a huge 

problem in governance and fire the board? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Highways and Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, the minister 

has met with people from Wawota on several occasions, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s a concern to us. Ultimately that becomes a health 

region decision, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite talks about long-term care in 

the province. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that she’d raise 

that because I have a copy of an article, a letter to the editor 

from my own community of Rosetown, which has a long-term 

care project moving forward. It’s a letter from the member 

opposite that says, Mr. Speaker, and I quote, “As you are no 

doubt aware, your area includes one of the Saskatchewan 

communities . . .” 

 

[Interjections] 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I ask the member 

from Regina Rosemont to allow the minister to respond. I 

recognize the Minister of Highways and Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

goes on to say, “. . . includes one of the 13 Saskatchewan 

communities to have its new long-term care facility or hospital 

cancelled in the Wall government’s 2010 budget.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s from the member opposite to letters to the 

editor to small town papers all across the province, Mr. 

Speaker, which wasn’t true. Will that member send a letter of 

apology now to those communities and rectify that situation? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 620 — The Government and Member of the 

Legislative Assembly Accountability and Transparency Act 
 

An Hon. Member: — Withdraw. 

 

The Speaker: — Withdrawn. 

 

Bill No. 621 — The Member of the Legislative Assembly 

Ethics Act 
 

An Hon. Member: — Withdraw. 

 

The Speaker: — Withdrawn. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Broten: — To ask leave to move a motion under rule 59. 

 

The Speaker: — I’ll ask for leave in a moment. I have a couple 

of comments I’d like to address before we move to . . . before 

orders of the day. And then I’ll place the question. 

 

STATEMENTS BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Passing of Ernest Boychuk 

 

The Speaker: — First of all, members, I wish to advise the 

Assembly of the passing of a former officer of this Assembly. 

Mr. Ernest Boychuk, who passed away on March 11, 2011, was 

the first ombudsman for the province of Saskatchewan from 

1973 until 1976. 

 

Mr. Boychuk was born on March 29th, 1934, and raised in 

Saskatoon. He attended Westmount School, Bedford Road 

Collegiate, and graduated from the University of Saskatchewan 

with a Bachelor of Arts and Law degrees. 

 

Mr. Boychuk worked in law firms in Saskatoon until he was 

named city prosecutor in 1963. He was appointed assistant city 

solicitor in 1965 and was made a judge of the Magistrate’s 

Court in 1967. In 1973 Mr. Boychuk was appointed 

Saskatchewan’s first Ombudsman. On March 12th, 1973, this 

Assembly adopted the motion to recommend Mr. Boychuk be 

appointed Ombudsman for this province. He established the 

first Ombudsman’s office. 

 

Upon resignation as the Ombudsman, Mr. Boychuk became the 

first chief judge of Magistrate’s Court of Saskatchewan, and he 

had chaired the Wage and Price Commission, as well as the 



6798 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2011 

Public Utilities Review Commission until he retired. After 

retirement, Mr. Boychuk worked as a part-time judge of the 

Provincial Court. 

 

Mr. Boychuk is survived and sadly missed by his sister Lillian 

Weloski and his five children Chris, Daryl, Phil, Terry, and 

Marianne and three grandchildren. 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: — And also before orders of the day: on 

Thursday, March 17th, 2001 the Government Whip raised a 

point of order about comments made by the member from 

Regina Coronation Park during the 75-minute private members’ 

day debate. The Government Whip claims that the member 

from Regina Coronation Park accused government members of 

purposely including a lie in a motion. 

 

After making an initial response to the point of order, I did 

commit to carefully review the record. I have done this, and I 

am now prepared to rule on this matter. The debate in question 

can be found on page 6776 of Hansard. The member from 

Regina Coronation Park stated, and I quote: 

 

I’m wondering how it is that the Saskatchewan Party 

Government House Leader can present such a complete 

fabrication that cannot be substantiated as fact, but how is 

it that I can’t call that a lie or a mistruth? How does that 

work? How is it that something can be fabricated by the 

Sask Party government, a complete fabrication, and yet I 

can’t call it a mistruth or a lie? 

 

Further, during the debate, the member from Regina Coronation 

Park indicates that the Government House Leader, and I quote, 

“tries to put falsehoods into our mouths and tries to 

misrepresent . . .” 

 

On May the 10th, 2004, Speaker Kowalsky ruled that it is not a 

legitimate function for members in debate to question directly 

or indirectly the integrity or motives of members individually or 

collectively. Members will find many rulings to this effect over 

the years. Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules & Forms, 6th 

Edition, at paragraph 487.2 states, and I quote, “Words may not 

be used hypothetically or conditionally, if they are plainly 

intended to convey a direct imputation.” 

 

In this vein, Speaker Osika ruled on May 12, 2000 that it is out 

of order to use the guise of a literary device to allege something 

about another member that otherwise would be 

unparliamentary. 

 

Upon a careful review of the Hansard, I find that the member 

for Regina Coronation Park used the device of a hypothetical 

question to disguise an allegation that another member had tried 

to deliberately mislead the Assembly. While it is not 

unparliamentary to criticize statements made by members as 

being contrary to the facts, the integrity or motives of members, 

whether individually or collectively, should not be questioned 

directly or indirectly. For these reasons I find the comments 

made by the member from Regina Coronation Park out of order, 

and I would ask the member to withdraw the remarks. 

 

I recognize the member for Regina Coronation Park. 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the offensive remarks. 

 

The Speaker: — I thank the member. I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Massey Place and ask the member to give his 

reasons for asking for a motion. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 

Audit of Colleges 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In light of a Meyers 

Norris Penny report only made public today on issues regarding 

the ongoing operations of Carlton Trail Regional College and 

St. Peter’s College including governance, financial 

management, and leadership which merit further action and 

investigation, I move the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly mandate the Provincial Auditor to 

immediately conduct a special investigation and forensic 

audit of the governance, financial management, and 

leadership of Carlton Trail Regional College and St. 

Peter’s College for the period covering January 1st 2009 to 

the present, direct the government to provide the auditor 

sufficient resources and authority to complete the 

investigation and audit, and table a report with this 

Assembly no later than May 12th, 2011; 

 

And further, to accomplish these goals, empower the 

Provincial Auditor to extend his investigation to the 

Ministry of Advanced Education, Employment and 

Immigration, the office of the minister, and to the minister 

himself, the member of the Legislative Assembly for 

Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to move this 

motion. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has not been granted. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’m having difficulty hearing 

which motion we’re moving to. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 149 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 149 — The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 



March 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6799 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

enter into the debate today on Bill No. 149, The Income Tax 

Amendment Act. Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill, a new section 

is being created in The Income Tax Act, 2000 to provide for a 

five-year corporate income tax holiday for companies that 

engage in processing of minerals imported into Saskatchewan 

from elsewhere in Canada. In order for corporations to be 

eligible for this tax holiday, they must be in the business of 

mineral processing and must make a minimum capital 

investment of 125 million in Saskatchewan. In addition the 

corporation must employ a minimum of 75 employees in 

Saskatchewan and must allocate at least 90 per cent of its 

taxable income to Saskatchewan for income tax purposes. So 

that is the gist of Bill 149, An Act to amend The Income Tax 

Act. So we see this is about giving, this is about giving a tax 

holiday to corporations who will be in the business of mineral 

processing here. 

 

The minister when he, the Minister of Finance when he spoke 

about this Bill, the minister says: 

 

This legislation is a result of the work done by officials at 

Enterprise Saskatchewan who have been consulting 

widely with the business community in an effort to 

improve the province’s business and investment climate. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. There is some concern about 

this government’s skill and ability in consultation. I have no 

doubt actually, the one thing this government has proven 

themselves good to be, they’re good at consulting with people 

who are of like mind or share an affinity for some of the same 

ideas. But we’ve seen time and time again this government’s 

inability to consult on a wide number of issues. Looking to last 

spring actually, we had The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, 

Mr. Speaker, where this government said that they had done 

consultation, but as it came out, they failed to consult with First 

Nations and Métis groups. They failed to consult with 

environmental and conservation organizations. 

 

So with respect to Bill 149, they say they’ve done their 

consultation, but there’s a huge list of things this government 

has done when they say they’ve consulted that they clearly 

haven’t. I take for example Bill 160, which is actually before 

the legislature right now, which is all about the abolishment of 

the Human Rights Tribunal. This government is making a huge 

departure to abolish the Human Rights Tribunal, which could 

use better support but does good work. And they claim that 

they’ve consulted with all kinds of organizations. Well 

consultation, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t mean you talk to an 

organization on a Friday and ask them to support your Bill, tell 

them what it is, and expect them to come support you on a 

Monday. Mr. Speaker, that is not what consultation is about. 

 

I can talk about consultation with respect to a small program in 

my own constituency. The work registry program, Mr. Speaker, 

was cut last spring. The work registry program was a very small 

budget item, but it did lots of really good things for families in 

Saskatoon Riversdale, particularly in the community of King 

George. This was about a $20,000 budget item that did lots of 

great work, and this government decided to cut it. The 

community organization received a letter from Social Services 

saying it was going to be cut and there was no discussion or 

opportunity for consultation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Bill we have before the legislature right now with respect 

to changes to . . . electoral changes with respect to needing 

specific ID [identification], this is again another example of this 

government’s inability to consult with people other than those 

who have the same values and shared ideas. 

 

For me, Mr. Speaker, actually consultation is one of the 

cornerstones of a democracy and good public policy. For me, 

when government, bureaucrats, and politicians need to be 

connected to people with whom they’re making decisions for, if 

you’re making a child care public policy, perhaps you need to 

talk to people who use child care services. Perhaps you need to 

talk to child care providers. You need to talk to educators. 

There’s a whole host of people when government is embarking 

upon specific changes that government has . . . the onus is on 

the government to reach out. 

 

Because the reality is there will always be people who will 

come to elected representatives to share their stories or share 

their experiences. But those people are in the minority, and their 

voices get heard because they seek us directly out. But it is the 

responsibility of elected representatives to go out — not to 

stakeholder groups, but individuals, organizations — to make 

sure that we know what is going to work and not work, what 

intended and unintended consequences so you can think about 

these things that might happen when you implement a piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. So consultation is absolutely critical 

when developing legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again I know that the minister did say that he’s consulted 

widely with the business community, but again just in light of 

this government’s record on consultation, I have some questions 

about how far-reaching those are. But I have no doubt that this 

government is comfortable consulting with people for whom it 

has shared values. 

 

So with respect to Bill 149, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 

this tax holiday, this five-year tax holiday is going to be 

administered by the Saskatchewan Ministry of Finance. And an 

eligible corporation will file its corporate income tax return and 

pay its tax liability to the Canada Revenue Agency and claim a 

rebate of the taxes paid from Saskatchewan Finance. So 

eligibility starts from the first year that the corporation has a tax 

liability and continues for the next four years. 

 

[14:30] 

 

I have some questions. The corporation needs to have made a 

minimum capital investment of 125 million, and the corporation 

must also employ a minimum of 75 employees in Saskatchewan 

and allocate 90 per cent of its taxable income to Saskatchewan 

for income tax purposes. So my question is, I understand that 

. . . My one concern, if the minister, according to the Bill: 

 

(a) if the minister is satisfied that the applicant is an 

eligible corporation and has complied with this section 

[that would be section 5(a) that the refund will be granted] 

. . . for the taxation year for which a refund is claimed and 

each of the next four taxation years equal to the amount of 



6800 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2011 

the corporation’s refund within the meaning of subsection 

(6) . . . 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, once the minister is satisfied with this 

application, then it applies for the next four years. My question 

is, do they have to maintain that 75 employees in 

Saskatchewan? And is there any checks and balances to ensure 

that those 75 employees, that limit, that number, is in place? 

That would be one of my questions. You need to make sure that 

if you’re implementing something in the first year and you’re 

receiving benefit for the next four years, that you maintain the 

criteria that you are supposed to. 

 

So in principle, as a social democrat, as a New Democrat I 

come from a political party that’s always believed in fiscal 

stewardship, financial management in order to be able to do 

things for the people of Saskatchewan and ensure that we all 

have what we need to be successful, productive citizens. And 

we need to make sure we have a strong and healthy tax base and 

that we’re supporting business to do what they need to do to 

help create work. So in principle, of course there are steps a 

government can take that are appropriate to encourage 

economic activity, but we don’t want to give the farm away 

while we’re doing so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve heard currently, well over the last few months, we’ve 

been having a debate around the right structure for royalties and 

taxes for some of our strategic resources like potash. And this 

government is not . . . So this government wants to incent 

business but . . . and look after . . . There’s no doubt that 

business and boards of governors will look after their own 

interests. But it’s up to this government to look after the 

interests of the people of Saskatchewan and to make sure, Mr. 

Speaker, that we all have what we need and that we have a good 

strong tax base and that businesses are being supported. 

 

So in principle it actually has been NDP governments that 

started implementing the changes to our corporate tax system to 

make things to improve the facility of business, of corporations 

to grow and develop here. But we want to make sure that we 

analyze any sort of tax incentive or tax break for these mining 

operations or these processing operations, how they’re going to 

affect our provincial coffers. Will there be increased economic 

activity that will offset lost revenue from the tax breaks? We 

have to make sure we are giving that some thought, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And ultimately this is about making sure that there’s the right 

balance or the right mix of policy that supports growth and 

supports our economy flourishing. But you also have to ensure 

that you have the right tax base, because you can’t continue to 

cut taxes to the point that there’s nothing left to provide the 

public services that we’ve all grown to be very proud of here in 

Saskatchewan, like our health care for example, Mr. Speaker. 

So I do have some questions around the income tax . . . An Act 

to amend The Income Tax Act or Bill 149. 

 

So in principle too, Mr. Speaker, our approach has, as a party 

when we’ve been in government, has been to encourage and 

support mining development. That’s a good thing and that’s a 

positive thing. And again that is why, that’s why we have and 

want industry here and businesses. Ultimately it’s not industry 

and booming economy for the sake of a booming economy. 

This is about . . . What underlies this, Mr. Speaker, are the 

needs of citizens and the ability for citizens to lead full and 

healthy, happy lives and be full participants in our economy and 

in our society. 

 

So government and creating these kinds of incentives, 

ultimately what is this about? This is about trying to make sure 

that there are jobs for people, that there is sort of that balance 

between making sure that what you’re doing is creating jobs, 

but it also is ensuring that there is money in our provincial 

coffers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think that one thing that one of my colleagues raised that’s 

in the actual Bill is that one of the . . . So this Bill 149 will “. . . 

provide a five-year corporate income tax holiday for companies 

that engage in processing of minerals imported into 

Saskatchewan from elsewhere in Canada.” So one of the 

exceptions or the exemption actually, Mr. Speaker, is for iron 

ore. So I’m just wondering what that is about and, in particular, 

who does this particular Bill apply to? 

 

But with that, Mr. Speaker, there are questions, and I know that 

some of my colleagues will also have questions on Bill 149. 

And with that, I would like to move to adjourn debate. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 149, The Income Tax 

Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 150 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 150 — The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to speak about Bill 150, a Bill regarding superannuation 

in the province of Saskatchewan. I understand that there are 

three main changes to this Bill that the government is asking us 

to accept. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think for two of the changes, I don’t think that 

the opposition would have any difficulty with those changes. 

Because one of the changes is clarifying how spouse survivor 

benefits are to be calculated in a case where the retiree has been 

married on more than one occasion and where you may have 

both a current spouse and a former spouse laying claim to the 

survivor benefit. Mr. Speaker, obviously we want to have a 

better understanding of the potential impact of this particular 

provision, but on the face of it, it does seem to merit 

acceptance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other provision of the legislation is basically 



March 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6801 

housekeeping, and it’s in regards to making sure that The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act is in keeping 

with the Income Tax Act of Canada. And once again I don’t 

think we have any difficulty with that because the provision 

would allow pensions to be garnisheed, except for maintenance 

orders and marital breakdown. So we don’t have any difficulty 

with that particular provision. 

 

The one provision that raises some concerns is this. Mr. 

Speaker, we know that when an individual or a company is paid 

$50,000 or more, that information is publicly disclosed and it’s 

disclosed in public accounts. We have Crown corporations that 

provide this information to the Crown Corporations Committee 

every year. Anybody, any company that receives $50,000 or 

more in one year, that information is publicly disclosed in 

keeping with transparency and accountability. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what is concerning is that this particular 

amendment to the legislation would no longer see, in the annual 

report when it comes to pensions, the names of people who 

retired and how much money they receive each year. Mr. 

Speaker, now the government will argue that this is all about 

privacy. I would argue that this is not about privacy; this is 

about transparency and accountability. Because it’s important 

that anybody in the province of Saskatchewan or any business 

in the province of Saskatchewan that receives $50,000 or more 

in a particular year, that that information is on the public record. 

 

Now one of the things that concerns me greatly about this 

provision is that we’ll no longer be able to know the following 

— and this was a problem when we were in government and 

this continues to be a problem — you have people who are 

receiving a pension, but they are also working in a Crown 

corporation or they’re working in a government department. 

And we don’t think that’s appropriate. We hear regularly about 

people at SaskPower who have retired and they’re now back 

working on contract at SaskPower. So not only are they 

receiving their pension, but they’re also receiving a contract at a 

time, Mr. Speaker, when we have over 30,000 people in the 

province of Saskatchewan that are unemployed, and perhaps 

they might like the opportunity to work in a Crown or work in 

government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have difficulty that we can see former 

employees being able to collect pension benefits while working 

for the government on a contract basis, and this is called, Mr. 

Speaker, double-dipping. Now this is not a money purchase 

pension plan. This is the old defined benefit plan, Mr. Speaker, 

where people in the defined benefit plan get their best five years 

times the number of years of service, and that is their pension. 

 

Now we know that the government likes to contract out 

services. We certainly have noticed that and we certainly have 

noticed that there have been some untendered contracts going to 

supporters of this government. So, Mr. Speaker, we would say 

this: don’t pretend that this is something new and innovative. 

Don’t hide under The Privacy Act. This is about transparency 

and accountability which this government promised in the 2007 

election, that they would be transparent and accountable. 

 

I noticed in question period today that the ministers had great 

difficulty in being transparent and accountable. Transparent and 

accountable is: what did you know; when did you know it, and 

answer the question, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, the 

government claims that this is an innocuous Bill. But we know 

a couple years ago that this government tried to bring in Bill 9 

where they tried to raise the bar for non-disclosure of 

government spending from $50,000 a year to $350,000 a year, 

and the public put a stop to that. 

 

This is the same government that we know fires people if they 

raise issues in the public interest. This is the same government 

that phones out to school boards and talks to school boards 

about certain teachers being NDP candidates and, you know, 

you might want to make sure that they may not have any 

profile, even though they might be a principal or a 

vice-principal of a school. This is the same government that 

sends the message to school boards, you know, if there’s a 

teacher that’s running for the NDP, you better make sure that 

that teacher doesn’t have any profile in the community. Oh and 

you may not want to have that teacher as a principal of such and 

such a school. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re getting these reports 

from around the province. 

 

Now we don’t live in a police state at the moment. We don’t 

live in a place where people can’t go about their business, 

where they can’t run for public office, where they can’t have 

jobs because they don’t support this particular government, Mr. 

Speaker. But in the name of transparency and accountability, 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s time the Sask Party got off their high 

horse and left people who don’t agree with them alone. 

 

You know, we live in a democracy. People in Saskatchewan 

have the right not to support the government. But, Mr. Speaker, 

they had the right not to support the government, question the 

government, challenge the government, and not be punished in 

their workplaces or in their communities. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

saw the same kind of behaviour in the 1980s with another 

government — and it was called Grant Devine’s government — 

where certain people who might get hired in a company and 

someone would make a phone call and say, you know, I’m not 

sure you should have that NDP member working in your 

company or working in this school board, Mr. Speaker. And 

we’re starting to see some of that. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a government that pretends to fix a 

problem by bringing in a new public interest disclosure Act that 

keeps any allegations of wrongdoing private. This is a 

government that continues a pattern of secrecy and a lack of 

accountability and transparency that’s beginning to define this 

government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you can take an innocuous little amendment 

and say this is in the public interest. Well, Mr. Speaker, we 

believe that the amendment that’s put forward by the Sask 

Party, where citizens who receive pensions would no longer 

have that information publicly available, is incorrect. Because 

we know that there are citizens that are receiving pensions from 

an employer, and guess what? They’re back working for that 

employer on contract. And we think that’s incorrect. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I can say with certainty that we don’t 

have any difficulty with the spouse survivor benefit. We don’t 

have any difficulty with the amendments around the federal 



6802 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2011 

Income Tax Act. We do have some difficulty with the 

amendment that presently, presently the legislation requires that 

pensioners are identified in annual reports. That will no longer 

be the case, and we think that that could lead and would lead to 

more of what is called double-dipping. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I would move adjournment of this 

particular debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 150. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 144 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 144 — The Litter 

Control Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment that Bill No. 144, The Litter Control Amendment 

Act, 2010 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Government Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The Standing Committee on the 

Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 155 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 155 — The 

Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 

to stand and speak on Bill 155, An Act to amend The Natural 

Resources Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, increasingly there’s concern, not only in 

Saskatchewan but I’d venture to say worldwide, about 

environmental protection and how that relates to species, be it 

wildlife, be it fish and game, these sorts of things. And so it’s 

always a timely thing to have an opportunity to visit an Act that 

does deal with these very issues. 

 

We do have — and colleagues before me on the opposition side 

of the legislature have spoken — we do have some concerns 

around this Bill. That’s not to say we don’t welcome the 

opportunity to debate it and to talk about it, but we do have 

some concerns around this, Mr. Speaker. And some of the 

concerns relate to a change in the way some of the funds are 

used. And some of the questions relate to things like: 

 

The Fish and Wildlife Development Fund provides the 

money necessary to secure habitat to support a diversity of 

fish and wildlife species. To date the fund has acquired, 

through purchase or donation, approximately 212,000 

acres of land for wildlife habitat purposes, with many 

acres under joint title with . . . anglers and outdoor 

enthusiasts, it is important to note that much of this land 

continues to be made available to local communities for 

haying and grazing. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, 212,000 acres is a significant chunk of land. 

And I’m actually pleased to see that there is that significant 

amount of acres that are devoted to wildlife and habitat and that 

it has significant protections along with it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act that is before us does some things around 

a steering committee that we have some unease with, but I don’t 

want to overstate that unease. We’re just . . . I guess I’m best 

able to put it this way. Any time there is some change, there’s 

bound to be some uneasiness. And we certainly hope that these 

changes are in fact to better represent the various groups that 

are involved in wildlife and habitat protection, and fish and 

game. If it’s a sincere attempt to be inclusive rather than cutting 

someone out, then this legislation will be a good thing, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In fact, there’s a new clause that officially identifies the current 

steering committee for the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund 

as the Fish and Wildlife Development Advisory Council, and it 

raises the profile of the steering committee in providing advice 

to the government, presumably through the ministry and the 

minister. And as long as the advisory council is of an 

appropriate makeup rather than a hand-picked, a hand-picked to 

get the results that the minister wants — if it’s not for that, if 

it’s to genuinely get a broad input from the groups that are 

appropriately involved in wildlife and habitat, and fish and 

game and that habitat — then it’s a welcome piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. We are looking forward to this 

universe unfolding with Bill 155, the Act to amend The Natural 

Resources Act, but there again are some concerns. 

 

The Fish and Wildlife Development Fund, there’s amendments, 

Mr. Speaker, to this section, that broaden the scope of activities 

that are covered under the fund to include restoration of fish or 

game populations or habitat necessary for fish or game species. 

The amendments to this section also include the addition of two 

new subsections to allow the fund and the advisory council to 

contract services that are deemed necessary for the management 



March 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6803 

of the fund. But new I think, Mr. Speaker, these services could 

include contracting expertise from groups such as 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, Nature Conservancy of 

Canada, or Ducks Unlimited Canada, for management of land 

within the fund. 

 

I’m not certain if it’s restricted to those three groups or if those 

are just simply three examples and there would be another 

organization that might be contracted in the same way with 

their expertise. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m a little bit worried if we 

skew from protection of our resources, not only for today but 

for the future, for our children, grandchildren, and future 

generations. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, the concerns have been broadly 

spoken to by members on our side of the House, and I do know 

that there are some other colleagues still anxious to make 

comment on Bill 155, An Act to amend The Natural Resources 

Act. But I thank you and I thank members for the opportunity 

for me to share some of the concerns I have with the Bill and 

some of the hopes I have for the Bill. It’s not just concerns. It’s 

some of the hopes that we have for this Bill. It’s been my 

honour to address the Act to amend The Natural Resources Act. 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Coronation Park 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 155, The Natural 

Resources Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 164 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert that Bill No. 164 — The 

Police Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise to speak to Bill 164, An Act to amend The Police Act of 

1990. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve been advised by the minister that the 

changes that are set out in this particular Bill are the result of 

about three years worth of consultation with police forces, and I 

assume also with the police boards and municipalities across the 

province. And, Mr. Speaker, the types of things that are 

completed here or are set out in this legislation primarily relate 

to the disciplinary procedures and making some changes that 

make the whole issue of discipline somewhat easier. It also 

arranges for the Ministry of Policing to step in and cover some 

of these costs, which have been the costs of municipalities. And 

I’m sure that that’s a positive aspect for many of the 

municipalities, and the police associations for that matter, so 

that some of these things can be dealt with. 

 

There’s also protection and procedures for whistle-blowing by 

police officers when they have concerns about their chiefs of 

police. And this sets out in quite a bit of detail how those kinds 

of issues can be dealt with, and it also provides protection for 

police officers who raise the issues. 

 

A further positive part of this particular Bill relates to training 

for members of municipal police boards. And as we expand the 

roles of police boards and give them more complicated issues to 

deal with, I know that that training will be well received 

throughout the community. 

 

A further change which has taken place here, and which is once 

again procedural, relates to the fact that there are two ministries 

that work with the police. One is the Ministry of Justice and one 

is the ministry responsible for policing. And because of that 

change, these particular amendments will alter the rules so that 

reports that are involved will be going to both ministries, and 

that’s a logical change as well. 

 

Now there’s one curious change, and I want to speak to this one 

perhaps at some length. And that’s what would be paragraph 4 

or the fourth section, 4, of the legislation. And this proposed 

change in the Bill reads as follows: 

 

Section 23(1) is repealed and the following substituted: 

 

[New] “(1) Subject to the approval of the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council, a municipality having a 

population greater than the minimum size prescribed in 

the regulations may enter into an agreement with the 

Government of Canada to employ and pay for a 

sufficient number of members of the Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police to provide policing services within the 

municipality”. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And that’s the end of the Bill. In the explanatory notes, it goes 

on to describe what the effect of this change will be. And 

basically what it says in the explanatory notes, provided by the 

legislative draftspeople, is that: 

 

This amendment provides autonomy to more 

municipalities to choose how police services are delivered 

in their municipality. It will remove the maximum 

population limitation for municipalities wanting to enter 

into agreements with the RCMP to provide police 

services. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is quite generic, straightforward 

language, but I think we need to look a little bit about what’s 

going on with policing in Saskatchewan to understand what this 

particular provision is dealing with. 

 

In our legislation in or in our situation in Saskatchewan, the 

Royal Canadian Mounted Police, on a contract with the 

province of Saskatchewan, provide the policing for most of the 

province on a geographical basis. And so therefore “F” Division 

provides, of the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police], 

provides policing right across the province except for in the city 

of Saskatoon, city of Regina, city of Prince Albert, city of 

Moose Jaw, the RM [rural municipality] of Corman Park, and 

city of Estevan and the city of Weyburn. And then otherwise 

across the province, the services are provided by the RCMP. In 



6804 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2011 

the city of Yorkton for example, the city itself has a contract 

with the RCMP to provide that policing. 

 

Now the only explanation for this particular provision in this 

Bill is that one of the existing independent police forces wants 

to get involved with a contract with the RCMP to provide their 

policing. And we have no information in what we have here 

which municipality has requested this, whether this has been 

requested by the Department of Justice or the Ministry of 

Justice or by the Ministry of Policing. 

 

Are there some problems in one of our municipalities with more 

than 20,000 people as it relates to their police forces that we 

haven’t been told about that this relates to? And when we think 

about that, we’re basically talking about Prince Albert or Moose 

Jaw or Saskatoon or Regina because those are the 

municipalities with more than 20,000 people which would be 

included in this particular change. So, Mr. Speaker, is there a 

problem in Prince Albert? Is there a problem in Moose Jaw? Is 

there a problem in Saskatoon? Is there a problem in Regina? 

We have no indication in this Bill where this particular request 

comes from. 

 

Now we know that the RCMP are very capable of providing 

urban police forces. I think the largest urban police contract that 

the RCMP have relates to the city of Surrey where the 

population there is between 450,000 and 500,000 which is 

double the size of any city in Saskatchewan. So I don’t think 

there’s any question about the capacity of the RCMP to provide 

policing for our larger cities. But is there some other issue that 

we don’t know about which hasn’t been stated by the Ministry 

of Policing that is the reason for this particular change? Are 

there plans afoot to consolidate all the policing in the province 

under one policing contract with the RCMP? Is there something 

else that’s going on? Mr. Speaker, there are a whole number of 

questions that underlie this particular provision, and at this 

stage we have no indication of what it might be. 

 

Now a number of years ago there were some very clear 

difficulties around policing in Saskatoon which happens to be 

our largest municipality. Has this come out of some of those 

concerns whereby the city of Saskatoon, the mayor, and the 

police board have basically asked for another option which 

gives them a little more clout in their discussions with the 

police associations when they’re doing bargaining. Does it 

come from the city of Regina? Does it come from Prince 

Albert? Does it come from Moose Jaw? Mr. Speaker, these 

questions are not answered here at all. And, I think, that when 

this type of provision is brought forward, it’s incumbent upon 

the minister or the Premier to make it clear why this change is 

being made. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think we have an answer 

from anybody on what’s the purpose of this particular change. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’re curious, when the Bill was tabled in 

the legislature this spring, as to the specific purpose. All of the 

other items, as I said before, are housekeeping but this one 

seems to have some kind of a different status. And, I think, until 

we find more information about what’s going on, I think that 

this whole Bill should be held by the minister until a proper 

explanation is provided. 

 

Now we know because it was introduced this spring there’s a 

good possibility that it’ll go over to next spring before it’s 

approved by the legislature. And just on that point alone, unless 

there’s better information provided to those of us on this side of 

the House, I don’t think there’s any reason for this Bill to 

proceed. 

 

But as I said, Mr. Speaker, The Police Act governs those police 

forces which are regulated by the province of Saskatchewan and 

primarily those are the municipal police forces, as I’ve said, 

primarily Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, RM of 

Corman Park, Estevan, and Weyburn. And so if in fact the 

intention of this legislation is to take out Saskatoon or Regina or 

both of those ones from under The Police Act and put them 

under a contract with the RCMP, this is making a substantial 

change to how policing is handled in this province with very 

little explanation, with very little idea of what’s being intended. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, until better information is provided to the 

legislature, to the people of Saskatchewan about subsection (4) 

of Bill 164, I do not think that this matter should continue to be 

dealt with in this legislature. And it should be withdrawn by the 

minister. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I will adjourn the debate 

on this particular Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 164, The Police 

Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 165 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 165 — The Adult 

Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2011 
be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I’m rising in debate on The Adult Guardianship and 

Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2011. A number of the 

measures contained in this amendment seek to clarify and 

tighten up certain of the provisions around the conduct of 

guardianship and the reporting requirements involved therein, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s possible therefore to characterize a lot 

of the measures contained in this legislation as housekeeping in 

nature, and of course there will be consequential amendments to 

The Public Guardian and Trustee Act and The Public Trustee 

Amendment Act, 2001 arising from this piece of legislation. 

 

In surveying the explanatory notes, the legislation itself, and 

perusing the minister’s first reading speech . . . or second 

reading speech on this measure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a number 

of items come to the fore. First off, the fact that of course the 

Act sets up procedures for the appointment for a personal or 

property decision maker to assist in the day-to-day affairs or 

property management of adults who are incapable of or need 

assistance in managing their personal or financial affairs. 

 



March 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6805 

Again there’s a range of severity or intensity as it regards the 

different kinds of decision makers. There’s the personal or 

property co-decision maker that might be appointed for a person 

who requires help with decision making but does not need full 

guardianship services. Where an adult is unable to make his or 

her own decisions, that might necessitate the appointment of a 

personal or property guardian who can be appointed pursuant to 

the Act. And the other sort of form that is utilized, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is where an adult needs a guardian for a short period of 

time, a temporary personal or property guardian might be 

appointed for no longer than six months. 

 

Now as these individuals conduct their affairs pursuant to the 

Act, there are a number of . . . Of course this is a fairly serious 

matter, Mr. Speaker, where an individual isn’t capable of 

conducting their own affairs, so it is a fairly heavy 

responsibility, not just for the people that are assuming this 

responsibility, but also for the state as they regulate the 

performance of the duties prescribed under the guardianship 

Acts. 

 

So in terms of that balance that they’re trying to strike and the 

balance that this legislation tries to refine or uphold, again some 

of the measures in this Act can be characterized as a refinement 

or as housekeeping in nature, tightening up certain of the 

reporting requirements, tightening up some of the accounting 

requirements and clarifying some things that perhaps should 

have been initially anticipated when the legislation was brought 

in but have come forward since, which in its own sort of 

trajectory, Mr. Speaker, is very much the definition of . . . This 

is what the government should be doing, is responding to the 

situations as they arise. 

 

And again in terms of the kind of powers that the individuals 

that have assumed guardianship, be it on a temporary basis or a 

permanent basis, the ability of an individual to make decisions 

as regards to their property or their funds or the conduct of their 

affairs, these are all fairly serious matters. So there should be 

some very distinct and particular measures brought to bear by 

the legislation and by the regulations to ensure that everything 

is on the up and up and that there’s full accounting made of the 

decisions made and of the funds that are often involved in these 

decisions. 

 

One of the amendments adds protection that will allow the court 

to recognize foreign guardianship orders. Again there have been 

. . . This helps to expedite some of the practices that have 

already been in place, and again helping to expedite the process 

but at the same time requiring that equality be assured in the 

foreign jurisdictions that are recognized under these 

guardianship orders and that the individuals involved in 

Saskatchewan are receiving the full protection of the law. 

 

[15:15] 

 

One of the interesting measures in the legislation, it also goes to 

the clarification of inventory and accounting provisions to make 

it clear when and what a property decision maker is required to 

provide. Again if the onus on the individuals discharging these 

duties isn’t very clear and the requirement for information isn’t 

very clear, that can impact the quality of the information 

coming forward and the timeliness of that information coming 

forward. And on the timeliness front, they’re changing the filing 

time for the providing of inventories from six months to three 

months and again trying to strike that balance between what is 

reasonable in terms of the time required in gathering this 

information, but at the same time making it timely enough to 

ensure that there’s been a proper conducting of the affairs and 

how that can be reflected in the proper accounting and 

inventory provision. 

 

Another change in the legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that on 

the face of it seems fairly reasonable, it concerns the forms by 

which annual accounting is made concerning the activity in a 

given guardianship file and the amounts that are involved. 

Again this has currently existed under the legislation, but 

decision makers haven’t been required to use it according to the 

minister’s second reading speech. Again this can lead to a 

problem with the quality and the quantity of information and 

whether or not that is adequate or not. 

 

So in terms of the Public Guardian and Trustee office receiving 

and reviewing all the accountings and being able to ensure that 

the accounts are complete and accurate, it is important that you 

can have a standardized form by which these reports be made 

and that they are again timely in terms of when individuals are 

appointed as guardians and the kind of powers that that entrusts 

to an individual over individual files. 

 

Right now when an individual should die, there’s a lack of 

clarity as regards the question of final accounting. The Act 

moves to provide a new provision for a final accounting within 

six months of an adult’s death or of the decision maker’s 

discharge or removal. Again a fairly reasonable proposal, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and one that would seem to fall in line with an 

approach where you continuously work to refine legislation so 

that it meets up to the . . . serving that balance, that I referenced 

at the top, between the rights of the individual and the 

responsibility of the state as regards to the conduct of property 

guardians or guardians more fully put. 

 

Under the amendments there’s also a requirement that will 

allow the court to require a temporary property guardian to file 

a bond. Presently they’re not required to file a bond. Again this 

has to do with making sure that there’s that proper safeguarding 

of assets and individuals’ rights that have been placed into 

guardianship. And on the face of it, that does not seem to be 

untoward. 

 

There’s another amendment concerning a fee schedule that may 

be established for the regulations. Currently the decision maker 

is allowed to charge fees only if the fees are set by the court. 

And I’m quoting here from the minister’s second reading 

speech: 

 

If an order for fees is not made, the decision maker cannot 

charge a fee. In practice, however, decision makers either 

fail to request a fee at the time the original application’s 

made or do not know how much the appropriate amount is 

to request, or else they will indicate they will not charge a 

fee and later change their minds at the accounting stage. A 

fee schedule will provide decision makers with a guideline 

as to the fees that they may charge. It will also make it 

clear that if they want to charge more than the schedule 

permits, they will need a court order. 

 



6806 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2011 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as regards the proper accounting of 

the affairs of an individual under guardianship, the proper 

discharge of those duties by the guardian or decision maker, this 

is fairly fundamental that you would have more clarity as 

regards what the appropriate fees are, and at the same time 

allowing for the court to respond in a particular way to a 

particular circumstance that may be encountered. So again, that 

would seem to be a fairly reasonable measure. 

 

Another measure contained in the amendments that seems to 

make sense is when a decision maker is appointed by the court, 

there will also be provision for appointing an alternate decision 

maker. So again, in terms of making appropriate use of the 

court’s time, making the process as user-friendly as possible, to 

have an alternate decision maker appointed in the time when all 

this is initially undertaken as opposed to going back to the 

courts should the decision maker be discharged or be unable to 

carry on the duties. And instead, having somebody that is ready 

to go as an alternate decision maker appointed again when the 

initial consideration is being made, seems to be an eminently 

reasonable proposition and would be an improvement to the 

current procedure. 

 

Also clarified is the question of, how much can be paid for 

ongoing support to an individual’s family? What kind of gifts 

can be made out of an adult’s estate if that need arises? There 

are certain measures that are contained in the amendments that 

clarify those circumstances. And again, some things that 

perhaps have been implicit before, Mr. Speaker, draws them out 

to be more explicit and more narrowly defined and prescribed 

under the law. 

 

And again, trying to withdraw the grey areas that in some 

circumstances, I’m sure you’re aware, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

certainly we’ve seen cases come before the public’s attention 

where . . . that the proper discharge of guardianship can result in 

some very unfortunate circumstances where individuals are 

making inappropriate use of funds or taking advantage of 

loopholes that perhaps were arguable under the law, and 

making them more narrowly prescribed and defined and 

therefore better guarding the affairs of those placed under 

guardianship. 

 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the legislation seems to 

follow what is normally a fairly sensible approach to legislation 

in that when you bring in a law, and as experience accrues over 

time, you find out where the loopholes are. You find what the 

law of unintended consequences might be kicking up on your 

doorstep. So in terms of seeking to better refine the way that 

The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Act ensures 

that balance between a legal regime that is fairly 

straightforward and easy to access by individuals and 

fundamentally safeguarding the affairs of those placed under 

guardianship, this legislation on the face of it seems to be on 

that train. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the interest of allowing others 

to participate in this debate, and I’m sure other of my 

colleagues would be happy to rise to hold forth on this 

legislation, I would move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 165, 

The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment 

Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 153 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 153 — The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s certainly my pleasure to rise and offer a few 

remarks on Bill 153, An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill repeals the civil division of the Provincial 

Court and appears to transfer significant responsibilities 

currently handled by Provincial Court judges to justices of the 

peace. In some limited cases, Mr. Speaker, there might be some 

merit to doing this. However there are some potentially serious 

implications for the quality of service being provided to people 

appearing in court and for their right to a fair hearing. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s always a great concern that we have for the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan — that the court 

systems and the judicial systems are something that are 

accessible and are working efficiently for all peoples of the 

province, Mr. Speaker, and not just a select few. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of questions that arise from 

having read through the minister’s comments on this Bill and 

the explanation that we’ve received from the Sask Party 

government so far. And those are for instance, what functions 

are being transferred out of the Provincial Court? What types of 

cases are going to be handled by the justices of the peace? What 

is the potential impact on the service that people receive when 

they go to court? How will their rights be impacted? Will those 

rights be impacted? And whose rights will be impacted? Who 

stands to benefit from this change? And, Mr. Speaker, 

ultimately, who requested these changes? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately a lot of these questions that 

I’ve just stated are questions that we are stating as opposition 

members in the legislature on many of the Bills that are being 

brought forward by the Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

There are always many more questions than we ever have 

answers to, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that we are asking 

questions about the various Bills that come before the 

legislature, asking questions about various issues that arise 

throughout the province, Mr. Speaker, and we’re very hard 

pressed to get any answers. We certainly receive a lot of 

responses. There’s no question that the responses are blustery, 

long, and empty for the most part, Mr. Speaker. But we don’t 

receive any answers. 

 

The Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, are looking for 

answers. And that’s what the NDP opposition is doing in this 



March 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6807 

legislature, Mr. Speaker, is ensuring that the people of the 

province are getting the answers that they deserve for the 

questions that they have on what their government, the Sask 

Party government is doing, especially when there is no 

consultation on a lot of the things that the Sask Party 

government is proceeding with, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill also allows for greater public disclosure 

of the results of investigations into the conduct of judges by 

Judicial Council. Now on the face of it, greater public 

transparency is a good thing and could increase public 

confidence in our justice system. But, Mr. Speaker, what’s 

interesting to note about the fact that it appears that this will 

have more public disclosure is that this is coming from, this Bill 

is being introduced by a government that goes out of its way to 

be less accountable to the public, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, today was a very good example 

when we look at the discussions that took place today in 

question period. And obviously one of the large issues that is in 

the mindset of Saskatchewan people right now is, what is 

exactly going on with the situation between the Carlton Trail 

College and St. Peter’s of Muenster, Mr. Speaker? So when it 

comes to . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I’ll remind the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres we’re discussing Bill 153, The Provincial Court 

Amendment Act, 2010. Can she please return to it? I recognize 

the member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So as I said with 

respect to Bill 153, it’s interesting that this Bill is supposed to 

be offering more public disclosure with respect to the results of 

investigations into the conduct of judges by Judicial Council. 

It’s interesting that we have a Sask Party government bringing 

this forward because public disclosure is something that they’re 

not necessarily fond of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as I said, we don’t have to look any further than question 

period today. When asked about questions regarding Carlton 

Trail and St. Peter’s at Muenster, we have absolute lack of 

disclosure, lack of accountability, and of course we have a 

minister who is now getting very irate about . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would first of all ask the member to 

direct the remarks through the Chair and to return to Bill 153, 

The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

Ms. Morin: — So, Mr. Speaker, if the Minister for Social 

Services has so much to offer, then perhaps she can answer 

some of the questions that I had just posed to the Chamber. 

Perhaps she would like to be more open and accountable. 

Maybe she would like to offer more public disclosure on the 

questions we have on this Bill and so many other things we 

bring forward in the legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I said, we’re finding it very ironic that the 

government is looking for others to provide more disclosure and 

be more open and transparent, and yet the Sask Party 

government itself does not feel that they are held to the same 

standard, Mr. Speaker. It’s absolutely atrocious. And for that 

minister, for the Minister of Social Services, to sit there and 

spew from her chair, Mr. Speaker, is absolutely ironic. 

[15:30] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — State your point of order. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

who’s making a speech right now has twice indicated that a 

member is in her place here. I believe that the rules state that 

you may not comment on the presence or absence of a member, 

Mr. Speaker. I would ask her to be more careful in the future. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Furber: — To speak to the point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Proceed. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, the member is simply engaging 

with the conversation across the floor, the accusations that are 

coming at her from the government members. Certainly there’s 

been no direct reference to the presence or absence. She’s 

simply referring to people who are commenting and talking to 

her today, so I would expect that your ruling would reflect that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would remind the member to, on the 

point of order, to direct your remarks through the Chair and not 

to engage and talk about the other members not . . . [inaudible] 

. . . in conversation. I will point out that on Bill 153, that the 

Bill right now we’re discussing is The Provincial Court 

Amendment Act, 2010. I would ask the member to discuss that 

Bill that is before the legislature right now. I recognize the 

member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with 

respect to Bill 153, The Provincial Court Amendment Act, Mr. 

Speaker, this Bill is talking about providing greater public 

disclosure of the results of investigations into the conduct of 

judges by Judicial Council, Mr. Speaker. Now clearly any time 

there is going to be more transparency, accountability, and 

public disclosure to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, it’s something that we obviously are greatly in 

favour of, Mr. Speaker. It’s something that Saskatchewan 

people are looking for on all matters, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So as I said, there is no question that that’s something that we 

would be supporting as an NDP opposition, but clearly it’s also 

something that Saskatchewan people and the NDP opposition 

are looking for from the Sask Party government on all matters 

that are related to the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

And it’s quite ironic, Mr. Speaker, quite ironic that we are 

seeing less and less open transparency and accountability and 

public disclosure from the Sask Party government. Instead we 

see more tirades, Mr. Speaker. We see more outrage, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We see cancellation of a debate. There was a debate that was 

requested . . . well not a debate, sorry. There was an 

investigation that was requested in this legislature today to 



6808 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2011 

provide more public disclosure, which is exactly what Bill 153 

is looking for. Bill 153 is looking for more public disclosure. 

And so when that public disclosure was asked for today by the 

NDP opposition in this legislature during question period, what 

did the Sask Party government do? They said no. They said, we 

won’t let the auditor look into that situation. They said the 

people of Saskatchewan aren’t entitled to the information that 

they are entitled to with respect to another investigation that 

was done, or research that was done with respect to the Meyers 

Norris Penny report, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the Sask Party government said no, we’re not going to let the 

auditor look into the situation with respect to Carlton Trail and 

St. Peter’s of Muenster. We are not going to provide more 

transparency. We’re not going to provide more public 

disclosure, which is what Bill 153 is asking for. And we are not 

going to be more accountable to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. That’s what the Sask Party government is 

saying, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So they expect others to be more accountable, like in Bill 153. 

They expect others to be more accountable through public 

disclosure and yet, as you can hear, Mr. Speaker, they want 

nothing to do with it when it comes to themselves, Mr. Speaker. 

They want nothing to do with it when it comes to reporting to 

the people of Saskatchewan about . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I’ve asked the member to direct her 

remarks through the Chair. 

 

Ms. Morin: — So, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government is 

obviously telling the people of Saskatchewan, do as I say but 

not as I do, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the Sask Party 

government is all about. It’s do as I say but not as I do because 

the Sask Party government wants nothing to do with being 

open, transparent, and providing public disclosure, and yet they 

expect others to do so in Bill 153, Mr. Speaker. Quite ironic. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is also the same government that fires 

public servants who try to disclose information that’s in the best 

public interest. Mr. Speaker, let’s look back not too far with 

respect to a potential dangerous offender that was out on . . . 

How should I say it? He was at large without having the 

government provide that information for the public in terms of 

their knowledge, Mr. Speaker. So what happened when the 

NDP opposition brought forward the information that this 

individual was at large and potentially still a risk to the public, 

Mr. Speaker? Instead of the government, Sask Party 

government, taking responsibility for that, instead of them 

saying, we had made a mistake, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Point of order. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — State your point of order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The member has repeatedly, despite 

admonishments from the Chair, repeatedly refused to speak to 

the Bill before the House. The member knew which Bill she 

was rising to speak to. I think all members would appreciate if 

she were to be speaking to that Bill, which the rules of the 

Assembly require. 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, to respond to the point of order. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

make a number of points in regards to the Government House 

Leader’s point of order. First of all, Mr. Speaker, there’s a 

long-standing tradition in this Assembly that allows a great deal 

of latitude when speaking to a motion, Mr. Speaker. In fact such 

a ruling was brought down just one week ago by Mr. Speaker. 

 

As well I’d like to point out that in his consideration, he was 

bringing up, bringing the Speaker into his point of order and 

into his debate, Mr. Speaker, which is highly inappropriate. Mr. 

Speaker, I think that the long Assembly or the long tradition of 

this Assembly is to allow members to speak with a great deal of 

latitude on Bills, Mr. Speaker, and that is all this member is 

doing. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — On the point of order, we have a 

tradition of giving some latitude on when we’re speaking the 

Bill, but I’ll remind the member that it has to be about the Bill. 

You can’t be varying all over the ways not even close to the 

Bill. So again I’ll remind the member to be addressing the 

issues and tying them to the Bill that we’re speaking, which is 

Bill 153, The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

The Bill that is before is 153, The Provincial Court Amendment 

Act, 2010. I recognize the member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, so with 

respect to Bill 153, which is The Provincial Court Amendment 

Act, as I said, the Bill is looking for greater public disclosure of 

the results of investigations into the conduct of judges by 

Judicial Council. Clearly this is something that the NDP 

opposition would support and that the people of Saskatchewan 

would support. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s ironic that the Sask Party 

government is asking of others to do this very thing, which is be 

more open and accountable to the public of Saskatchewan, and 

is refusing to do that itself when it comes to its own practices, 

Mr. Speaker. So as I said, it’s do as I say but not as I do. 

 

So now, Mr. Speaker, this is the same government that fires 

public servants who try to disclose information which is in the 

best public interest. As I was saying, there was a prisoner at 

large, Mr. Speaker, and yet when that information came to light, 

instead of making sure that the public of Saskatchewan had that 

public disclosure on that situation, they decided instead to 

engage in a witch hunt as to, oh my goodness, who actually 

leaked that information and therefore was able to be brought to 

the public’s knowledge through the NDP opposition. So instead 

of being more open and accountable to the public of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, instead of providing more public 

disclosure as Bill 153 is requesting of the judges and respective 

Judicial Council, Mr. Speaker, instead of doing that, they 

decided to engage in a witch hunt. They decided to find that 

employee that leaked that information despite the fact it was for 

the public’s safety, Mr. Speaker. It actually had to do with the 

safety of the public because this was a dangerous criminal, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 



March 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6809 

But that’s how the Sask Party operates. They like to do as I say 

but not as I do, Mr. Speaker. So it’s very interesting that in Bill 

153 we’re seeing a request for more public disclosure when the 

Sask Party government is quite the opposite when it comes to 

their own practices, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is also the same government that’s 

proposing new public interest disclosure post that would ensure 

allegations of wrongdoing essentially never see the light of day, 

Mr. Speaker. So again we have an ironic situation with Bill 153 

expecting others to provide more public disclosure, and yet it’s 

quite the opposite of the practices of the Sask Party government 

and quite the opposite of the practices of what obviously the 

members want to offer the public of Saskatchewan. Because 

otherwise, Mr. Speaker, you wouldn’t see the outrage that we’re 

seeing in the Chamber today with us talking about the fact that 

they’re asking more public disclosure of others and yet not 

willing to provide that themselves to the people Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with respect to Bill 153, we can all . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Proceed with your point of order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, Bill 153 is before the 

House. Simply repeating the number and title of the Bill is not 

speaking to the Bill, Mr. Speaker, which the member opposite 

clearly is not. The rules of the Assembly require there to be at 

least some pretence of speaking to the substance of what’s 

actually in the legislation, which is not occurring. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To speak to 

the point of order. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Proceed. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the repeated attempts by the 

Deputy Government House Leader to intimidate the member 

from speaking what she believes is the appropriate, the 

appropriate discussion on this Bill in the House is inappropriate, 

Mr. Speaker. There has been a long history of allowing broad 

latitude. Mr. Speaker, this attempt every few minutes by the 

Deputy Government House Leader to intimidate a member in 

this Assembly is inappropriate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Again I will reiterate on my past 

ruling, and I will bring the member . . . Or if I have to, I will get 

a copy of the second reading speech, and I will go through it. 

But I will ask the member — she has the Bill in front of her — 

to speak to Bill 153, The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 

2010. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So with respect to Bill 

153, the Act to amend The Provincial Court Act, Mr. Speaker, 

one of the provisions in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve been 

speaking about, is respecting public disclosure and that there is 

a desire in this Bill to have more public disclosure of the results 

of investigations into the conduct of judges by Judicial Council, 

Mr. Speaker. And as I said, this is something that we certainly 

would support. It’s obvious that transparency and accountability 

is something that the NDP opposition feels very strongly about, 

as do the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, we get chuckles and giggles and outrage 

from the Sask Party government sitting opposite in the 

Chamber, Mr. Speaker. So obviously there is a difference of 

opinion between the members that sit on that side of the House 

and the members that sit on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

And obviously, Mr. Speaker, there is a difference of opinion of 

the members that sit on that side of the House and the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because oddly enough, the people 

of Saskatchewan have many questions about this Bill and many 

other Bills that aren’t being answered. They have many 

questions about many issues in Saskatchewan today, like for 

instance maybe even getting an answer to one of the questions 

that was asked in question period today about Carlton Trail and 

the St. Peter’s College in Muenster. 

 

So with respect to Bill 153, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that we 

are looking for public disclosure from others, and yet the Sask 

Party government feels no sense of accountability whatsoever. 

Not even so much as when the NDP opposition asks for an 

investigation by the auditor into the situation with respect to St. 

Peter’s and Carlton Trail, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party 

government shuts down the motion, Mr. Speaker. So with 

respect . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I will ask the member to return to the 

Bill that’s being spoken and not about events that happened in 

question period. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Ms. Morin: — So, Mr. Speaker, with respect to Bill 153, it’s 

interesting that they’re looking at wanting more public 

disclosure from the judicial system, judiciary system, Mr. 

Speaker. But it’s also the same government that comes up with 

new and innovative ways of spending taxpayers’ money 

without having to account for, for instance, a $27 million loan 

guarantee to their friends at Amicus, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again we have no accountability. And Bill 153 

is requesting accountability from the judiciary, but again we see 

no accountability and transparency from our own government 

that’s expecting it, through Bill 153, of the judiciary through 

this Bill, Mr. Speaker. So it’s very interesting that we’re saying, 

they expect something from others but they don’t hold 

themselves to the same standard. The Sask Party government 

feels that they are not responsible to be open and accountable 

and transparent to the people of Saskatchewan and provide the 

public disclosure that they are asking for in Bill 153 with 

respect to the judges and the Judicial Council, Mr. Speaker. So 

it’s very interesting that we are seeing this ironic situation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now another situation, example, Mr. Speaker, is changing 

provisions to the superannuation Act to hide pension benefits 

paid to former employees or, for instance, their attempt in Bill 9 

to spend $350,000 without public disclosure. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, we can see countless examples where they’re asking 



6810 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2011 

for public disclosure in Bill 153 of the judiciary whereas when 

they speak about themselves or their own situations, they want 

to ensure that there’s no public disclosure. 

 

And I’m sure many people have forgotten about Bill 9, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m sure people, many people have forgotten about the 

fact that under the NDP administration that was in power for 16 

years — which is something that they love to tout, Mr. Speaker; 

they love to talk about how the NDP was in power for 16 years 

— in those 16 years, Mr. Speaker, up until 2007, having a 

discretionary fund of spending of $50,000 was enough under 

the NDP administration. Well what did the Sask Party 

government want to do when it first got elected? It wanted to 

introduce Bill 9, which allowed discretionary fund spending of 

$350,000. 

 

So in Bill 153, we see that they’re looking for public disclosure 

of others and yet wanting to hide public disclosure to the tune 

of seven times the amount of the previous administration that 

was in power for 16 years and had no problem operating with 

that amount of discretionary funds, Mr. Speaker. And what’s 

interesting about that is that the discretionary funds still have to 

be reported, Mr. Speaker. They still have to be reported, but 

they don’t have to be reported for a certain period of time. 

 

Well the problem is that if it takes too long for that reporting 

period to take place, Mr. Speaker, then it becomes very 

clouded. And so they were more than willing, the Sask Party 

government was more than willing to take a fund or amount of 

funds to the tune of seven times of the original amount, Mr. 

Speaker, and have that not reported to the public for a 

significant period of time. So with respect to Bill 153, we’re 

seeing a desire for more public disclosure, and yet on the other 

hand, the Sask Party government is always looking for ways to 

provide less public disclosure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. Why is the Sask Party 

government holding judges to a standard that it won’t even 

apply to itself, Mr. Speaker? Why is that? In Bill 153 they want 

judges to provide more public disclosure, and yet I’ve provided 

countless examples — and, Lord knows, I can provide many, 

many more but I think I’m losing my voice — that would 

provide examples of the lack of transparency, the lack of 

accountability, and the lack of desire of the Sask Party 

government to provide any public disclosure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I know that they’re thrilled that although my voice is 

coming back from last week, it’s not at 100 per cent strength 

because I may not be able to carry on as long as I’d like to in 

terms of providing more examples. Because why, Mr. Speaker? 

They don’t want to hear the truth about what’s going on. They 

don’t want the people of Saskatchewan to know the truth of 

what’s going on. They want to keep hiding the truth from the 

people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so with Bill 153, we see that desire to have others provide 

more public disclosure and thereby be more accountable and 

transparent. And yet what is the Sask Party government content 

in doing, Mr. Speaker? They’re content in ensuring that the 

people of Saskatchewan don’t have all the information. They’re 

content in that the people of Saskatchewan don’t have the 

proper accountability and transparency that they should expect 

and have from their government, Mr. Speaker. They’re quite 

content, Mr. Speaker. But, so as I said, they’re expecting a 

different standard from the judges under Bill 153 that it’s not 

even willing, that this Sask Party government isn’t even willing 

to apply to itself, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this Bill also allows the government . . . 

They’re hoping that I’m finished, Mr. Speaker, but I’ve still got 

a ways to go. My voice is still strong enough to carry on. So, 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill also allows the government to appoint 

temporary judges currently serving on the bench in other 

provinces. Now the minister said this was to address cases 

where all available judges on the Saskatchewan Provincial 

Court have a conflict of interest with one or more of the parties 

involved in a particular legal matter. Now, Mr. Speaker, that 

would seem to be sensible enough. We certainly would want to 

prevent any situations where there is a potential conflict of 

interest, Mr. Speaker, so this is obviously something that we 

would see as a step forward and as a good change under Bill 

153. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s also a provision to bring eligibility 

for disability benefits to the same standard, which is three 

months, as provided to other provincial government employees. 

And again, Mr. Speaker, having a level standard is not 

something that we have any concerns with, Mr. Speaker. It 

would seem that that would be a logical thing to do as well, and 

so we have no immediate concerns with that as well, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now we also support the changes to the nature of the Law 

Society representation on the Judicial Council. Currently the 

president of the Law Society serves on the council and this 

results in frequent turnover on the council. So this Bill would 

allow representatives of the Law Society to serve for a longer 

period of time and allow the Judicial Council to retain their 

experience. And, Mr. Speaker, any time you have any type of 

committee or council or anything to that effect, it’s important to 

have some longevity. It’s important to have what some would 

call corporate memory, Mr. Speaker, because it allows things to 

move forward in a more progressive way hopefully and not 

repeat some mistakes or do research into some things that have 

already been sought out before, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This would also hopefully enhance the quality of the service 

provided to people who bring complaints before the council, 

and clearly, Mr. Speaker, this is a change that we could support 

as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as we can see when we look through the Bill, 

there are a number of changes that are taking place in this Bill 

— some which obviously we don’t have any major concerns 

with, some which obviously we have more questions about. 

And I want to repeat those questions because, as I said, despite 

the fact that there has been a lot of interaction while I’ve been 

speaking to this Bill, Mr. Speaker, from the Sask Party 

members opposite, despite the fact that there has been a lot of 

points of order and complaints, Mr. Speaker, the questions that I 

posed and the questions that many of my colleagues posed, Mr. 

Speaker, still haven’t been answered. And there’s been 

absolutely no one from the Sask Party government that has 

volunteered to provide any more clarity on those questions, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 



March 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6811 

So I just want to repeat those questions and see if we have 

anybody that wants to provide some answers on these questions 

and provide some more clarity, Mr. Speaker, to not just myself 

but obviously the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and the 

members on the NDP opposition side. 

 

And those questions are such: what functions are being 

transferred out of the Provincial Court? Mr. Speaker, we’d like 

to know, have some greater information on specifically what 

functions we’re talking, speaking about, Mr. Speaker. The 

remarks in the second reading speech were somewhat vague, 

Mr. Speaker, and despite the fact that there have been other 

members of the opposition that have asked some of these 

questions, we still haven’t been provided any answers, Mr. 

Speaker. So again we are still looking for some clarification as 

to which functions are being transferred out of Provincial Court, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, what types of cases are going to be 

handled by the justices of the peace, Mr. Speaker? We know 

that there are some cases that wouldn’t be as concerning, that 

would be, could be sent to the justices of the peace, Mr. 

Speaker. But in a lot of cases, that would not be the appropriate 

route, Mr. Speaker. So we would like to know what the Sask 

Party government has in mind in terms of which of the cases 

they’re speaking of or thinking of that would be handled by the 

justices of the peace, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what is the potential impact on the service that people 

receive when they go to court, Mr. Speaker? Is there any 

impact? We don’t know that. What are the impacts? We’d like 

to have some more details, Mr. Speaker, on that question as to 

what are the impacts for Saskatchewan people when they are 

looking for these services with respect to the courts, Mr. 

Speaker. And how will their rights be impacted? Will their 

rights be impacted? Those are questions we have, Mr. Speaker, 

and those are legitimate questions on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

As I said, any time you’re making changes to any Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, you want to make sure that those changes merit the 

changes that are being brought forward, Mr. Speaker. You don’t 

want any consequences coming from those changes through the 

Bills that would actually pose more problems into the future. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you know, a colleague of mine spoke to this 

Bill on November 15th. He’s the member for Lakeview. And 

I’d like to just repeat one of the comments that he made in his 

remarks, Mr. Speaker, because of course my colleague is a 

member of the bar and would therefore have a greater depth of 

knowledge with respect to some of the proposed changes under 

Bill 153. And obviously if my colleague has some concerns, 

obviously then I would like to heed those concerns and have 

great respect for what my colleague’s opinion is of any changes 

that are made to anything with respect to the court systems in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So my colleague said on November 15th, and I quote: 

 

. . . when the legislature or the executive branch of 

government deal with the Provincial Court or with 

anything related to any of the levels of court, we have to 

be especially vigilant in what we’re doing to make sure 

that there aren’t any unintended consequences or that the 

intentions . . . make sure that the intentions are entirely 

clear as we proceed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was a quote by my colleague, the member 

from Regina Lakeview. As I said, he’s a member of the bar. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I trust the fact that he has some concerns 

about some unintended consequences that may arise out of the 

changes to Bill 153. And I would like to have some of the 

questions answered that I posed before the legislature today to 

provide some more reassurance that those unintended 

consequences aren’t going to be something that is going to exist 

because of the changes to Bill 153. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a couple more questions. Whose rights will 

be impacted? And that’s a question that we have not yet had 

answered from the Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. They 

haven’t been able to tell us whose rights have been impacted. 

I’m wondering, Mr. Speaker, if the Sask Party government has 

done enough research and has done enough work on this Bill 

with respect to the changes that they’re bringing forward as to 

whose rights will be impacted. Because, Mr. Speaker, as my 

colleague, the member from Regina Lakeview said, we don’t 

want unintended results or consequences from changes that are 

made to the judiciary system, Mr. Speaker. So we want to know 

whose rights will be impacted. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, with that question also goes the 

accompanying question: who stands to benefit from this change, 

Mr. Speaker? Again that question has not been answered. Who 

stands to benefit from this change, Mr. Speaker? Because if 

there isn’t any benefit from the change, then why would the 

change be made in its entirety? As I said, there are certain 

components of this Bill that we don’t see any large concerns 

with, but there are certainly some questions that we’d have with 

this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we want to know who stands to benefit from the changes to 

Bill 153, Mr. Speaker, and make sure again that the people of 

Saskatchewan have full public disclosure on that information, 

Mr. Speaker. Because as we’ve seen with the Sask Party 

government, there are many times when their friends stand to 

benefit from the changes that the Sask Party government puts 

forward, Mr. Speaker, and that is not serving the best public 

interest for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again I’m certainly not opposed to the fact that Bill 153 is 

seeking more public disclosure. I am certainly finding it ironic 

that this is coming from a government, a Sask Party government 

that doesn’t feel that public disclosure and being more 

accountable and being more transparent to the people of 

Saskatchewan is a priority that they should be held to or a 

standard that they should be held to, Mr. Speaker. So we want 

to know: who stands to benefit from these changes? 

 

[16:00] 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, one only has to look at the Amicus 

deal and one can see . . . where one can see who stands to 

benefit from the Amicus deal, Mr. Speaker. The Amicus deal is 

obviously benefiting their friends. It’s benefiting their 

supporters in terms of financial supporters. It’s benefiting some 

of their . . . links to their family members, Mr. Speaker, to the 



6812 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2011 

tune of a loan guarantee of $27 million on behalf of the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, Bill 153 doesn’t apply to the Sask Party 

unfortunately. Bill 153 can’t make them more transparent. It 

can’t make the Sask Party government provide more public 

disclosure. Bill 153 can’t make the Sask Party government be 

more accountable and more open and transparent to the people 

of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, if 

we’ll ever really know the story on what happened with 

Amicus, Mr. Speaker, because as I’ve said, we know that there 

are a number of . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Proceed with your point of order. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been listening very 

carefully to the member opposite, and I looked through the 

notes from the Minister of Justice when he presented this Bill. 

And this Bill is about temporary judges, Law Society 

appointments, public hearings on discipline of judges, and 

reducing the waiting period of judge disability allowances, Mr. 

Speaker. And the member opposite has not mentioned any of 

those subjects, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that 

the member opposite debate Bill 153 and not whatever else it is 

she wants to talk about, which is irrelevant to the Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, to respond to the point of order. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Proceed. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 

responding to the point of order, I want to make two or three 

basic comments, Mr. Speaker, the first being this: the minister’s 

interpretation of what the impact of the Bill is is his 

interpretation. Each member of this Assembly gets to make 

their interpretation and speak to this Bill as they feel it impacts 

the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t have to be 

based on what the government’s view of what the impact is 

because, Mr. Speaker, they have a particular view of each piece 

of legislation and the impact may or may not be as they 

indicate. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the Bill, as many Bills do, talks about 

accountability, openness, and transparency, Mr. Speaker, in one 

form or another. A member can relate other issues relating to 

transparency, accountability to the Bill; Mr. Speaker, there’s 

longstanding traditions here. And Mr. Speaker, thirdly, the 

government’s continued attempts to intimidate a member of this 

Assembly by standing up and saying point of order doesn’t 

mean it’s a point of order. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I will go back to a 

ruling that was done by a former Speaker Hagel. And I will read 

his quote: 

The hon. member will be aware the item before the House 

is a second reading debate on The Pipelines Act. And this 

of course requires that debate would be two things. One, it 

would deal with the principles of the legislation that’d be 

proposed before the House. And secondly, it would deal 

. . . the debate would deal with the Act itself. 

 

And the Chair has been listening for quite some time to the 

hon. member’s remarks and having [quite] a bit of 

difficulty finding the connection between the hon. 

member’s remarks and the Act which is before the House. 

I’m sure that the hon. member will want to conduct his 

debate in such a way that he’ll be debating the principles 

of the Bill and of the Bill that was before the House, The 

Pipeline Act, at this moment. 

 

That is a ruling by a former Speaker, and that is a ruling that I 

will stand by. So I will ask the member to discuss the Bill and 

the principles of the Bill. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with 

respect to Bill 153, Mr. Speaker, I actually would like to 

provide some clarification to the Government House Leader, 

given his remarks, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Government 

House Leader has kindly read a portion of the second reading 

speech by the minister. And Mr. Speaker, in what he had stated 

to the speaker himself, he talked about how there is a desire for 

more public hearings when looking into the actions of judges in 

the judiciary, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, public hearings provide public disclosure. 

That’s what public hearings do. They provide public disclosure. 

In other words, when there are public hearings, there is 

information that is provided publicly to the people of 

Saskatchewan. That’s what public disclosure is. It’s public 

hearings. So, Mr. Speaker, with respect to Bill 153, when we’re 

talking about public hearings and public disclosure, that’s 

exactly what Saskatchewan people are looking for from their 

government on all matters, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know it’s interesting that we are looking at 

Bill 153, which is asking for public hearings with respect to the 

actions of conduct with respect to judges, and yet when a 

motion was put forward today in the legislature to have a 

greater accountability of what’s going on with Carlton Trail and 

St. Peter’s College at Muenster, the Sask Party government 

itself doesn’t want public hearings or public disclosure as Bill 

153 is looking for, Mr. Speaker. No, they want quite the 

opposite. They absolutely quashed the motion because they 

have a majority. They don’t want the auditor to look into it. 

And of course the only question Saskatchewan people can have 

is, why, Mr. Speaker? What are they hiding, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — What is your point of order? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, the Bill in question has to 

do with temporary judges, Law Society appointments, public 

hearings on the discipline of a judge, and reduced waiting 

period for the disability payments for a judge. The member has 



March 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6813 

repeatedly not spoken to the contents of the Bill. The member 

clearly has a text which she is unable to deviate from. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the rules of the Assembly, the rules of the 

Assembly and, as you quoted, the ruling from previous 

Speakers require that there at least be some tenuous relevance to 

the contents of the Bill when members are speaking. And I 

would ask that she pay attention to those rules. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To respond 

to the point of order. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Proceed. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we have a Bill before the House. 

The interpretation in that Bill by the minister doesn’t 

necessarily mean that’s the interpretation by any member of this 

Assembly. Mr. Speaker, the members of this Assembly have a 

right to speak to the Bills. The continued interruptions by 

members of the government who have no desire to listen to the 

Bill . . . Mr. Speaker, I have heard repeatedly the member go 

back and speak about Bill 153, The Provincial Court Act, and 

her interpretation of what the Bill’s about. If the member . . . 

And drawing in references to other things that are done in 

context to this Bill. 

 

Now if the members don’t believe that or don’t want to listen to 

that, Mr. Speaker, that is in fact their problem. But, Mr. 

Speaker, the interpretation of the minister is not the 

interpretation of the Bill. And each member of this Assembly 

has a right to bring forward their interpretation of what this Bill 

means. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Bill before the legislature is a 

Bill, and that is what is to be discussed, not a total interpretation 

of what the member may or may not think of what it is. I will 

refer back to the Speaker Hagel of what . . . 

 

Order. Order. Order. Order. We are discussing the Bill 153. I 

will ask the member to discuss the principles of the Bill and the 

things that surround the Bill and also not . . . I’ve heard the 

member repeat a number of things, and there’s also a ruling 

here also repeating . . . of not to keep repeating a thing over and 

over again. I will get it if I have to. I will ask the member again 

to stay on the principle of the Bill that’s before us, Bill 153. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with 

respect to Bill 153, The Act to Amend The Provincial Court Act, 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to have to reiterate unfortunately 

despite the fact that I haven’t had the Sask Party government 

listen to the comments I’ve made with respect to the Bill. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, some of those comments are simply this. So, 

Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about a Bill that’s expecting more 

public disclosure of the results of investigations into the 

conduct of judges by Judicial Council. I made a good point 

about that. Matter of fact, I made numerous points about that in 

terms of the expectation under Bill 153 of judiciary which is not 

the same standard that Sask Party government is applying to 

itself, Mr. Speaker. I made many, many references about that, 

Mr. Speaker. So perhaps I’ll just leave that for a moment. 

I also spoke, Mr. Speaker, about the fact that this Bill allows 

government to appoint temporary judges currently serving on 

the bench in other provinces. Now the reason, Mr. Speaker, that 

we want . . . How should I say? We don’t have a problem with 

that particular notion, Mr. Speaker, is because we don’t want to 

see any conflict of interest when those judges are serving on 

those cases, Mr. Speaker. So obviously the Sask Party members 

haven’t been listening that attentively or they would have 

certainly known that is a reference that I made to, with respect 

to another one of the changes that is being proposed under Bill 

153. 

 

Another one of those proposed changes, Mr. Speaker, is — now 

this is deviating from script as was described — but we’re also 

supporting the provision to bring eligibility for disability 

benefits to the same standard, which is three months, as 

provided to other provincial government employees, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s something else I had talked about with respect 

to a proposed change under Bill 153. So perhaps now that I’ve 

mentioned it a couple times, it’ll jog the memories of the 

members sitting opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another one of those proposed changes, Mr. Speaker, was also 

that we support the changes to the nature of Law Society 

representation on the Judicial Council. Now as I said, currently 

the president of the Law Society serves on the council and this 

results in frequent turnover on the council. 

 

This Bill would allow representatives of the Law Society to 

serve for a longer period of time and allow the Judicial Council 

to retain its experience. And this would hopefully enhance the 

quality of the service provided to people who bring complaints 

before the council. And, Mr. Speaker, we certainly support that 

change, Mr. Speaker. So there are a number of different things 

contained in this Bill. 

 

Now obviously the one that is most ironic to the people of 

Saskatchewan and to the members of the NDP opposition is the 

fact that there is an expectation of public hearings of the results 

of investigations into the conduct of judges by Judicial Council 

which, Mr. Speaker, provides more public disclosure. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s interesting that we’re looking for more public 

disclosure under Bill 153 of the judiciary, and yet the Sask 

Party government doesn’t feel that it’s held to the same 

standard. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, I’ve already provided a few 

examples. For instance, Carlton Regional College and Amicus, 

Mr. Speaker. But the Sun Country Health Region, there were 

individuals from that region here today that were looking for 

answers, Mr. Speaker, and didn’t get them today. Unfortunately 

they got responses. And the Sask Party government is very 

good at providing responses, Mr. Speaker, but those are a long 

stretch away from being publicly accountable and providing 

answers, Mr. Speaker. So Bill 153 is looking for public 

accountability with respect to the judiciary, and yet 

unfortunately the Sask Party government doesn’t feel that it’s 

held to the same standard of public accountability, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s also look at the accountability that the Sask 

Party government has to the people of Saskatchewan when it 

comes to chiropractic care, Mr. Speaker. Under Bill 153, the 

Sask Party government is asking the judiciary for public 



6814 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2011 

hearings with respect to the conduct of judges and yet, Mr. 

Speaker, we can’t find any information out about the conduct of 

the Sask Party government when it comes to dealing with 

contracts or negotiating contracts in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

For instance under . . . The chiropractors negotiated a deal with 

the government, Mr. Speaker. And unfortunately the Sask Party 

government decided to renege on that deal and furthermore 

decided to cut the benefit to the people of Saskatchewan for the 

health care that they need, Mr. Speaker. And there were 

thousands and thousands and thousands and thousands of names 

brought to the legislature, Mr. Speaker, of people who were 

upset about this. And what did the Sask Party government do 

about it? Nothing. They plowed forward with their plan to cut 

the chiropractic services to the people of Saskatchewan in terms 

of the supplemental benefit. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, under Bill 153, there’s an expectation for 

more public disclosure, and yet the Sask Party government 

doesn’t feel that it’s held to the same standard of public 

disclosure, Mr. Speaker. It just doesn’t make sense. It just 

doesn’t make sense. 

 

So as we see, there was no consultation with the public. And 

therefore the people of Saskatchewan lost a health benefit that 

was of great benefit to many, many people in the province, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. What is the member’s point of 

order? 

 

[16:15] 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, the member has been 

encouraged repeatedly to speak to the Bill, Bill 153. She 

repeatedly has refused to speak to the Bill. She has repeatedly 

refused to follow the rules of the legislature, Mr. Speaker. And 

again we would encourage and ask that the rules of the 

legislature be followed by the member opposite who has 

flagrantly disregarded them up until this point during this 

intervention. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, to speak to 

the point of order. Mr. Speaker, since last time the Speaker was 

on his feet and the last intervention by the Government Deputy 

House Leader, I listened very carefully when the member went 

through every single clause of the Bill and explained each 

clause and what her position was and what she believed the Bill 

was about, Mr. Speaker. And in the last . . . Mr. Speaker, I don’t 

know that I can call what we see before this House anything but 

intimidation of a member of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there has been latitude on Bills for a long 

time, Mr. Speaker. And this continues, Mr. Speaker. There’s 

little or no doubt that this is an attempt to stop this member 

from having her debate on this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’ve been listening carefully to 

the debate, and I have also heard the point of order raised by the 

Deputy House Leader and the response by the Opposition 

House Leader. And I would like to remind the members, and I 

believe other Speakers as well have, in the past, have reminded 

members of the importance of relevance to the debate. 

 

But let me also . . . House of Commons Procedure and Practice 

reminds members that there’s also the . . . Sometimes it’s 

difficult to derive the importance or the relevance, and that’s 

why as Speakers we’re obligated to try and not only remind 

members to be relevant, but also trying to remind members to 

make sure the debate is entwined into the relevance of the 

question before the Assembly. On page 620, it says: 

 

Notwithstanding their importance regarding relevance in 

debate, these rules remain difficult to define and enforce, 

and not least because such enforcement must respect the 

freedom of debate enjoyed by all Members. 

 

So Speakers past and present, no doubt in the future, while they 

will remind members of being relevant to the debate, also have 

refrained from trying to restrict the debate, and this has been a 

long-standing practice. So I’ve listened to the point of order, 

and I don’t believe the point of order has been well-taken. I 

would ask, however, given the point of order, that the member, 

in debating the question before the Assembly, the Provincial 

Court, address the issues in her debate and tie it to the 

legislation of the Bill that she’s currently speaking to. I 

recognize the member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with 

respect to Bill 153, as I said, there are a number of changes in 

this Bill that are being proposed, Mr. Speaker, and some of 

which the NDP opposition doesn’t have any serious concerns 

with, some which we just find ironic, and one of them 

obviously is the greater accountability and disclosure by the 

results of investigations into the conduct of judges by Judicial 

Council, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, again we have concerns about the fact that 

those standards don’t seem to be applied to the Sask Party 

government when they’re providing information to the people 

of Saskatchewan as well. And so, Mr. Speaker, having said 

what it does in Bill 153 with respect to providing greater public 

disclosure and accountability, Mr. Speaker, we would hope that 

the Sask Party government would want to hold themselves to 

that same standard. But unfortunately we have seen far too 

many examples that are of the opposite nature, Mr. Speaker. 

And I’ve already listed a few. And obviously there’s, you know, 

a number of other ones, like for instance no consultation on The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, despite the fact that the 

minister said that there was contact made with six 

organizations, five of six which said there wasn’t. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, public disclosure is something that the 

people of Saskatchewan are looking for. It’s something that the 

people of Saskatchewan should be able to expect, Mr. Speaker. 

So with Bill 153 wanting to make a proposed change to provide 

more public disclosure, Mr. Speaker, this is the standard that we 

would assume and hope that the Sask Party government would 

feel that they should be living up to as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you know, there are . . . For instance there’s 

another case before the courts with respect to the $3 million PC 

[Progressive Conservative] trust fund where members of . . . 

 



March 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6815 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I would 

ask the member to address the Bill before the Assembly, second 

reading of The Provincial Court Amendment Act. I recognize 

the member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I said, 

we’re also looking for greater public disclosure on many other 

issues, one obviously being the fund that I just had mentioned, 

and many other topics, Mr. Speaker, like for instance, who are 

they speaking to? Who are they consulting with on various 

other Bills that are brought forward, Mr. Speaker? So for Bill 

153, we’d also like to know who’s going to stand to benefit 

from the changes in this Bill, and who requested the changes to 

this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So as I said, there’s a number of changes that are being 

proposed with this Bill, and some appear to be worthy of 

support; others raise serious questions and require more 

information, both from the government and from people outside 

government, before the opposition is willing and ready to 

support this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I am going to allow many of my 

colleagues to have their remarks on record with respect to this 

Bill, Mr. Speaker, and I will adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Walsh Acres has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 153, The Provincial 

Court Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 154 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 154 — The 

Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, 2010/Loi de 

2010 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 154, 

The Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, 2010 be 

now read the second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Government Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 161 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 161 — The 

Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join in the debate 

on Bill 161, The Election Amendment Act, 2010. I think there’s 

been a lot of discussion, Mr. Speaker, from a lot of different 

individuals already, sharing concerns with this Bill, some of the 

stuff, the concern, the photo ID. And you know, the whole 

process of this Bill, people are asking, where does it come 

from? What’s the purpose of it? What’s the reason? Who’s 

asked for this? 

 

I’ve heard a lot of questions about this Bill coming forward and 

concern from leadership. I’ve attended meetings where photo 

ID, whether people truly understand what that means. And 

they’re very confused. They’re not happy. And at the end of the 

day, Mr. Speaker, it is truly . . . People want to trust, and they 

want to trust their governments and the people that make the 

rules and pass legislation and laws. And they want to make sure 

at the end of the day that their concerns are addressed, their 

voice is heard. 

 

And there’s a group of people that will, and I hope not, but I 

think at the end of the day will not be able to cast a vote, will 

not have the proper ID that’s being required, the change. We 

don’t know why. But I know there are some people very upset 

to know why all of a sudden, this coming out at this time, what 

is it about, this Bill? Why do all of a sudden we have to have 

such strict regulations to make sure people in this province have 

a right to vote? People are wondering about this. You know, it’s 

just, they’re very suspicious. They’re concerned. Some of them 

have expressed they’re even alarmed that this type of ID and the 

process . . . And then when they get told, oh, no, no, you guys 

have got nothing to worry about; no, no these Bills, nothing to 

worry about. No, no, we’re not trying to . . . We’re trying to 

involve and make sure people have a vote. We want to make 

sure they have a right to vote. 

 

Well when you bring in, I guess, a Bill like this and legislation 

that’s going to truly, and I think, attack individuals’ right to 

vote, then, like it or don’t like it, at the end of the day, the Sask 

Party government is clearly going to have to have their . . . 

people turned away because of this legislation. People will not 

have the ID that they’re going to need or the information 

required in the regulations for them to cast their vote. That is 

totally wrong. It goes against the democratic process. We know 

that. 

 

We hear so many concerns that people are not engaged in our 

political process because they don’t come out and vote, the 

frustration. And if we start bringing in legislation that even goes 

against encouraging young people . . . And I’ve heard some of 

the mayors are concerned about young people, the Aboriginal 

population, that if you discourage them at a young age, at 18 

when they have a right to vote, that they may not get involved 

in the system. And we may hear ministers tell them, oh, no, no, 



6816 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2011 

no, that’s not what it’s about; we’re going to make it really easy 

and simple. I question that. 

 

After this process and the debate goes through and this becomes 

law, it’s too late for people that are really concerned out there 

and thought, well, we put trust out there. We were told certain 

things, and we believed this is not going to stop young people 

from voting; it’s not going to stop our community members 

from casting votes, residents of our province. It’s not going to 

go against individuals. It’s not going to stop; it’s not going to 

deter people. Mr. Speaker, Bill 161 is exactly that. It is going to 

stop people from casting a vote. It’s going to stop a certain 

group. And we’ve heard it very clear, Mr. Speaker, the concern. 

And the group, the most vulnerable will be the ones that will 

suffer under this legislation. 

 

So we could see why the Sask Party would love to have this, 

this Bill come forward and these regulations followed, to stop 

individuals from casting their vote. And some of these 

individuals are seniors, the, I guess, low-income, the poor, the 

people living in poverty, individual students. And you know, 

you look at our seniors. And traditionally the NDP Party has got 

a lot of support. 

 

And I sometimes question, why now? Why this? Who asked for 

this? Where’s the lineup? Where’s the petition? Where’s all the 

people with their concerns? You ask and, no, there is nobody. It 

just, oh it just . . . We thought about this. 

 

And you know, and I have to believe this. We have a, you 

know, a department and Department of Justice. And we have a 

Justice minister and, you know, he’s supposed to bring 

legislation forward. I’m actually surprised and, I have to be 

honest, Mr. Speaker, disappointed that he would bring such 

legislation forward to stop, to stop individuals from casting 

their vote, especially when you’re hearing on the federal side of 

it, they’re pushing and saying, we’ve got to get more of the, 

more of our Canadian citizens, more our provincial citizens 

voting because right now the numbers don’t look good. They’re 

not engaged. Well why is that? 

 

But when you actually come up with Bills like this, 161, to 

eliminate that, and you want to make sure that you’re saying 

that people have a right to vote, and you believe that as a . . . 

The Sask Party government tries to tell us that’s what they 

believe. We want to make sure those individuals that have a 

right to vote are voting. 

 

Well I have suspicion with the timing of it, who they’re 

targeting with that. And they can sit here and say, oh well SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] is going to go out and 

it’s going to make sure that they’re doing photo ID shops, and 

they’re going to go do workshops, or whatever they want to call 

them, community visits, whatever. 

 

In some of the isolated, the rural communities, it’s not that easy 

for some of the individuals to get the ID that they want. And 

yes, some will have proper ID. And they do, and that’s fine. But 

some of them will have challenges. I know for the First Nations, 

they’re limited to a number of treaty cards that they receive. 

That’s the information I’ve been given, provided. And they’re 

concerned of that process. 

 

[16:30] 

 

So I’ve heard individuals say, well I’ve been waiting some time 

and some of them, it might be a year, could be two years for a 

new card. They’ve lost their card, their status card, and it’s 

going to take time for them to get one. And there are only so 

many handed out at one time by the government. So it’s very 

concerning to see even, on that side of it, if they’re going to 

accept status cards from band members. What if that band 

member doesn’t have a card? 

 

And then you go a little further and you want to talk about 

overcrowding. And I’m going to give you an example of some 

homes we’ll have. In northern Saskatchewan right now in some 

of our communities, we have overcrowded. There’s a lot of 

people living in one or two homes in different areas and they 

might have a large number of people living in them. Now the 

phone bill may not be in their name. The power bill may not be 

in all their name. I’m sure that it’s not on the phone bill, 

whether it’s SaskEnergy, SaskPower, whether their insurance, 

whether their name’s on the actual receipt when they pay the 

rent. 

 

Now if those individuals are living in that house, and how do 

they all get on the voters list, we say, or if they have ID to bring 

a . . . bills to show. Maybe they don’t have photo ID. So we’re 

hearing all the different things, the ways that they can . . . Oh 

no, we’re going to fix it. We’re going to make it so it’s possible 

that all individuals get to cast a vote. And I’ve seen some 

people very frustrated when they were turned away from the 

polls in the federal, when they tried to cast their vote. I’ve seen 

some of those individuals that were very frustrated because they 

didn’t have the documents that was required and they left pretty 

upset, and I’ve seen some of them . . . the conversations from 

individuals. Very alarming. 

 

So it concerns me when people don’t have, or feel like they 

don’t have the access to vote or the democratic process, we call 

it. And we fight for that. And my grandfather fought for that. 

He was a vet. He fought hard. He believed in that, and he 

served his country well and made us all proud. And he was 

asked to do that and when he asked . . . He volunteered to do 

that. And he wanted to protect the democratic process and he 

did that. Very clearly, he did that with honour and he was 

honoured for that. 

 

And to see some of the legislation, Bill 161, and seeing where 

we’re going, where this Sask Party government’s going, very 

concerning some of the stuff that’s coming into today. And as 

things unfold, I think, more and more is going to come out, and 

it’s going to come out. It’s a trust thing, Mr. Speaker, trust. 

 

Our residents, people that elect us to come here and represent 

them, they want to trust us. They want to trust the government. 

The government has an obligation to be transparent, open, and 

to truly say we want all people to vote. And people should not 

feel like, if you do vote a certain way, you should be attacked. 

If you belong to a political organization you shouldn’t be 

attacked. There should be some protections. And you talk about 

Bills that they want to come in and, you know, whistle-blower 

legislation, and I’ve seen different Bills that they’ve brought 

forward. 

 



March 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6817 

When they talk about, Mr. Speaker, that they want to protect 

individuals, employees coming forward . . . And we’ve seen 

what they’ve done with individuals, and it’s pretty alarming to 

see that kind of behaviour from the Sask Party government and 

a government that’s supposed to be respected of all the people, 

protecting them, protecting their right to vote, their right to 

employment, their right to share. They’re the public. The public 

wants to know that its servants, you know, that are serving them 

in the different capacities with the different ministries . . . And I 

do say that. It is an honour to work for the province and to serve 

the people and they are, the employees that do it, do it because 

they want a career. They believe in it. They want to do their job. 

 

And there’s many of them, whether it’s our police force, 

whether it’s, you know, the health science people, whether it’s 

our doctors, our chiropractors, our teachers who are valuable 

. . . teachers, they’re not feeling so . . . But there’s many people 

who serve and they want to do the right thing. So when I see a 

Bill like this coming in to jeopardize a process, we see it’s a 

trust. People want to trust. And they put in their government 

and they say, yes okay, we elect you. We trust you. I tell you, 

do not take the people for granted. And I think right now that’s 

going on big time. 

 

And, you know, you can laugh and can jaggle back and forth 

and have comments that we want to make and, you know, you 

can kid each other and you can make comments to each other, 

oh you know, good luck. Oh yeah, good luck, back and forth. 

But, you know, at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, the people 

want a government that takes care of the needs, takes care of 

their family, the social problems that we have. And there are 

many problems going on in our province right now. 

 

Yes, we know the economics is good. You’re hearing it — 

record revenue. And the people will trust the government will 

do the right thing. And you know, Mr. Speaker, you look at the 

Bill 161 and you wonder. It is a trust thing. And you wonder, 

where exactly is the Sask Party government going with this? 

And just how far, how far will they go to stop people from 

casting a vote? And, you know, when you hear individuals 

talking out there and community members and leaders 

concerned and you’re in meetings and you’re hearing them talk 

about it, what’s this all about? And I make sure that they 

educate themselves, that they’re the group of individuals that 

may not get to cast their vote. And they may be the young 

people. They may be the Aboriginal people. There maybe are 

seniors, some of that group, some of the people living in 

poverty — and I’ve talked about that — students, you know, 

will it be some of the immigrants? How many people will be 

turned away? 

 

And I know the government of the day that’s bringing this in 

wants to say, oh no, no, that’s not what this is about. No, no, no, 

trust us. No, no, no, we’re not about that. We’re not trying to do 

that. But, Mr. Speaker, that’s the problem. Outside of this 

House people are starting to wonder. They trust the 

government. They want to make sure our government’s taking 

care of their finances, the public dollars. They want to make 

sure that those dollars . . . And we see some of the concerns 

coming out, and my colleague before me expressed it very well. 

I know it didn’t go over well. Government and some of the 

ministers did not care for that, and of course want to attack. 

 

But you know, at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, it’s very 

clear. It’s about the people of our province having a right to 

vote. And any time you limit individuals from casting a vote or 

being a part of the democratic process, it’s very alarming. And I 

tell you, I want to make sure. I’ve got a young grandson. He’s 

going to be turning 18. He wants to vote, but he better make 

sure that he, he better make sure that he has the proper ID to 

vote. You know, you’re going to try to make sure he has that. 

But I hope, I hope that he can sign an affidavit or somebody for 

him saying, yes, you know, he can vote. You know, he can 

vote. And if need be, somebody could sign an affidavit saying, 

yes he has the right to vote. He’s a resident. He’s here. 

 

And whether it’s myself or it be somebody else to sign an 

affidavit saying he is a resident, he is 18, he meets the criteria, 

then, Mr. Speaker, he should have a right to vote. Or any 

individual. They should have the right to vote by signing an 

affidavit. Why not? It has some teeth in it. Put some teeth in it, 

if that’s the case. You put some teeth into it now. 

 

The Justice minister and his officials could come up with an 

affidavit that would probably be pretty secure, that says if you 

sign this and you’re not the person you’re saying you are and 

you’re not a resident, then charges will come. And I think the 

Justice minister and his officials could come up with a, you 

know, a kind of affidavit like that very clearly. It could 

probably do that quite well. But to come forward and 

cheerleading on the photo ID and carrying this on, it’s a little 

concerning and disappointing with the Justice minister going in 

that area. 

 

I’m sure there’s different areas they could have come in with 

and different ways. They could have consulted, talked to I guess 

our seniors, First Nations, the Métis, students, people who may 

not have the finances right now because of the cost of living in 

this province. It’s a beautiful province, but the cost of rent, 

utilities, food is going up. Have they consulted those 

individuals? No, I don’t think so. 

 

Justice minister and his officials came up with it, if that’s what 

they did, so why couldn’t they just come up with a simple thing, 

signing an affidavit that holds you as the person signing it? And 

if somebody’s going to sign that with them saying that yes, this 

is the person I signed and hold them accountable, so there could 

have been some other options rather than go to the photo ID and 

eliminate. 

 

You should be encouraging people to vote. It’s a democratic 

process and you should not be turning people away from the 

polls. They have a right to vote. And if you’re going to engage 

them, Mr. Speaker, then do it and encourage them. Don’t come 

up with regulations and, I guess, Bills like 161 to cut them out 

from the democratic process. 

 

We find it very, very concerning. And when I hear young 

people saying they want to get involved in the political process 

and they’d like to vote, but you know unfortunately some of 

them are going to get turned away. And they may say oh no, no, 

no, that’s not going to happen. Trust me, it’s going to happen. 

People will be turned away. People will be turned away. We’ve 

seen some of them being turned away. And they can say, oh 

well, they didn’t have the proper ID. They should have went to 

the SGI road . . . I guess, what do you want to call it? 



6818 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2011 

Workshops, ID workshops that they were going to do. The SGI, 

the road show, with the SGI going around and making sure 

everybody has ID. 

 

Well then in our rural areas and maybe in some of our northern 

communities, people aren’t going to have the access to that. 

And they want to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that their voice is 

heard. And many of my colleagues have expressed themselves. 

There’s been different groups that have expressed themselves 

with concerned individuals that are concerned about this Bill. 

It’s going further, you know. There’s another Bill that’s coming 

forward again in regards to, you know, the Human Rights Code, 

and that’s concerning. 

 

People are starting to see certain things that are concerning 

them. It is the trust thing. And I know that some of the members 

on the other side have to feel that they’re not comfortable with 

this. There has to be someone questioning it, Mr. Speaker, has 

to be, saying, is this the right Bill? Are we doing the right 

thing? And if they’re not, I hope they are looking at it, Mr. 

Speaker, and making sure that it isn’t going to affect some of 

the individuals back home that won’t get a chance to have the 

democratic process and vote. 

 

And, you know, Mr. Speaker, maybe sometimes . . . You know, 

unfortunate we take that for granted, and some people do. But 

I’ll tell you, when you talk to the veterans . . . And I said earlier 

my grandfather, and many of my great-uncles fought with him, 

his brothers, they served. And I tell you, they did it because 

they wanted to ensure democratic process. They wanted to 

make sure that we still had, and our families and their 

grandchildren, we had a beautiful country and a province, and I 

respect that. And to see that being jeopardized by the Sask Party 

government, you know, it’s sad. It’s a sad day if this legislation 

passes. 

 

They can do the right thing. They can revoke this, or they can 

just cancel the Bill. They can withdraw the Bill. They can do a 

lot of things with this Bill, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t have to go 

forward. They can do the right thing and make sure that people 

have a right to vote and not take that vote away from them. 

Because if you do take a vote, one person loses their 

opportunity to vote. You have definitely affected the outcome 

of an election. 

 

So I want to make it very clear, Mr. Speaker, I do not support 

this Bill. I have a lot of leaders, community people are 

concerned. They want to make sure what exactly is the outcome 

of this Bill, and they are concerned. And I heard the mayor. 

They’ve talked about it in meetings. I’ve heard different 

individuals out there just saying, what exactly is this photo ID? 

 

And we heard a lot of different organizations coming forward 

that are concerned about this, very concerned, very concerned 

about this type of a Bill. That this Bill will eliminate individuals 

and they can . . . You know, at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, 

I don’t think we have many people coming forward with their 

concerns. And we didn’t see the petitions. We didn’t see all 

this. And we asked that — who and what organization, what 

group brought this forward? How many complaints have they 

had from the election officials? And I don’t think there’s going 

to be too many of them because we haven’t heard of them and 

I’m sure we would have been receiving that. 

So that makes it very clear to me that this isn’t about 

individuals, groups, or the election officials bringing it forward, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s clearly about the Sask Party government. It’s 

clearly about the Sask Party government. It’s clearly about the 

Sask Party government agenda, eliminating individuals . . .  

 

And you can go to meetings. And, you know, they’re going to 

spin it the way they want and they’re going to try to make sure 

that . . . Oh no, no, no. We want to make sure every citizen has 

a right to vote. We’re the caring Sask Party government. Well 

guess what? There’s a lot of people questioning that. And as 

things unfold, and more and more will unfold, and as people 

come forward, Mr. Speaker, and voice their concerns, the 

concerns of the way the running of our finances, the running of 

our ministries, and some of the stuff that are going on within the 

government itself . . . Individuals know things. They’ll claim 

they don’t know things. They will be held to account for the 

things that they claim they didn’t know. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, I think at election time 

we should make sure that all the individuals have a right to 

vote, have a right to vote so they can make sure that they’re 

holding their government to account. That will be your 

evaluation — all of us. You will get your chance to be 

evaluated. And the process is by the residents of our province, 

citizens of our good province getting to cast a vote — one vote, 

one individual. There hasn’t been a lot of problems, a lot of 

issues . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . But, you know, you know, 

very clearly, very clearly you have some of the members 

wanting to come and join in. This is my opportunity to my bring 

my concerns of my constituents and the people that have shared 

their concern. So at this time I would ask them, you know, to 

please allow me the time to share what people are sharing with 

me. And I’m bringing that forward. 

 

So let me make it very clear, Mr. Speaker. People are very 

concerned. They want to make sure that they have a right to 

vote. The democratic process, we should fight for that. Many of 

us do, and I believe, I believe that individuals, individuals want 

to have that right. 

 

If you were to go out there and probably, maybe out in some of, 

some of . . . well different countries, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, 

some of the other countries out there, I don’t think they have a 

democratic process and a right to vote, one vote for every 

citizen. That isn’t so. Pretty scary. 

 

And when you see some of the actions of the Sask Party 

government, and it’s almost like they’re taking away 

individuals’ right to vote, intimidation. And some of my 

colleagues shared some of the other things that people have 

been told: maybe, you know, being targeted because of your 

political beliefs, because you don’t believe in their philosophy, 

the Sask Party’s philosophy. You don’t believe in what they’re 

doing and some of the things they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So a Bill like this coming forward is very concerning to a lot of 

people. And, you know, you’re going to have individuals asking 

many questions about this. And at the end of the day we’re 

going to debate this, and this is the right venue to do that. And 

we’ll have a right to share our views. And you know what? You 



March 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6819 

know, you made a ruling earlier, Mr. Speaker, which, you 

know, it was very clear that we have a chance to have the 

debates. It’s protected and I commend that you did that. And 

you saw clear to protect the democratic process and you made a 

ruling that clearly gave us an opportunity to debate and talk. So 

I have to say that, you know, Mr. Speaker, that opportunity 

should be given for all Saskatchewan residents, and that’s why 

I’m here debating this Bill 161, very clearly. Photo ID: how far 

will it go? Who’ll it impact? Who will not be able to cast a 

vote? And why should they not have that right? 

 

And I talk about whether the Justice people, the minister 

couldn’t have come up with a process that makes it very clear 

that individuals get to vote. And like I said, it’s an affidavit. It 

could’ve been drawn up and it could’ve had some teeth to it, 

making sure that citizens of our province, our citizens have a 

right to vote. And if you had some teeth in that, you know, that 

declaration, it would be very clear that that person would — or 

an affidavit, whatever you want to call it — that person would 

sign that and a witness. And they would be scrutinized if 

someone appealed that or had concerns, whether it was flagged 

or somebody had concerns about it. You could go and say, well 

hold it here we have a concern, and we want to investigate. But 

I think we would have the individuals and the election officials 

would look into this. And it would be up to them to make sure, 

very clearly, that the provisions that provided residents of our 

province to vote were followed, and that individual got to vote 

in that area. So there are opportunities. 

 

But I go back, you know, to thinking about some of the 

concerns that are coming forward, and we’ll see them unfold 

over the next while. And we look at, I guess, some of the record 

revenue that’s out there. People are questioning that stuff. It’s 

along with the finances. They trust the government will take 

care of their interest and make sure they have affordable 

housing. So it’s a trust thing. 

 

And you know, when you look at this Bill and different 

legislations that this government will bring forward, you want 

to make sure, people out there want to make sure that this 

government’s bringing legislations, whether it’s protecting their 

home, whether it’s making sure they have affordable housing, 

whether it makes sure they have adequate roads, adequate 

health care, adequate education. There’s a lot of Bills that will 

come forward that we’ll pass through this House, and we’ll 

debate them and we’ll talk about them. 

 

But I go back to this, Mr. Speaker. It is about a trust thing. The 

people out there have to trust their government, want to trust the 

government. But at the end of the day, when they see a 

government turning their back on them, ignoring them, not 

listening to their concerns, not consulting them, not truly 

engaging them in that, you know, in that process that they want 

to, the democratic process that they want to engage in, let’s 

make it very clear that those individuals . . . And I encourage 

them, and there’s probably a lot of them listening right now — 

get out and vote. Make sure you get out and vote. Send them a 

message, send a letter, send something to your MLAs [Member 

of the Legislative Assembly] telling them how you’re 

concerned and the issues that you feel, that you don’t think it’s 

right that we stop people from the democratic process, what this 

Bill could do. And make it very clear that one person that gets 

turned away from the polls is one too many. And nobody, if 

they have a right to vote, should get turned away. Nobody. It’s a 

democratic process. 

 

And like I said earlier, many people have fought. Many 

arguments have been debated. Many Bills have come through 

this House and have been debated. People have made rulings to 

protect the democratic process. If you see what’s going on in 

our world right now, it’s pretty sad some of the things 

happening to the democratic process. And when you start 

eliminating certain things, and you start passing legislation — 

Bill 5, Bill 6, Bill 43, I think Bill 80 — when you start 

introducing Bills like this that go after individuals . . . And 

we’re not doing justice to the people that elected us, that asked 

us to represent them. 

 

So that’s an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to talk about Bills, and 

Bill 161 is exactly one of those Bills. I think this thing should 

be thrown out, shredded, and never brought back again here. 

Now the Justice minister, I know he appreciates that. He’s 

probably going to shred it tomorrow, so I’m glad to hear that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, very clearly, I know the people back home 

take this very serious. Individuals that are bringing this issue 

forward, and my colleagues have made it very clear, they’re 

very concerned. And they’ve expressed themselves well to 

make sure that this House knows exactly the issues and what’s 

going on. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Speaker, I wonder at the end of the day when 

individuals are turned away from the polls, when they can’t 

vote, who then do they get to criticize? Is it then too late? And 

then I think it is too late when one person gets turned away. 

And I think there’s going to be hundreds turned away by this 

legislation — hundreds. There could be thousands turned away 

because they wanted to vote, they wanted to get rid of the Sask 

Party government, but they won’t be allowed to, to get rid of 

them. Thousands of them maybe. Maybe ten thousand. Maybe 

it’s going to be a hundred thousand. They’re going to try to get 

rid of that Sask Party government because of some of the 

shenanigans going on. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you know what? You just watch, you watch 

what the people are saying out there. They’re not feeling the 

economic boom, if you want to use that word. They’re not 

seeing the economics. They’re very concerned about their 

finances, about their families. And it’s a trust thing. It’s a trust 

thing. They want to trust their government will make sure that 

they’re taking care of them. 

 

And when they see a government bringing in Bill 161 they’re 

very concerned about that because it goes back to . . . I guess I 

want to make a comparison. They go back to other things, Mr. 

Speaker, about their education of their children. It’s a trust 

thing. About their senior homes for their seniors, about their 

roads, about the condition of their homes, if you can call some 

of them a home. They’re very proud people, and they’re 

struggling to make ends meet to provide food. 

 

But I’m just using this as an example, Mr. Speaker, to compare. 

People want to trust their government, but when they see Bills 

coming forward that take away from them and take away their 

democratic process or their democratic right to vote. And that 

process . . . But you know I want to focus. The government 



6820 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2011 

says, oh we’re listening and, you know, our ears are open. And 

we’re willing to consult. We’re willing to talk. 

 

And I say to you, if you’re that way then why don’t you change 

this? You’re hearing people with concerns. Have an affidavit. 

The Justice Minister and his officials can draft one up to make 

sure nobody gets turned away that has a right to vote. And if 

somebody wants to sign a document or an affidavit and they 

want to do something that’s not proper, and somebody flags it, 

then the law, there we go. And the Justice department could 

deal with that and could deal with them. And I’m sure we have 

enough people, scrutineers, watching. We have election 

officials there. There’s a process and they’re trained well to 

make sure that that happens. 

 

I find it odd that we would even bring this Bill forward without 

much thought of it. You didn’t consult anyone. Maybe you 

thought it was the best idea, and you brought it forward. And 

that’s okay, but unfortunately, you know what? I don’t think 

this is what’s best for our Saskatchewan residents, and I ask you 

to reconsider this. And for the members, vote against this Bill. 

You can vote against this. The members opposite, you can vote. 

You can vote against this Bill that takes away the democratic 

right to vote for those . . .  

 

And like I said earlier, there may be one, there may be ten. 

There may be hundreds. There may be thousands. There may be 

10,000 people get turned away that wanted to vote and get rid 

of the Sask Party government, but you won’t let them. But let 

me turn that around to you. Those individuals might want to 

vote for the Sask Party. They might want to vote for the Sask 

Party and send . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, they might. 

One or two of them out there would do that. 

 

But having said that, Mr. Speaker, it’s very concerning. And I 

wanted an opportunity, and I’m glad I could join my colleagues 

in getting in on the debate on Bill 161. I think it’s crucial. I 

expressed some concern from people back home, and I will go 

back home and share that with them. And I will express to them 

that we on this side of the House, the official opposition, made 

it very clear. We debated this. We talked about it. We tried to 

ask the government, the Sask Party government, to reconsider 

and to support us defeating this Bill. And it may not happen. 

 

But at this time it’s getting late in the day, and I’m glad I got to 

take part in this. I am prepared to . . . I know my colleagues 

want to talk, so I’ll adjourn debate at this time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 161, The Election 

Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Being now the time of recess, 5 p.m., 

this Assembly will recess until 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6789 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6789 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6789 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6789 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6789 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6789 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6789 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6790 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6790 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6790 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6790 

 Spring Free From Racism Event 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6791 

 Z99 Radiothon 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6791 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6791 

 Social Work Week 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6791 

 Prince Albert Team Wins AAA Championship 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6792 

 The Good Old Days 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6792 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 College Governance Issues 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6792 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6792 

 Investments in Health Care 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6795 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6795 

 Administration of Health Region and Long-Term Care Issues 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6796 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6796 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 620 — The Government and Member of the Legislative Assembly 

 Accountability and Transparency Act (withdrawn) .................................................................................................................... 6797 

 Bill No. 621 — The Member of the Legislative Assembly Ethics Act (withdrawn) ................................................................... 6797 

STATEMENTS BY THE SPEAKER 

 Passing of Ernest Boychuk 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6797 

 Ruling on a Point of Order 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6798 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 Audit of Colleges 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6798 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 149 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6799 

 Bill No. 150 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2010 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6800 

 Bill No. 144 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 6802 

 Bill No. 155 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6802 

 Bill No. 164 — The Police Amendment Act, 2011 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6803 



 

 Bill No. 165 — The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2011 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6804 

 Bill No. 153 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6806 

  McMillan (point of order) ...................................................................................................................................................... 6807 

  Furber (point of order) ........................................................................................................................................................... 6807 

  Harrison (point of order) ......................................................................................................................... 6808, 6809, 6812, 6814 

  Yates (point of order) ..................................................................................................................... 6808, 6809, 6812, 6813, 6814 

  D’Autremont (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................ 6812 

  Deputy Speaker (point of order) .................................................................................................... 6807, 6808, 6809, 6812, 6813 

  The Speaker (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................. 6814 

 Bill No. 154 — The Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, 2010 

 Loi de 2010 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 6815 

 Bill No. 161 — The Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6815 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


