




















































Hansard: April 20, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 52A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 20, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7359 

 April 20, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

is my pleasure today to introduce 25 public services employees 

that are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. They are here to take 

part in the parliamentary program for the public service, and 

they’re employees from the following ministries: Agriculture; 

Enterprise Saskatchewan; Environment; Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

The program that they’re taking part in today actually includes 

an in-depth history tour of the legislature building. They have 

briefings by the Legislative Library, the Office of the Clerk, 

Executive Council, and by the Speaker. And they are now 

sitting in the Chamber to observe the proceedings, and I’ll have 

the opportunity to meet with them later on. 

 

I want to thank you for the work you do on a daily basis, and far 

too often the work you do is taken for granted. And we 

appreciate the fact that you’re here today and learning more 

about the legislative process. So I invite all members to help me 

welcome these public service employees to their Chamber. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wish to 

join the minister today and welcome the many public servants 

that are here today on behalf of the official opposition. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to remind all members of the very valuable 

work they do each and every day on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan often goes without the proper recognition that 

you deserve, and the people of Saskatchewan are better off 

because of the work you do every day. On behalf of them and, 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all of us, I’d like to welcome them to 

their Assembly and hope that you have a very fruitful and 

eventful day today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour for 

me to introduce my friend, the Hon. Jay Hill. Jay was first 

elected as a Member of Parliament from BC [British Columbia] 

for the riding of Prince George-Peace River in 1993. He’s since 

won six elections. He has retired from politics in the fall of 

2010, is now working in government relations. And me and 

some of my colleagues are going to be visiting with him later 

today. 

 

Jay is now living in Calgary with his lovely wife, Leah. And I 

do want to say that I know it’s hard for people in this House to 

believe, but I was once a very shy, quiet girl. And Jay and I ran 

question period together in early 2002, and he worked that out 

of me pretty quickly. And I’m here in part because of the things 

that I learned working with Jay. So I do want to publicly thank 

him for that and ask all members to help me welcoming him 

here to this Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today a 

number of community leaders gathered at the Legislative 

Assembly to express their disapproval of Bill 160, the Bill to 

amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code. And a few of 

those leaders remain here today in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I wish to introduce to you and through you to all members 

of the Assembly: Peter Gilmer, he is here today on behalf of the 

anti-poverty league; Tina Vuckovic who’s with the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Labour women’s committee; Larry 

Kowalchuk, who is here on behalf of the SFL’s [Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour] human rights committee; and Angelica 

Barth-Burkholder, who is here representing the Queen City 

Tenants Association. I hope that all members will welcome 

these citizens to their Assembly this afternoon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise, the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to 

members of the House, in the west gallery, Mr. Joel Sopp, an 

insurance advisor with RBC [Royal Bank of Canada] and also 

very active with the Saskatchewan Young Professionals and 

Entrepreneurs, who I had the pleasure of speaking to this 

afternoon. So welcome, Joel. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the 

member from Martensville in welcoming my friend and former 

colleague the Hon. Jay Hill to the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I’d like 

to introduce a gentleman that’s from my community. He’s here, 

and he works for Northern Lights School Division as a 

consultant. And I just want to acknowledge him and make sure 

he knows how welcome he is at the Assembly. 

 

It is an honour to be here representing him, Julius Park. He 

works for Northern Lights School Division. He’s here on 

business, and he wanted to come and see the House. And I just 

want to welcome here and say keep up the good work you are 

doing with our children. It is an honour to have you. Welcome, 

my friend. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

want to join in with my colleague from Cumberland to welcome 

Julius Park. And a lot of people don’t know . . . A bit about 

Julius, very quickly. 

 

Julius is a phenomenal basketball player, Mr. Speaker. In 1982 



7360 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2011 

and 1983, he was a member of the provincial basketball 

championship. La Loche Lakers won that, and I think it was the 

first time in the history of Saskatchewan that a northern team 

won the provincial basketball tournament. And Julius received 

the recognition as scoring the most points in a single game, and 

also I believe in a tournament. And he held that record for nine 

years. And, Mr. Speaker, he’s very, very proud of the fact that 

the former MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] for 

Athabasca, the Hon. Fred Thompson, got up in the Assembly 

and he made a statement about that great accomplishment, not 

just of Julius but of the team as well. 

 

And I want to tell Julius that he is a great northerner, a great 

Dene leader, and that this Assembly’s his Assembly as well. 

And I should finally close on this point, Mr. Speaker, that Julius 

and I played basketball against each other. And he often 

accused me of being a little dirty during some of the exchanges 

under the basket. And, Mr. Speaker, I can assure him that 

referees are there to make that call. It’s not his to make. But I 

want to point out that Julius is a phenomenal northerner, a great 

friend, and one that I truly call my brother. Thank you very 

much. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan residents who are 

facing surging rent increases that are simply making living in 

Saskatchewan unaffordable. Mr. Speaker, it also points out that 

a majority of Canadians now live in provinces with rent control 

guidelines, including Manitoba, British Columbia, Ontario, 

Quebec, and Prince Edward Island. And it also points out the 

fact that in rent-controlled Winnipeg, they generated over 1,500 

new rental units in that city, and when you combine Regina and 

Saskatoon with no rent controls during that same period of time, 

there was only 300 new rental unit starts in those cities. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s an issue we need to look at. And the 

prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take 

the following action: cause the government to 

immediately enact rent control legislation that protects 

Saskatchewan tenants from unreasonable increases in 

rent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed on behalf of citizens in 

Regina, Moose Jaw, Belle Plaine, Cupar, Kamsack, and Canora. 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again today to present a 

petition from people supporting maintaining quality health care 

services. 

 

The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth that the Government of 

Saskatchewan ought to recognize the need for timely 

access to comprehensive and quality health care services 

for all communities within the province, including 

Wakaw and surrounding areas, and that the disruption of 

emergency services and in-patient services at Wakaw 

Hospital will not serve the needs of the residents in this 

community and surrounding areas; and 

 

That cuts in access to timely and accurate diagnostic and 

laboratory tests with the community of Wakaw and 

surrounding area will not serve the needs of the residents. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintain quality health care 

services through the commitment of necessary funding to 

address critical retention and recruitment issues. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Wakaw 

and Bellevue. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of Northern Trappers Association Co-operative. The 

fur industry has much potential for our northern trappers. It is a 

way to educate and empower our northern youth and to connect 

them with their culture. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to recognize that Northern 

Trappers Association Co-operative maintains the 

traditional values of hunting and trapping and also brings 

in millions of dollars to the provincial economy every 

year from the proceeds of fur harvesting combined with 

the economic spinoffs to the tourism sector and to the 

local economy;  

 

And in so doing, cause the Sask Party government to 

immediately show their support for the Northern Trappers 

Association Co-operative by providing additional funding 

to assist in development of value-added and marketing 

strategies that will enhance the current income levels 

available to their members. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of Stanley Mission. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition concerning the need for hospice and palliative 

care here in the province: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that all Saskatchewan people deserve quality 

end-of-life and bereavement care; that hospice and 



April 20, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7361 

palliative care is known to enhance the quality of life for 

those facing advancing illness, death, and bereavement; 

that a publicly funded and administered hospice and 

palliative care system including residential hospices 

would increase end-of-life care options for Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to enhance and increase 

publicly funded and administered hospice and palliative 

care, including in-home hospice services and residential 

hospices, in order to ensure that all Saskatchewan people 

have access to high-quality end-of-life care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the cities of Saskatoon and Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of a potash royalty review, 

considering that the citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 

are owners of a 1,000-year strategic resource and that the same 

citizens deserve to receive the maximum possible return on that 

resource. Additionally, the CEO [chief executive officer] of one 

of the major potash companies said that there’s a new norm for 

potash in a speech to his shareholders. Mr. Speaker, the prayer 

reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to begin 

a comprehensive, transparent, and public review of 

Saskatchewan’s potash royalty system with a view to 

maximizing the return from this strategic resource for its 

owners, the people of Saskatchewan, who wish to use 

these additional potash revenues for needed investments 

in health care, child care, education, affordable housing, 

infrastructure, and other social programs as well as 

initiatives such as debt repayment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition today is signed by good folks from 

North Battleford, Prince Albert, Candle Lake, Maple Creek, 

Christopher Lake, and Kamsack. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I rise today 

to present petitions signed by citizens of Saskatchewan 

concerned about the detrimental effect that Bill 160 will have 

on human rights law in the province if enacted. And the prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

withdraw Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public 

consultations informed by a public policy paper before 

any amendments to the Human Rights Code, the law that 

supersedes all others in our province, are even considered. 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Milden, Saskatoon, 

Kamsack, Veregin, Regina, North Battleford, Shellbrook, 

Prince Albert, Candle Lake, Maple Creek, and Christopher 

Lake, Mr. Speaker. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from 

across Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of our 

finances by the Sask Party. They allude to the fact that the Sask 

Party has run deficits and increased debt at times of record 

highs of revenues, that this province reports its finances in a 

way that’s out of line with public sector accounting standards 

and the rest of Canada, all provinces and territories. And they 

highlight the fact that debt has increased for the last three 

consecutive years, well over $1.3 billion of debt being 

increased, in this year alone, debt being increased by $548 

million to the public books, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads 

as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents of Regina, 

Saskatoon, and Lloydminster. I so submit. 

 

[13:45] 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

The Generosity and Commitment of Volunteers 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday nine 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal recipients were presented with 

their awards. And I’m proud to say that, of those nine, two 

individuals reside in the constituency of Cypress Hills, which in 

itself is unprecedented in my tenure as their MLA. 

 

Now both Lexie Culham of Cabri and Albin Zubot of Burstall 

exemplify the generosity and commitment of volunteers 

throughout our province. By donating their time and special 

skills in service to their communities, they contribute to the 

experiences of each person who has the good fortune to reside 

in their respective small towns. 

 

In her nomination, Lexie Culham is referred to as a pillar of the 

town of Cabri’s music programs. She shares her love and gift of 

music by providing lessons, accompaniment, and entertainment. 

The Royal Canadian Legion, the Cabri Brass Band, the Cabri 

United Church, the Ecumenical Teen Choir, the Cabri school, 

and the Cabri health care facility all have programs which have 

been enriched due to Lexie’s volunteer contributions. 



7362 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2011 

Albin Zubot has served as chairman and treasurer for a number 

of clubs in the town of Burstall, has taken on the role of project 

manager for the community water treatment centre, has coached 

minor league baseball, softball, basketball, and volleyball. He’s 

helped with the construction and maintenance of community 

ball diamonds, engineered a solar water heating system for the 

swimming pool, and the list goes on. For 25 years, Albin has 

demonstrated a commitment to making his town a great place to 

live, earning him the utmost respect from the citizens of his 

community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition, the 

member from Regina Douglas Park. 

 

Annual Better Newspaper Awards 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday, April 16th, the 

Saskatchewan Weekly Newspapers Association announced the 

winners of the annual Better Newspaper Awards. The BNA 

awards, as they are sometimes called, recognizes the excellent 

in journalism, the layout among numerous weekly newspapers 

right across this great province. With Saskatchewan’s wide 

open spaces and spread out population, these weekly 

newspapers have been providing information, entertainment, 

and are a main source of community news that is referred to by 

families again and again throughout the week. 

 

The BNA awards are given to recognize such accomplishments 

as the best news story, best research story, best agriculture 

story, and of course the best hard news photos. Working within 

the areas, the weekly newspapers have continued a long 

tradition of citizen journalism that reaches back to the earliest 

days of the province. Many papers can trace their roots back to 

the ’30s, ’20s, and some even earlier. The Saskatchewan 

Weekly Newspapers Association, by hosting these awards, 

makes sure that the proud history of Saskatchewan’s weekly 

newspapers continues and in the future with a commitment to 

excellence that all Saskatchewan should be proud of. 

 

Therefore I would like to extend, on behalf of myself and the 

entire NDP [New Democratic Party] opposition, a sincere 

congratulations to these hard-working and dedicated reporters, 

photographers, editors, and production staff. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Housing Development in Esterhazy 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, our province continues to move forward as is evident 

by the many positive economic indicators including housing 

starts. However this isn’t just the case in our cities. 

 

On March 25th I had the opportunity to attend a sod-turning 

event in Esterhazy. Boombata Homes is beginning the first 

phase of their Deerwood development on 40 acres of land in the 

northwest side of Esterhazy. This project will consist of 72 

condo-style apartments, 11 duplexes, and 13 single family 

homes. The total value of phase 1 of the project is $55 million. 

Mr. Speaker, this is yet another sign of our provincial economy 

moving forward. 

This investment by Boombata Homes will create jobs in 

Esterhazy and area in the short term and meet the housing 

demands in a growing population in the long term. Mr. Speaker, 

this housing investment is another sign our province continues 

to move forward. Investments such as this are happening across 

Saskatchewan thanks to our strong economy and growing 

population. Mr. Speaker, this housing initiative is good news 

for the people of Esterhazy but also good news for the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Le Concours d’art oratoire  

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I had 

the pleasure last week of attending the divisional 

championships in Saskatoon for le Concours d’art oratoire, an 

annual public speaking event for students who are studying 

French as a second language. 

 

This is the third year I’ve had the opportunity to attend these 

divisional championships, and I’m always so impressed with 

the French these young students speak, the topics they choose to 

write about, and their ability to stand before a crowd with the 

utmost confidence and deliver amazing speeches in their second 

language. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the goal of Concours d’art oratoire organized by 

Canadian Parents for French is to further motivate the interest 

of English-speaking students in learning French. Schools 

around the province host their own public speaking 

competitions with winners progressing to competitions held by 

local school divisions. Students in grade 6 to 12 who place first 

or second at their divisional event are given the opportunity to 

participate at the provincial level. At the Saskatoon event held 

at Cardinal Leger last week, there were 48 students from grade 

5 to 8 representing schools across the city. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon Riversdale is home to l’École française 

de Saskatoon, or as we Anglos call it, the Saskatoon French 

School. The school fielded eight participants in their regionals. 

Of special note from the Saskatoon French School, Yiwen Li 

finished third in the grade 7 group. Also in grade 7, Hennessey 

Chartier-Ford finished second and is excited to be heading to 

provincials at Saskatoon’s Holy Cross High School on May 7th. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in offering our 

congratulations to all the students who participated in the 

regionals and wishing good luck to those who are progressing 

to the provincials next month. Félicitations et bonne chance, et 

merci. [Translation: Congratulations, good luck, and thank 

you.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Growth in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The latest 

economic indicators point to this province as a great place to 

live and work and raise a family. Our population is now at an 

all-time high, over 1.052 million people. It has grown over 



April 20, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7363 

15,000 people in the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I would ask that 

members have the respect, show the respect and allow the 

member to make their ministerial statement without 

interference. I’ll invite the member from Cut Knife-Turtleford 

to start over and do his statement without interference. I 

recognize the member from Cut Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our population is 

now at an all-time high, over 1.052 million people. It has grown 

by over 15,000 people in the past year making Saskatchewan 

the second-fastest growing province in Canada. The province’s 

population has now increased for 19 consecutive quarters, and 

in the past four years, Saskatchewan has grown by almost 

60,000 people, the fastest and most sustained period of 

population growth in decades. 

 

New employment numbers show that 516,800 people were 

employed in March 2011, the second-highest level of 

employment on record for the month of March. There were 

employment increases in construction, transportation, 

warehousing and utilities, finance, insurance and real estate, and 

public administration. 

 

Recently RBC released a report that estimates Saskatchewan’s 

economy grew by 4.5 per cent in 2010, the second highest rate 

of economic growth in the country in 2010. The same report is 

also forecasting growth rates of 4.9 per cent and 4.3 per cent for 

2011, 2012 respectively, the highest rates of economic growth 

among all the provinces for both years. 

 

Our province employment is expected to grow by more than 2 

per cent each year or by about 10,000 jobs in 2011 and 12,000 

jobs in 2012. Mr. Speaker, this data reinforces what is now 

being referred to as the Saskatchewan advantage. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Human Rights 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, on the front steps of the Assembly 

today, representatives of groups concerned with human rights 

spoke out against this government’s plan to stifle the further 

development of human rights law in the province by abolishing 

human rights tribunals. 

 

So far, Mr. Speaker, the government hasn’t been listening. We 

know who does have the government’s ear, Mr. Speaker, and 

it’s one of the foremost opponents of human rights commissions 

in Canada, Ezra Levant. 

 

A week after a judge ordered him to pay $25,000 for his 

reckless indifference to the truth for blog posts about a 

Canadian Human Rights Commission lawyer, Mr. Levant came 

to the Assembly last fall, Mr. Speaker, to be on hand as Bill 160 

was introduced and was warmly welcomed by the member for 

Meadow Lake as he said, “a well-known political commentator 

and soon-to-be Sun TV personality.” 

Well the sun rose on Mr. Levant’s new television career this 

week, Mr. Speaker, but his opposition to the work of human 

rights commissions is as fierce as the day is long. From his days 

as an opponent of the Alberta Human Rights Commission, Mr. 

Levant’s even gone on to write a whole book, Mr. Speaker, 

called Shakedown, continuing his campaign against the work of 

human rights commissions which he says are “selling an 

obsolete product as part of a grievance industry. The battle for 

equality just isn’t as urgent any more,” writes Mr. Levant, 

calling human rights commissions “the biggest threat to our 

core liberties.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to accept government assurances on Bill 

160 when its abolition of human rights tribunals is being 

cheered on by a Sun TV personality who doesn’t want another 

Human Rights Commission case to see the light of day. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Volunteer Medal Awards 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday, 

while the Volunteer Awards were on, the members from 

Saskatoon Eastview and the Saskatoon Nutana were mumbling 

and complaining away, Mr. Speaker. And fact is they even sent 

the Premier a note complaining about the recipients, Mr. 

Speaker, and their constituencies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan government in 1995, the former 

administration, set up the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medals 

Awards, and there are public calls for nominations. Individuals 

only may be nominated, Mr. Speaker, and any individual and 

group from across the province may nominate someone for 

selection. And that selection is made, Mr. Speaker, by the 

Saskatchewan Honours Advisory Council. 

 

Well yesterday the member from Saskatoon Eastview put in a 

written question asking, who are those members on that 

advisory committee? So I’d like to read out the list: Mitchell 

Holash from Prince Albert, former Chair of the Police 

Commission and member of the Arts Board; Elisabeth Hugel, 

Mr. Speaker, from Regina, who’s the registrar of the protocols 

and honours committee; Elva Kyle, Mr. Speaker, from Regina, 

spouse of former Justice Kyle; Lester Lafond, First Nations 

businessman and Saskatchewan Order of Merit recipient; 

Justice Robert Laing, Mr. Speaker; Fredrick Mantey, the 

cabinet secretary; Linda McIntyre who is the secretary for the 

honours committee, Mr. Speaker; Carol Peterson who is a 

recipient; Oren Robison, Order of Canada recipient; Dr. Vianne 

Timmons from the U of R [University of Regina]; and Art 

Wakabayashi, former chancellor, U of R. 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Contract Negotiations with Health Care Workers 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, today we’re joined by a 

group of health science professionals in the Speaker’s gallery. 



7364 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2011 

And, Mr. Speaker, they’re here today for two main reasons. 

One, because in their area of profession, they have a number of 

shortages right across the province. And also because they’re 

dealing with a government that simply isn’t moving to get a 

proper contract in place. We also know, we also know that the 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would ask the members 

in the gallery . . . Order. Order. Order. I would ask the members 

in the gallery, while you’re invited to be here, you’re asked not 

to participate in the debate. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, the 

members of the Health Sciences Association, a professional 

group, are here today because there’s a shortage in many areas 

that they represent, and also because of a lack of a contract for a 

long period of time. 

 

And what we’re saying, Mr. Speaker, is that the example of 

respiratory therapists, respiratory therapists in this province, we 

have in this province . . . Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, obviously a 

sensitive point to the members opposite. But, Mr. Speaker, in 

the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would think the 

members would like to hear the question coming from their 

colleague. I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the respiratory therapists, 

for example, who are represented here today, in their area of 

profession they are represented by the lowest number per capita 

of any province in Canada. And these are the men and women 

who help the critically ill patients, critically ill patients with 

their breathing. 

 

In light of the fact that we have this shortage and we have a 

group of professional health caregivers who are without a 

contract for a long period of time, Mr. Speaker, when will this 

government come to realize that you’re going to have to pay a 

reasonable salary in order to attract and retain employees in this 

area going into the future? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I’ve asked the members in the gallery not to 

participate. I would appreciate if the members would respect the 

rules of the Legislative Chamber. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, we know that this province is blessed with many 

health care professionals that work 24-7, 365 days a year, Mr. 

Speaker, that provide excellent service throughout the whole 

province, Mr. Speaker. Whether it’s from the south to the north, 

east and west, Mr. Speaker, we’re blessed with very strong and 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. It would probably be 

appropriate to allow the minister to share his response so that 

the members in the gallery can hear. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — As I said, we are blessed with very 

capable and competent health care workers, health care 

professionals throughout the province. Mr. Speaker, right now 

the Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations is in 

contract negotiations with one of the last health care providers 

that hasn’t settled in the province, Mr. Speaker. I would ask 

both of those parties to stay talking and find a common 

agreement, Mr. Speaker, a common agreement that has been 

found in most every other health care provider organization in 

the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the last three and a half years we’ve come to an 

agreement with Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. We’ve come to 

an agreement with CUPE [Canadian Union of Public 

Employees]. We’ve come to an agreement with SEIU-West 

[Service Employees International Union]. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 

come to an agreement with SGEU [Saskatchewan Government 

and General Employees’ Union], most recently with PAIRS 

[Professional Association of Internes and Residents of 

Saskatchewan], Mr. Speaker, and with the SMA [Saskatchewan 

Medical Association], all at competitive wages. I don’t believe 

that it’ll be any different than with the Health Sciences, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the area of shortages in the 

specialized care is putting Saskatchewan families and members 

of families at risk in this province. And we need only look back 

a few short months ago when four babies became critically ill at 

the Royal University Hospital in Saskatoon. Why? Because the 

wrong prescriptions were given to these children. And in fact 

the VP [vice-president] of clinical operations agreed that that 

was because of a lack of staff and outdated facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is this: in light of the 

fact that in the past two years we have a cut of 18 pharmacists 

at hospitals in this province and in light of the fact that we have 

enough money — there’s a lot money for CEOs, in fact up to 60 

per cent — why is it that we can’t hire more pharmacists in 

hospital and give a proper contract to these workers who are 

here today? 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’m just going to remind 

the members in the gallery . . . Order. If our guests continue to 

not heed to the rules of the Legislative Assembly, we’re going 

to have to ask our guests to leave. Order. Order. Order. I’ve 

already asked, I’ve already reminded the members. The 

Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, I 

can’t start negotiations on the floor of the Assembly. But what I 

would say, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the whole 

complement of health care providers that we have in the 

province, Mr. Speaker, according to CIHI [Canadian Institute of 

Health Information] we have the highest number of health care 

workers combined per capita for Western Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our goal as government has been to make sure that 



April 20, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7365 

we have the proper complement. So we set targets for many of 

the health care providers, and we’ve met those targets, Mr. 

Speaker. It is a far cry from where we were just three short 

years ago, Mr. Speaker, where the NDP simply turned their 

back on health care workers year in and year out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Many of the unions said that they were absolutely ignored by 

the NDP. That isn’t the case with this government, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve worked on contracts with many of the health care 

providers, tens of thousands of people have settled contracts, as 

high as 95 per cent acceptance rate, Mr. Speaker. We believe 

that will be the case. We sure hope that’s the case with the 

Health Sciences union as we move forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell the minister this, 

that the members of the professional service who are here today 

feel very much ignored by this government. And I’ll tell you 

that they are going to deal with this government in a harsh way 

at the first opportunity. 

 

My question to the minister is this, Mr. Speaker: when it comes 

to competitive salaries, competitive salaries in this province we 

know that, even within the context of Western Canada, that the 

wages paid to our professional health service union people is 

not accurately reflected in the wages that are being offered. And 

in fact not only in Saskatchewan does there . . . any competitive 

area of responsibility occurring. 

 

In Swift Current last week, for example, speech pathologists 

were offered in the Department of Education, $75,000 plus a 

$20,000 signing bonus. That’s the same as health services gets 

for a master’s program at the highest level they can get — 

$75,000. Not even in this province are the employees in the 

health service union and health service professionals being paid 

properly. They’re not competitive in Western Canada. And I 

ask the minister when we will bring competitiveness to bear. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said in my 

previous answer, when you look at the tens of thousands of 

people that we have settled with over the last three and a half 

years, whether it’s been CUPE, whether it’s been SGEU, the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association, Mr. Speaker, all those 

contracts have been competitive with Western Canada. They are 

based on Western Canada averages, Mr. Speaker. I would think 

that pretty much all of them are at the 90th percentile. Some 

that are hard to recruit, some that are hard to recruit, Mr. 

Speaker, are even above the 90th percentile, Mr. Speaker. 

Out-of-scope has been at the 65th percentile. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have settled with tens of thousands of health 

care workers, Mr. Speaker, because they’re valuable in this 

province and, Mr. Speaker, I believe SAHO [Saskatchewan 

Association of Health Organizations] and the Health Sciences 

will find a common agreement that will see those wages 

competitive with Western Canada. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, on March 16th in the House 

the minister claimed, and I quote, “We haven’t met every wage 

in Alberta . . . but I can tell you it’s fair and competitive . . . if 

we’re not number one, we may be number two but not far 

behind number one.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s just not accurate, and the minister knows 

that. In fact, of the 26 health science professions, 16 of these 

groups will not be receiving equitable wages even if they accept 

the proposed increase that’s being offered to them. Sixteen of 

the 26 will not be at a level that their own website shows as 

being the Western standard. And if we look at EMS [emergency 

medical services] workers in Saskatchewan, they will be dead 

last in Western Canada if they accept the offer on the table. 

 

My question to the minister is this: at a time when you’re 

offering up 30, 40, 60 per cent to CEOs, based on how much 

they cut in health care, why isn’t the same applied to those men 

and women — mainly women — who give excellent service to 

the people of this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, the Health 

Sciences union that is still outstanding with a contract is 

negotiating with SAHO, Mr. Speaker, and they look at all the 

various professions, Mr. Speaker, and look at market 

adjustment. They look at supply and demand, Mr. Speaker, 

what is hard to recruit, which ones are hard to recruit, which 

ones aren’t. Mr. Speaker, all of those factors are put in place 

when negotiations take place. It wouldn’t be up to me to make 

those wage offers, obviously, on the floor of the Assembly. I 

haven’t in any of the other contracts, Mr. Speaker. SAHO has 

come to an agreement with tens of thousands of workers, Mr. 

Speaker, that have ratified at very high percentage rates, Mr. 

Speaker. I will say that. I believe it was CUPE at 95 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, once the union decides that it would take it to the 

membership, for the most part as far as we have seen, it has 

been very well accepted. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Security of Health Information 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The people 

of Saskatchewan take their health privacy very, very seriously, 

Mr. Speaker, and they take it very seriously when there’s a 

breach of health information in this province, Mr. Speaker. Last 

night we had the Information and Privacy Commissioner before 

committee, Mr. Speaker, and he clearly indicated that there is 

one impediment to improving the practice of providing security 

for these health documents in our province, Mr. Speaker, and 

that’s the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the last several years, last three years in 

particular, the Information and Privacy Commissioner has 

asked for additional investigators in order to investigate claims 

of breaches of privacy that are upon the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and each and every 

time those requests for additional funds to hire additional 

investigators have been turned down, Mr. Speaker. That will 



7366 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2011 

cost only $250,000. Would the government commit today for 

that $250,000 to hire the three investigators? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the citizens 

of this province share the member’s opposite concern, as do I, 

when there is breaches of privacy. I can imagine nothing more 

sensitive to an individual than their personal health records. 

 

Earlier this year, we approved an additional two temporary 

investigators to work within the Office of the Information and 

Privacy Commissioner. Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, in the 

last few days we have indicated that, through the ministries of 

Health and Justice, we will provide additional resources, either 

on a contract basis or directly through the ministries, to ensure 

that there are additional investigators and prosecutors to ensure 

that, where appropriate, prosecutions can take place. 

 

The citizens of this province have every right to expect that 

their records will be kept confidential, and it is the goal of this 

government to ensure that. During the previous government’s 

administration, there was records that went astray. It shouldn’t 

have happened. No prosecutions took place. Under our tenure 

we are going to ensure that every investigation is completed 

fully, completely, and appropriately, and prosecutions take 

place where they should. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. If 

people want to review Hansard last night, they’ll find out that 

those breaches occurred only after the election of the new 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk about the seriousness of 

the situation we face. On March 23rd, more than 100,000 pieces 

of individual health information were found in a dumpster, Mr. 

Speaker — more than 100,000 pieces of personal health 

information, perhaps the greatest breach in the history of this 

province for sure, maybe in this entire country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a serious issue. Serious steps need to be taken 

to stop these types of breaches from occurring. Since that date 

four additional breaches have occurred. Mr. Speaker, we need 

to prosecute those responsible. Will the government commit 

today, without any hesitation, that they will prosecute those 

responsible for these files being in a dumpster, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have a prosecutorial 

standard. If these files meet that standard — and we will do 

everything we can to look carefully and make sure whether they 

do — but if they do, if they meet the appropriate standard, we 

will ensure that those prosecutions take place. So the simple 

answer is, subject to the usual prosecutorial guidelines, yes. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the Information and Privacy 

Commissioner made it clear last night that there are cases he’s 

sent forward that should have, in the minds of himself and 

others, been prosecuted, Mr. Speaker. Those prosecutions never 

occurred, Mr. Speaker. So where is the problem in our system 

that continues to allow violations of our health information 

privacy Act, Mr. Speaker? It’s in the office of the Minister of 

Justice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’ll ask the Minister of Justice one more 

time: is he going to take the protection of the privacy of 

Saskatchewan citizens seriously, and is he going to forward to 

prosecution this situation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, prior to our government, 

our party forming government, we’ve always taken privacy, 

we’ve supported the work of the Privacy Commissioner. Mr. 

Speaker, that group of people did not increase the resources of 

the Privacy Commissioner. We have. We have provided 

additional resources, and, Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, we 

have provided the resources of the Ministry of Justice and the 

Ministry of Health. 

 

We have written letters to the trustees that hold this 

information. We and they take it seriously. They should all take 

it very seriously because they are in very serious danger of 

being prosecuted for this, Mr. Speaker. We are trying to get a 

message to everybody that has personal health care information, 

that it does not belong in a dumpster, Mr. Speaker. There are 

appropriate and proper places for those things to be kept, and 

we expect those trustees to do it. If they fail, if they fall below 

that standard, prosecutions will ensue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Issues in Health Care 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday Charlene Sullivan was 

here asking the minister to honour a promise he made in his 

office in front of witnesses to cover her dental implants. In the 

rotunda, the minister said he can’t make policy in his office. He 

also said, “We can only cover people who apply.” At the same 

time, Mr. Speaker, his senior staff was phoning a patient telling 

him to send his application and he would get coverage for his 

implants. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how can the minister stand in the rotunda talking 

about Charlene Sullivan’s case, saying he can’t make policy in 

his office, when at the same time his senior department staff is 

phoning a patient telling him he will be covered; he just has to 

apply. Why the double standard? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in the House 

yesterday and I said out in the rotunda, after we looked at the 

policy, we realized the policy wasn’t consistent with other 

provinces. We’ve changed that policy, Mr. Speaker. What I 

found out is that some of the people that had lobbied for this 



April 20, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7367 

very policy change had not had either their dental surgeon or 

themselves apply to test the new policy to see what would 

happen with the new policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in fact one of the persons that had lobbied had told 

us after that the dentist himself, the dental surgeon said, you 

don’t need to apply; it won’t be approved. Mr. Speaker, we’re 

asking people that have lobbied to apply, Mr. Speaker. We’ll 

put it through the criteria. People within the ministry will look 

and see whether it should be covered. 

 

We cover congenital defects, Mr. Speaker, as well as tumour 

removal. That’s when implants are put in, Mr. Speaker. But we 

have professionals within the ministry that will adjudicate those 

applications based on the policy that we changed. It certainly 

wasn’t ever changed under the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, Doug Bonderud was diagnosed 

with cancer and treated unsuccessfully with medication. He 

looked for other surgery options in Canada but because of long 

wait-lists went to the Mayo Clinic without a referral for surgery. 

In 2008 the minister ordered that Mr. Bonderud’s 

out-of-province expenses be covered. 

 

Ed Tchorzewski was diagnosed with cancer and couldn’t get 

surgery in Saskatchewan. He looked around Canada for other 

surgery options but because of long wait times, went to the 

Mayo Clinic without a referral for surgery. The minister is 

refusing to pay for Mr. Tchorzewski’s out-of-country medical 

expenses. The difference between these cases is that Crystal 

Bonderud was in a Sask Party 2007 election ad. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how can he stand in his place and 

say he follows policy when he continues to change it on the fly 

for political gain without not even a semblance of fairness? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when we came to 

government, we reviewed the out-of-country coverage for 

people that seek medical procedures outside of country. We 

reviewed that. It was the same policy that was in place under 

the NDP. We’ve looked at that and we’ve moved on it to have a 

medical review services review committee that will look at that 

as an appeal process. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what the member opposite, what the critic 

opposite failed to say in her question, Mr. Speaker, is that in the 

Crystal Bonderud case, which went to the Ombudsman, the 

Ombudsman ruled that the government should cover the cost, 

Mr. Speaker. In the Tchorzewski case, Mr. Speaker, it went to 

the Ombudsman and the Ombudsman said that it shouldn’t be 

covered, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been very consistent . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask the members to allow 

the minister to respond to the question presented by their 

colleague. I recognize the minister who may want to complete 

his comments. 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been very 

consistent with the rulings. When the Ombudsman steps in, and 

he doesn’t step in very often, we have great respect for his 

office. That’s why we follow through on recommendations that 

he’s put forward. And also, when he recommends, for example, 

that perhaps the ministry in a certain case should cover 

expenses, we’ve followed through on that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In this case that they’re citing, the Ombudsman was notified 

and there is a letter saying that he doesn’t feel that this should 

be covered, Mr. Speaker. We followed along with that. The 

ministry also agrees that this was a case where out-of-country 

approval — prior approval — was not sought. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the procedures that were under the NDP were followed 

as they were under our government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is consistently 

inconsistent. Last year, the minister threw together some policy 

and promises because he was facing citizens who had real 

dental problems and special circumstances. He promised them 

he would fix it, but in fact they were empty promises. 

 

He has proven that he picks and chooses who he will cover for 

out-of-country cancer surgery, based on political gain, and that 

he will reward health region CEOs with up to 60 per cent wage 

increases for cutting services while he turns his back on 

front-line health care workers asking for a fair and respectful 

contract. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in light of the minister’s broken promises, 

disregard for front-line health care professionals and 

fly-by-night policies, why would anyone believe anything he 

says about Kamsack Hospital, Wakaw Hospital, long-term care 

beds, or doctor recruitment? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, that was quite a 

wide-ranging question, Mr. Speaker, but what I will say is that 

the government that has been in place for three and a half years, 

Mr. Speaker, have made commitments. They’ve set targets, Mr. 

Speaker, something that the former government would never 

do. 

 

When we said, Mr. Speaker, we’d attract 800 more nurses to 

this province, this government has done it, Mr. Speaker. When 

we said we’d increase the number of medical seats to 100 seats, 

this government has done it, Mr. Speaker. When we said we’d 

increase the number of residency positions to 120, Mr. Speaker, 

this government has done it, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when 

we said we’d cover Avastin because it was a standard of care 

for cancer patients in this province, which that government 

turned its back on, this government covered it. Mr. Speaker, I’ll 

take no lessons from the former government. They’re going to 

be in those benches for a very, very long time because, Mr. 

Speaker, they were scared to set targets because, as the member 

from North Battleford said, we just wouldn’t meet them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 



7368 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2011 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, what this minister has done to the 

people of Saskatchewan has confused them. They don’t know 

what are the policies of this government. It depends on what the 

minister is feeling at the moment, who comes here, who talks to 

him, who appears in an ad. It appears that the minister has no 

policy. No one can actually say they understand what the 

criteria are. Dental surgeons don’t understand. They think it’s 

simply just to oil the squeaking wheel, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then when the squeaking wheel goes away, the minister 

just forgets what he’s promised and does nothing, and stands in 

this House and rants and rants till he’s red in the face, and it 

does not impress anybody. People from Kamsack that were here 

yesterday, Mr. Speaker, they saw that, those antics. They do not 

believe this minister. They do not believe he’ll fix anything in 

Kamsack or Wakaw. Why would anyone else in this province 

believe anything he says any more? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when citizens came to 

this province, Mr. . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when citizens came to 

this legislature that were having trouble with certain policies, 

not only did we say we’d look at it, Mr. Speaker; this 

government changed those policies. Mr. Speaker, when it 

comes to dental implants, we’ve improved the policy that was 

. . . under 16 years of government, that never looked at it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the old NDP, Mr. Speaker, hospitals were 

closed throughout this province. I forget how many. Does 

anybody remember? Fifty-two hospitals, including the Plains 

hospital, was closed under that government. And I know the 

critic always says, nobody cares about that any more. Come 

with me out with to rural Saskatchewan; we’ll show you who 

cares, Mr. Speaker. In fact every one of these MLAs could take 

that member out and show you who cares about who closed 

those hospitals. And it was under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. I can 

tell you rural Saskatchewan and urban Saskatchewan will never 

go back to that government again. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of the House 

Services Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on House Services 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on House Services to report that it has considered 

certain estimates and to present its 12th report. And I would 

move: 

 

That the 12th report of the Standing Committee on House 

Services be now concurred in. 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Chair of the House Services 

Committee has moved: 

 

That the 12th report of the Standing Committee on House 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 166, The 

Renewable Diesel Act without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Government Deputy 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I request leave to waive consideration 

in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill be now 

read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Government House Leader has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 166, The Renewable Diesel Act without 

amendment and that the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 166 — The Renewable Diesel Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Enterprise that Bill No. 166, The Renewable 

Diesel Act be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

 



April 20, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7369 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Private Bills. 

 

Standing Committee on Private Bills 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Private Bills to report private Bill No. 

906, The Bethany College Amendment Act, 2011 without 

amendment and to present its 11th report. I move: 

 

That the 11th report on the Standing Committee on Private 

Bills be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It’s been moved by the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Private Bills: 

 

That the 11th report of the Standing Committee on Private 

Bills be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from 

Martensville. 

 

Ms. Heppner: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 906, The Bethany College 

Amendment Act, 2011, and that the Bill be now read a third 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Martensville has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 906, The Bethany College Amendment Act, 2011 and that 

the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I now ask the member to move third reading 

of the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 906 — The Bethany College Amendment Act, 2011 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 

Martensville that Bill No. 906, The Bethany College 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney may state 

his point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today 

during question period I saw something in this Assembly that I 

hoped I would never see, Mr. Speaker, an attempt by the 

Government House Leader to both intimidate members of the 

public and members of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, in an action 

that he carried out in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. He acted in a 

manner that would, that would be considered to be 

inappropriate, Mr. Speaker, threatening, Mr. Speaker, and 

people believe that this type of behaviour is unacceptable within 

our society. 

 

We need to lead by example in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the Government House Leader has no right to in any 

way involve members of the general public in the debate on this 

floor. He has no right to make a gesture that would intimidate 

any member of the public or any member of this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s totally, totally inappropriate. 

 

Members on this side of the Assembly take offence to that 

behaviour, as do members of the public, Mr. Speaker. That type 

of behaviour is not acceptable behaviour within this Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that you rule on 

this gesture, which I’m sure you saw as all members of the 

Assembly saw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we saw the member make a gesture that could be 

considered like cutting somebody’s throat, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

inappropriate to go across your chest and throat and put your 

finger out, Mr. Speaker. It is not an appropriate gesture. It’s not 

an appropriate gesture in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, we’re not playing 

baseball in this Assembly either, and for members to make 

funny of that type of gesture in this Assembly just tells you the 

nature of the members, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask that you rule on the appropriateness of 

that behaviour within this Assembly. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington, the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I did not make 

the gesture that the Opposition House Leader contends that I 

did. But if I made any gesture that offended anyone, I 

apologize, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I thank the member for apologizing. I will 



7370 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2011 

also remind members of the importance of respecting the rules 

of the Assembly and also indicate that it’s not always possible 

for the Speaker to be aware of what’s going on. Most times 

when a question is being placed, I’m listening to and observing 

the person who’s on the floor, and same with the response. So I 

thank the member from Cannington for apologizing to the 

Assembly. Order. Order. Order. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 172 — The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 

2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les victimes 

d’actes criminels 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 

2011. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of this government’s priorities is to ensure the 

justice system provides adequate focus on and support for 

victims of crime. Leadership in providing that support comes 

through our police-based victim services programs and from 

our victim services providers throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

The Ministry of Justice and Attorney General provides funding 

for 18 police-based victim services programs. The staff and 

workers in these programs work closely with the police and 

assist victims in the immediate aftermath of a crime or a tragedy 

and throughout the criminal justice process. The services 

offered include crisis intervention, information, support, and 

referrals to other specialized programs and services. Services 

are provided by staff and a team of volunteer victim support 

workers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these victims services providers must be able to 

determine who has been the victim of a crime so that they can 

provide them with the support that they need. That is why this 

Bill amends The Victims of Crime Act to establish a requirement 

that police must disclose to designated local victims service 

providers certain limited identification information about a 

victim. This applies to members of the RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police] acting under a provincial policing contract as 

well as municipal police officers. 

 

These amendments seek to address a disclosure issue that has 

arisen with the RCMP across Canada. Despite the RCMP’s 

support of timely delivery of local victim services, they need 

greater local clarification that this information can legally be 

disclosed for this specific purpose. Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, 

this Bill will expressly authorize the limited release of victim 

information to designated victims services providers as named 

by minister’s order. 

 

To be designated under this section, the person must be engaged 

in the delivery of police-based victims services. The privacy 

rights of the victim will be carefully safeguarded. The 

information provided by police will be restricted to contact 

information and the limited incident information necessary to 

allow victims services to contact the victim to determine 

whether they would consent to any victims services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act specifically limits the purposes for which 

the information may be used to firstly contacting the victim and 

secondly providing or facilitating victims services. If an 

individual declines these services, no further contact will be 

made. The designated victims services provider will be required 

to destroy the information that was required under this Act. 

 

This legislation is being brought forward at the 

recommendation of our victims services branch following 

consultation with the police-based victims services units, the 

Saskatchewan Association of Police Affiliated Victim Services 

Inc., Saskatchewan-based RCMP community policing 

representatives, and the policing services division of the 

Ministry of Corrections, Policing and Public Safety. 

 

On the national level, Saskatchewan is co-chairing with 

officials from Public Safety Canada the working group on 

RCMP referrals to victims services as struck by the 

federal-provincial-territorial deputy ministers’ response for 

Justice to work with the RCMP to identify solutions to resolve 

this issue. This proposal follows the approach adopted in 

Newfoundland and Labrador, and it is being considered as a 

model in all Canadian provincial and territorial jurisdictions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is strongly of the view that the 

justice system must protect victims while it seeks to punish 

criminals. I know our provincial policing services share this 

view, and I am hopeful that all members of the Assembly will 

support this Bill to ensure that victims can receive the services 

that they need. Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The 

Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 172, The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 

2011. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise and make comments on the Bill that’s before the 

House, The Victims of Crime Act, 1995. Mr. Speaker, I think 

many people take a particular interest when any changes are 

being made to this Act because we all recognize that the 

services provided to victims through victim services, and the 

absolutely wonderful, dedicated people that work in this area 

throughout the province have had a huge, positive impact on the 

lives of many. In many cases, Mr. Speaker, I wonder how on 

earth they perform their duty with such dedication because it 

has to be very heart-wrenching at times, very difficult at other 

times. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when any changes come before the Assembly, 

when it looks at this Act and making changes to this Act, I’m 

sure there will be a great deal of scrutiny that’s put forward. Mr. 

Speaker, I appreciate the comments from the minister, gave a 

bit of an overview of what the changes are and the new section 

2.2. I guess in the short title, we also have the addition of 

“Victims’ Information”, which really, from the minister’s 

comments, lays out the gist of all of the changes that are being 



April 20, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7371 

proposed and put forward. And it clarifies victims’ information, 

who the designated persons are that it can be released to — 

police officer. It defines victim in this case. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I have gone through most of this legislation, 

but I guess the difficulty for me, Mr. Speaker, I always need to 

look at it in context of the total Act. I was actually in the 

process of doing that this morning. There is a couple of 

questions I have in the last definition, when we are under part 

III, compensation for victims, interpretations of part, and it’s 

13(1), Mr. Speaker. There was some changes that are made in 

the definition of victim in that section in part III. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I wanted to do a bit more research there and see how it 

fits in and the references that are made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know, as the minister said, you always need to 

be making adjustments and various changes to be updated and 

current, and we also know that there is a real concern amongst 

the public as for privacy. And victims’ information would fall, I 

think, into that category as to how it’s being used, who it’s 

being released to, and how far that information will travel. 

 

I know the minister touched on the fact that if not used or if 

there is a refusal of service from what is offered from victims 

services that the information needs to be destroyed. Mr. 

Speaker, it is an issue that’s very topical in the province, not 

only in the province of Saskatchewan but beyond. And we have 

to be ever vigilant when we are dealing with people’s personal 

information. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, at this point in time, there’s a bit more 

research that has to be done. We have to look at how the 

proposed changes fit within the Act as a whole, get a better 

understanding of the implication of the changes being proposed. 

So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would adjourn debate on The 

Victims of Crime Act changes proposed in Bill No. 172. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 172, The Victims of 

Crime Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 167 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 167 — The 

Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 
be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

relatively short piece of legislation, Bill No. 167, on The 

Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Act. And I guess as short 

and, you know, questionably sweet or sour as it is, Mr. Speaker, 

there have been some fairly wise things said about it by 

different of my colleagues on this side of the House in the 

preceding debate on this legislation. 

 

Now this legislation is brought forward under the guise of 

helping out shortline rail industry and the way that that gives 

producers additional control over transportation and grain 

handling issues which is certainly a laudable goal, Mr. Speaker. 

In the minister’s speech, he talked about the kind of advances 

that have been made for shortline rail over the past decade, and 

again those are certainly laudable things. 

 

But in the remarks that the minister made in his speech on the 

Bill, he talked about the need to establish “. . . legislative 

authority to undertake the short-line sustainability grant 

program, develop other initiatives in the future, and better 

position the corporation to respond to the needs of rural 

Saskatchewan.” Again all laudable goals. And this can be found 

within April 6th, 2011, page 7122 of Hansard. 

 

But the thing that’s interesting about this, Mr. Speaker, is that 

certainly that program existed the year previously, and there’s 

an attendant increase in the amount of funds that are available 

for this program, moving from 500,000 to 700,000. But the idea 

that they need to establish legislative authority to administer 

that program is not the complete picture because of course the 

legislative authority existed the year previous to administer the 

shortline sustainability grant program the year before. 

 

What’s different in this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, is that 

it moves it into the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation itself, 

so out of executive government and into the Saskatchewan 

Grain Car Corporation. So what does that do to the 

expenditure? And what does that do with the FTEs [full-time 

equivalent] that are attached, the full-time equivalents that are 

attached, the employees that are attached to the administration 

of this program? 

 

Well again, Mr. Speaker, it would seem to look, from where I 

sit in this legislature, that this is more a matter of imaginative or 

so-called innovative financing on the part of this government 

over there, where you move things out of executive government 

and into a Crown corporation. And for all the critique that we 

heard from members opposite about Crown corporations over 

the years, turns out they’re very big fans of Crown corporations 

because they’ve cottoned on to the idea that this can help them 

manage the appearance of what debt the public is on the hook 

for and what number of employees are working for the province 

of Saskatchewan. So it’s hard not to think that this is more 

about managing the appearance of public debt, the appearance 

of public employee numbers than it is about establishing 

legislative authority because of course, Mr. Speaker, this 

program was administered the year previous, and now it’s being 

shunted into the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation. 

 

And again as has been referenced a number of times in this 

debate, Mr. Speaker, the member from Wakamow, Moose Jaw 

Wakamow, the Deputy Leader of the Official Opposition, 

referenced what had happened in 1992 in this province when 

the Financial Management Review Commission made its 

report, more commonly known as the Gass Commission for 

Donald Gass who headed up the efforts of the commission. And 



7372 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2011 

of course, Mr. Gass had been commissioned to get a clear 

picture of what had happened over the 1980s with the people’s 

books. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And one of the things that he drew attention to was the way that 

the government of that day — the then Grant Devine 

Progressive Conservative administration — the way that they 

had juggled the books and the way that they had shifted 

expenditures from executive government and the General 

Revenue Fund off into the Crown corporations. And in trying to 

get the different Crown corporations back on track and to get an 

accurate and manageable and an acceptable situation according 

to the public accounting rules of the day, there were a number 

of corporations that had a great amount of money written off, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And by written off, I don’t mean that it magically disappeared. 

It was that these financial activities that have been undertaken 

by different corporations, Crown corporations of the 

government, were then shifted onto the debt load under the 

General Revenue Fund so that, again, you could get a proper 

picture of what the debit picture of the province was. 

 

But in the ’92-93 budget, there was $713 million where the then 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation had debt 

written off and applied to the General Revenue Fund supported 

debt. There was $182 million from the Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation again transferred from that corporation onto the 

General Revenue Fund to bring it in line with acceptable 

accounting practices. And there were $36 million that were 

taken from the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation’s books 

and put onto the General Revenue Fund. 

 

Now again, Mr. Speaker, 1991 was the first election that I was 

able to cast a ballot in the election. And the problem with what 

happened in the 1980s was that we had a lot of activity that 

went on that when it came time to pay the cheque, there was a 

grinding debt that had been accrued. And when the final tab 

came in and when a clear picture was finally amassed, that 

meant for some very difficult decisions to be made over the 

1990s. That made for a very difficult reality where you had 

more money being put into the deficit in supporting the debt 

than was being spent on education at the time, Mr. Speaker. So 

that’s what the Gass Commission held out in terms of what was 

proper financial activity for the Saskatchewan Grain Car 

Corporation and other Crown corporation entities at the time. 

 

And now we see this government once again moving back 

down this road. And of course it’s relatively early in the game 

for this kind of activity, Mr. Speaker, as is put forward in this 

legislation. It involves the $700,000 of the shortline rail 

assistance program. 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, they had that authority before to 

administer it under the ministry, but of course then it had to be 

counted as part of government debt. The members opposite, in 

terms of their disdain for summary financial statements and 

their need to manage the image of these things, is taking a 

program that they had the legislative authority for and shifting it 

off into the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation. 

 

So it’s not about being able to conduct new activity, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s about conducting what had been going on in a new 

way. And that new way happens to coincide with the way that 

they can manage the appearance of debt and the appearance of 

the employees that are under the hire of the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So I guess that’s again, underneath the laudable goals that are 

put forward on the top of this legislation, at the front end of this 

legislation, it’s always very interesting to see what the gap is, 

what the cognitive dissonance is between what is the stated 

intent by the members opposite and the way that this plays out 

on the ground. 

 

And the way that this plays out, as far as I can tell, Mr. Speaker, 

is more about issue management or image management for the 

debt and deficit that the people of Saskatchewan are responsible 

for and the way that government employees are counted and the 

ways that the members opposite can then shoehorn different of 

these rearranged situations into saying, you know, we’ve 

completed the four-by-four civil servant reduction, or that, look 

we’ve reduced debt. Well if you reduce debt on the one hand, 

Mr. Speaker, and rack it up on the other and the people are still 

responsible for it, it’s still a responsibility of the people of 

Saskatchewan. And you should at least be straight with the 

people about that responsibility. 

 

So I believe that I’ve got other colleagues that wish to 

participate in this debate, Mr. Speaker, and as such I will 

conclude my remarks on this legislation at this time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

this afternoon to join in on Bill No. 167, An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we’re dealing with an Act of this nature and 

talking about agricultural production and the ways that 

producers ship the items and the product that they grow to 

different markets all over the world, Mr. Speaker, certainly this 

piece of legislation is relevant. And it’s an important discussion 

for us to have in this Assembly. And, Mr. Speaker, we have to 

think also of the history that we have in this province as being 

the breadbasket, as it’s been referred to. I remember as a child 

being told that line in the school, and it’s important to think of 

our history of agriculture in the province and the way that it has 

evolved and changed over the years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s important to also realize and recognize the very 

important role that agriculture continues to play in our province, 

as it is the basis for many families as they make their existence. 

It’s the basis of many jobs, of many industries that are 

associated with the agricultural sector. And it’s a means of 

bringing prosperity to Saskatchewan families; it’s a means of 

bringing wealth to all citizens of the province. 

 

It’s a great source of pride for everyone in Saskatchewan, and 

it’s something we’re known for here at home and abroad, Mr. 

Speaker, because we know that the grains and the different 

items, Mr. Speaker, that are grown here on the prairies certainly 

do feed the world and are shipped everywhere across the world. 



April 20, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7373 

And it’s a very important industry for all Saskatchewan people. 

 

So when we think about the issue of the Saskatchewan Grain 

Car Corporation and when we look at possible changes to the 

corporation, we have to, Mr. Speaker, look at the changes in the 

context of what agriculture means to Saskatchewan and in the 

context of what Saskatchewan means to the world with respect 

to the products that are provided to many people all over the 

globe. But, Mr. Speaker, we have to of course also think of the 

actual producers, the farmers in our province that are involved 

in agriculture, those individuals who support their families and 

build their livelihoods here in the province through agriculture. 

 

And we know, Mr. Speaker, as we look at the landscape of 

Saskatchewan over the past few years, many farms have 

celebrated 100 years of existence, of family farms being passed 

from one generation to the next, and that’s a very, very proud 

thing for families that are associated with reaching that 

milestone in the history of their farming operation. 

 

And for members in this Assembly, whether they live on a farm 

or whether they are living in an urban environment, for the vast, 

vast majority of the members in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, we 

all have ties to agriculture, either directly — members who are 

engaged in agriculture — or individuals who have cousins, 

aunts and uncles, or are one generation off the farm. 

 

So when we’re dealing with issues to do with agriculture in 

Saskatchewan, it’s a very important issue, and I know that 

everyone in Saskatchewan most certainly recognizes that. 

 

When we look at perceptions of Saskatchewan, agriculture is 

often something the people will mention. And when you look at 

any calendar for Canada, often the photo that is identified for 

Saskatchewan is an agricultural landscape of some sort. And 

while I think that’s a wonderful thing, and many people 

recognize us for our agricultural achievements as a province, of 

course we know that Saskatchewan’s a very diverse province as 

well, and we’re not only agriculture. But that is not to in any 

way diminish the important role that agriculture has played in 

Saskatchewan and will continue to play in Saskatchewan for 

many, many years. 

 

So in looking at Bill No. 167, An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Act, Mr. Speaker, I 

approach it with the recognition that agriculture is very 

important to the province and that when we are making 

decisions and adjustments in the area of agriculture, it’s very 

important to keep in mind the proud history that we have and 

the bright future that we also have. 

 

In reading the minister’s second reading speech in the 

Assembly that he provided on April 6, 2011, the minister 

responsible for this amendment stated that: 

 

This Bill will give the Saskatchewan Grain Car 

Corporation the legislative authority to undertake the 

short-line sustainability grant program, develop other 

initiatives in the future, and better position the corporation 

to respond to the needs of rural Saskatchewan. With these 

legislative amendments, we are proposing to broaden the 

authority of the Grain Car commission to allow it to 

become more active in assisting the short-line railway 

industry in the province. 

 

And the minister of course went on in his second reading 

speech. 

 

In looking at the legislative changes itself, Mr. Speaker, they’re 

not overly lengthy as pieces of legislation go that come through 

this Assembly. One page and a bit are the proposed changes. So 

when I hear the minister’s explanation as to what this piece of 

legislation is supposed to accomplish, what the goals are, and 

what is its intent, and when we look at the actual piece of 

legislation, the amendment that is proposed, and it’s Bill 167, 

An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation 

Act, we might think that the changes being proposed by the 

minister aren’t perhaps overly substantial. That might be an 

initial impression someone might have if they simply look at 

the link of the legislation and some of the initial remarks of the 

minister. 

 

But as it is, Mr. Speaker, with many types of legislation and 

many pieces of legislation that we see here in the Assembly, it’s 

very important to look at the full picture. It’s very important to 

examine the piece of legislation and see what some of the 

implications may be. And these implications can be of different 

types, Mr. Speaker. They might be intended implications that 

aren’t explicitly stated in the piece of legislation or explicitly 

stated in the minister’s second reading speech or, Mr. Speaker, 

they could be unintended implications, implications that have 

not been thought out or thought of, and implications that might 

need to be learned only through further examination and 

through further scrutiny. And certainly that is the role of this 

Assembly. 

 

Once we’re into adjourned debates and we’re discussing a piece 

of legislation, we are able to raise some of the questions that 

people in Saskatchewan want to have asked, raise questions that 

we as opposition members think are appropriate. To raise 

questions and to ensure that when the government is proceeding 

with a piece of legislation, we need to ensure that the changes 

being suggested by a particular minister and by the government 

as a whole are in fact appropriate; that the changes that will 

come to pass are in fact desirable; and that the changes that are 

to come to pass are expected, they are the proposed intended 

changes that are to be accomplished through the legislation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when I look at Bill 167, An Act to amend 

The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Act, there are a few 

items, a few issues, Mr. Speaker, that do cause me to have a few 

questions that I think are appropriate to put on the public 

record. And I know, Mr. Speaker, it’s likely a debate that can 

continue and carry on in committee as well as we consider the 

implications of this particular piece of legislation. 

 

When we look at the Bill that is being suggested with respect to 

the changes, we look at: 

 

“Powers of corporation 

12 The corporation may: 

 

(a) [it says] acquire, by purchase, lease or otherwise, 

railway rolling stock suitable for the transportation of 

grain, commodities and other products. 

 



7374 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2011 

So, Mr. Speaker, we understand that this item clearly states 

what is to occur — the acquisition of railway stock suitable for 

the transportation of grain, commodities, and other products. 

 

When we look at the explanation, Mr. Speaker, that is provided 

with the legislation, which is standard form when pieces of 

legislation come into the Assembly: “Subsection 12(a) is a 

wording change intended to clarify that commodities other than 

agricultural products are hauled.” So what we see, Mr. Speaker, 

when it says grain commodities and other products, we see by 

the definition, Mr. Speaker, that this is an expansion of the 

types of materials that can be hauled as it is stated in the 

legislation. 

 

[15:00] 

 

So when we’re considering that change, when there’s an 

expansion, as the explanation would say, to commodities other 

than agricultural products, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to take 

that into recognition, understand what the implications may be 

for the industry, may be for the rail lines that are affected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also see that another change is that when we 

look in 12(b)(ii) it states, “the provision of consulting, 

management or administrative services to persons who are 

involved with the railway industry.” So we see an expansion 

here, Mr. Speaker, of the services that can be provided through 

consulting and management, and we see that is to the railway 

industry. 

 

So the question I have, Mr. Speaker, that may be to a smaller 

company operating a shortline or it could be, Mr. Speaker, to a 

much larger corporation. And I think that’s an important fact to 

take into consideration when we consider the types of supports 

and assistance that may be provided to different players within 

the industry. It says the railway industry, but it does not 

explicitly say which companies, which corporations, what is the 

scope, and what sorts of commitments might be provided, Mr. 

Speaker. So I know that too may be a concern for some. And it 

raises important questions that weren’t necessarily addressed in 

the minister’s second reading speech on this issue. 

 

Another component, Mr. Speaker, that we see in the legislative, 

or in the changes to the legislation, where under, on the second 

page of the legislation, under the title: 

 

“Powers of Corporation 

12 [it says] The corporation may: 

 

And if we go down to the letter (g), it says: 

 

subject to any orders or directives of Treasury Board, 

provide financial assistance by way of grant, loan, 

guarantee or other similar means to persons for the 

purpose of allowing those persons to acquire railway 

rolling stock, plant, equipment or other assets that will 

benefit the railway industry. 

 

So what we have here, Mr. Speaker, I think is the one of the 

most concerning aspects of this Bill with respect to the 

implications, either intended or unintended, that may exist 

within this legislation. It’s one of the most troubling aspects, I 

think, because what we have here, Mr. Speaker, is the provision 

within the legislation that allows the provincial government to 

basically provide financial assistance through a variety of 

means to the industry. 

 

And we know, Mr. Speaker, that from a government that is 

self-professed that it doesn’t want to pick winners and losers in 

business, we know, Mr. Speaker, that their track record 

indicates a very different approach when we look at the types of 

activities that they’re willing to support, who they’re willing to 

support, and when they’re willing to support these individuals. 

And while that talk may be convenient at various times, Mr. 

Speaker, we know that, based on actions that have been 

discussed in this Assembly, we know that they are more than 

prepared to follow a different approach. 

 

I know when I think of, Mr. Speaker, the assistance that 

government may provide to the private sector without openness, 

without transparency . . . In question period over the past week 

or so, we’ve talked about the tower development that is 

proposed in Regina, and we’ve learned that government plans 

on being a major tenant in the building and is willing to provide 

a 20-year, sign a 20-year arrangement with the corporation 

building that project, Mr. Speaker. But we don’t have a 

willingness from members opposite to provide the details, to 

provide the information, to give a clear explanation as to what 

extent the Saskatchewan taxpayer — every individual in this 

province, all the families who pay taxes, Mr. Speaker — no 

understanding of to what extent those individuals may in fact be 

on the hook at the end of the day. 

 

So when we see actions like that, Mr. Speaker, to me that is a 

concern because we know that the government is more than 

happy to have special deals with certain players that allow them 

to support people who they want to support. And it’s not always 

done, Mr. Speaker, in a way that is open, that is transparent, and 

that is in the way of all Saskatchewan people. And I think those 

are the questions that are appropriate to be asked, and it’s the 

role of the opposition to raise those concerns. 

 

So when we see in the actual piece of legislation where it says: 

 

subject to any orders or directives of Treasury Board, 

provide financial assistance by way of grant, loan, 

guarantee or other similar means to persons for the 

purpose of allowing those persons to acquire railway 

rolling stock, plant, equipment or other assets that will 

benefit the railway industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and when we read the explanation note, we see 

that subsection 12(g), it is stated that “. . . is a wording change 

to provide financial assistance to railways for acquisition of 

assets.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while the legislation may allow for the 

government to now take on debt, to funnel cash to certain 

projects, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan taxpayer, the 

Saskatchewan citizen is not left with a better understanding 

with respect to how much is going to flow with respect to 

financial resources, to which firms, to which companies it will 

flow, Mr. Speaker. We clearly saw in an earlier change when 

we talked about “the provision of consulting, management or 

administrative services to persons who are involved with the 

railway industry.” So a very large banner, so we don’t know the 



April 20, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7375 

size of the companies that will be assisted or the names of the 

companies that will be assisted. 

 

And now we also see, Mr. Speaker, that the government is 

willing to provide financial assistance to the railways in order 

to, I would assume, Mr. Speaker, allow them to provide a 

service. The catch is, Mr. Speaker, as we often see with respect 

to these types of arrangements, the government is often rather 

murky on the details. The government is often very, very 

cloudy when it comes to the openness and transparency that is 

needed in order to ensure that the Saskatchewan taxpayers’ 

interests, the citizens of this province are in fact being 

respected, are being treated well and that the deal is good for 

everyone in the province, not just a select few. And, Mr. 

Speaker, good for not just a select few companies, in order to 

ensure that it’s a level playing field for all companies. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, another example that we saw in recent days 

with respect to how the government is more than happy to 

create an uneven playing field for businesses in the province 

was something I raised yesterday in question period, Mr. 

Speaker, with the special Modus deal that occurred in Swift 

Current where we saw an initial tender that went out for a 

project, but then we saw the nature of the project with respect to 

the type of buildings that were being sought through the tender 

and we saw the scope of the project, Mr. Speaker, the number 

of units being provided through that tender increase 

substantially. I believe it was a 55 per cent increase, Mr. 

Speaker, from the original tender to what actually transpired at 

the end. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, if we are to treat businesses fairly in 

this province, it’s appropriate to have a tendering process that is 

honest with the businesses that are wanting to participate and go 

after government contracts. And what we saw in the instance in 

the Swift Current situation, we saw government choosing to 

have a tendering process that is not fair and does not create a 

level playing field for all Saskatchewan businesses. 

 

And that’s my concern, when we see government in this piece 

of legislation talking about providing grants, loans, guarantees 

“. . . or other similar means to persons for the purpose of 

allowing those persons to acquire railway rolling stock, plant, 

equipment or other assets will benefit the railway industry” and, 

Mr. Speaker, when we see just before that, in legislative 

changes, where it talks about the railway industry without 

providing the specifics of which companies may benefit in what 

areas, and what sort of connections that may exist, Mr. Speaker. 

Those are the types of concerns I have by simply allowing 

government to take an approach where they ask us to once 

again to simply trust them, that they will defend the public 

interest, that they will defend the public good. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we certainly recognize that agricultural 

producers in the province face many challenges. Mr. Speaker, 

weather in this time of year in various parts of the province, 

there are major concerns with moisture, with water that is 

occurring in Saskatchewan. And some areas had problems last 

year and some before that with the amount of water on their 

land, and things now are very saturated in some parts of the 

province, Mr. Speaker. And we know that that puts financial 

strains on farmers. And we know that with input costs seeming 

to always increase but rarely decrease, Mr. Speaker, we know 

that for many Saskatchewan farm families it’s more and more 

difficult for them to make ends meet and to carry on that 

tradition that is so proud in our province. 

 

When I talked about the milestone that many Saskatchewan 

farm families are reaching by having their farm reach 100 years 

of age and the ceremony that is attached with that, and the 

plaque or the marker that is available to farms with that, that’s a 

great and a positive thing, Mr. Speaker. But we do know that 

many Saskatchewan farm families are under pressure and have 

many concerns. And so that’s related to mother nature, creation, 

Mr. Speaker. And some of the things are unpredictable, whether 

that’s too much rain or too little rain. Mr. Speaker. It’s related 

to high input costs that many farmers have to wrestle with and 

make choices with respect to the decisions that they make on 

their farm. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we know that transportation costs are a 

major concern as well, whether that is access to rail. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we know the increased pressures that increased 

hauling and trucking on our roads does have for the 

infrastructure that we have in the province, that those are 

important things that need to be addressed, Mr. Speaker, as 

farmers are having to haul their grain longer and longer 

distances to different terminals, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we know that these are real concerns, and I believe that it is 

important to have leadership and the right kind of decisions 

made that does in fact make life easier, better, more viable, and 

more prosperous for Saskatchewan, for our families. I think 

that’s a very important thing, and I think that’s the approach 

that government ought to take. 

 

My concern is, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve seen with this piece of 

legislation and other examples, is the absence of the details 

which can cause me to have the assurance that government is in 

fact acting in the best interests of Saskatchewan families, 

Saskatchewan farm families, Mr. Speaker. And so whether it’s 

the undefined nature of the railway industry as one concern that 

has been highlighted in this piece of legislation . . . Which firms 

will benefit? Which companies will benefit? Will these be very 

large players? Will these be smaller players? 

 

And since we don’t know who exactly will benefit through this 

proposed legislation, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the railway 

industry, we also don’t know who will benefit as producers 

through these decisions. Will it be localized in particular areas? 

Will the benefit be experienced throughout the province? These 

are concerns and question marks that I have, and based on some 

of the previous actions we’ve seen with this government, I’m 

not prepared to simply trust them on this fact without having 

more of the details. 

 

Now the other concern, Mr. Speaker, about the transparency 

aspect, I guess. An additional concern beyond the transparency 

aspect is this issue of debt and this issue of lending and the 

issue of what it means for the public books. And we know in 

this province, Mr. Speaker, after coming through the time of 

Conservative government under Grant Devine, we saw an 

approach, Mr. Speaker, where the government was more than 

willing to add more and more debt to the province’s books. And 

that has been an effect that has been felt through subsequent 

governments and will affect subsequent generations for some 



7376 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2011 

time to come, Mr. Speaker, because of the government’s 

willingness to take on more and more public debt. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what we saw in the past were different types 

of public debt. Sometimes it was clearly stated and it was easily 

known. It was easily identifiable because it was on the public 

books. And individuals who, Mr. Speaker, had an interest in 

understanding and evaluating the financial health of the 

province, individuals were able to access some of the 

information on the public record. And that is an appropriate 

thing, Mr. Speaker, and that, in my view, is how it should occur 

when government is taking on debt on behalf of everyone in the 

province, every citizen, every taxpayer. 

 

It’s important that everyone actually know what the terms are. 

How much is being borrowed? How much will the government, 

the taxpayer of the province have to pay for the debt that’s 

being acquired? How soon will it be paid off, and what are the 

implications for the overall financial picture of the financial 

health of the province? And so that’s the one type of debt, Mr. 

Speaker, where it’s easily known. It’s easily identifiable. It’s 

open. It’s transparent. And citizens are able to examine what are 

the debts of the province and are able to make their judgment 

on a government accordingly. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Another type of debt we see, Mr. Speaker, is lending that is off 

the books and is not as easily found, not as easily identifiable, 

but at the same time, Mr. Speaker, has just as great of 

consequences for the provincial treasury, has a significant 

impact on the daily lives of Saskatchewan people. And we also 

saw, Mr. Speaker, a lot of — in the era of the Conservative 

government — we did see a lot of this type of lending as well, 

Mr. Speaker, where it was not openly known to Saskatchewan 

people. There were many secret deals, or there was an absence 

of transparency. There were many problems associated. There 

were loan guarantees. There were sweetheart deals with 

particular companies in particular areas. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

think it can be said safely that a lot of that lending that occurred 

was not in the best interest of Saskatchewan people, was not in 

the best interest of Saskatchewan families. 

 

So I’m concerned, Mr. Speaker, realizing that our province has 

experienced that type of financial mismanagement in the past. 

And we do know that some members opposite, Mr. Speaker, 

have deep and close ties, ongoing ties with many of the players 

involved during that troubling time in Saskatchewan’s history, 

Mr. Speaker. My concern is that we’re following a similar path 

here and that it’s déjà vu all over again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We do know that in reading some of the remarks that other 

members have made in the Assembly concerning Bill No. 167 

. . . And I’ll remind readers at home, Mr. Speaker, Bill 167 is 

An Act to Amend the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Act. 

In preparing for this speech, I had the chance to read a few 

comments made by other speakers from our side of the House 

who wanted to comment on this. And I read, Mr. Speaker, the 

speech from the member from Saskatoon Nutana. And while 

this member is still sitting in the Assembly and very engaged 

and very active, Mr. Speaker, I think many people in 

Saskatchewan will know that this member has indicated that she 

does not plan to run again, and she has had a very long and 

distinguished career here in the Assembly, and has contributed 

to many debates that have occurred in the province, and she’s 

participated in those debates from both sides of the House 

during different times, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when the member from Nutana commented on this piece 

of legislation, she said: 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we are now moving back to the past. 

And I would remind the members opposite that in 1991, 

under the recommendations of Donald Gass, we wrote off 

$36 million in debt that had been accrued by the 

Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation. And my colleagues 

have talked about the history of the Grain Car 

Corporation. It was not unlike Alberta did, Manitoba, as 

well as the Government of Canada, to get enough cars on 

the track to get grain to market. 

 

The important point here, Mr. Speaker, that the member from 

Nutana is making is that she said, “And I would remind the 

members opposite that in 1991, under the recommendations 

from Donald Gass, we wrote off $36 million in debt that had 

been accrued by the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation.” 

 

So we see, Mr. Speaker, in this province during the 1980s under 

the Conservative government, a government that has many 

strong ties to the existing Sask Party government — and there’s 

a lot of overlap of the players involved — we saw, Mr. Speaker, 

an approach to financial management that was not in the best 

interests of Saskatchewan people. We saw a very reckless 

approach to financial management. We saw an approach of 

lending dollars, of providing financing, of giving loan 

guarantees, of entering into deals, Mr. Speaker, sweetheart deal 

that were not well known. 

 

And the end result, Mr. Speaker, was that through the Gass 

report there was an examination of the lending and the financial 

practices of the provincial government. And it was determined, 

Mr. Speaker, that there were many, many problems. We saw an 

approach where there was not full disclosure. We saw an 

approach that was not transparent. We saw an approach that 

endangered the financial viability of this province close to the 

brink of bankruptcy, Mr. Speaker, based on the actions of the 

members opposite at that time, though there are certainly great 

connections ongoing with the current government and the 

members of the past. 

 

And so when we see, Mr. Speaker, similar types of actions 

where the government is getting into this business of entering 

into deals without the details being known, without the players 

being identified — simply saying railway industry, not 

identifying who exactly they’re talking about — when we see 

government talking about providing financial assistance 

through a variety of means, to me that is concerning because, 

though I was perhaps not paying attention as closely to politics 

in the 1980s as I do now, Mr. Speaker, I, like many other 

Saskatchewan people, have lived through the consequences of 

that time. And the consequences of that time, Mr. Speaker, were 

many troubling years and consequences of debt and a 

restraining of what government can do because of the debt that 

is associated with the debt burden that was brought on through 

those types of practices. So those are some of the concerns I 

have around this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 



April 20, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7377 

As I wrap up my remarks, Mr. Speaker, on this piece of 

legislation, I want to state once again that Saskatchewan has a 

very proud history of agriculture, a history that the vast majority 

of Saskatchewan people have ties to, either through current 

involvement or recent involvement, Mr. Speaker. And we know 

that support for our agricultural producers is a very important 

thing. And we know that having a strong and vibrant 

agricultural sector is something that is very important. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, that there are increased pressures on the 

family farm. We know that through weather, we know through 

increased input costs, we know through world market 

influences, things that are beyond the control of Saskatchewan 

producers, that many Saskatchewan farm families face 

problems. Many Saskatchewan farm families are in an uphill 

battle. So, Mr. Speaker, we know that when making decisions 

about agriculture in this province, it’s important to do so 

cognizant of those realities for Saskatchewan farm families. 

 

We also know, Mr. Speaker, that there have been different 

economic times experienced in this province, and different 

approaches to the financial health and the type of debt that is 

acquired here in the province. We know, Mr. Speaker, that there 

are different ways that debt has been accrued by the provincial 

government, sometimes in an open and transparent way, 

sometimes in a way that is not transparent. But nonetheless, Mr. 

Speaker, the implications for Saskatchewan people are very 

great. 

 

We also know, Mr. Speaker, that with the proposed changes in 

this piece of legislation, Bill No. 167, An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Act, we know that 

there’s a lot of ambiguity with some of the changes that the 

minister is suggesting. We know that there is . . . It now talks 

about not simply grain but also commodities. We know that it 

makes reference to the railway industry without specifically 

identifying which companies stand to benefit, Mr. Speaker. And 

because we don’t know the details around that, we also don’t 

know which Saskatchewan farm families stand to benefit and if 

a real gain in their financial outlook will be experienced or if it 

will have a negative effect or a neutral effect. We don’t know 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we also know, Mr. Speaker, that the government is now 

more than happy to be in the business of providing grants, 

loans, guarantees, or other similar means to persons for the 

purpose of allowing those persons to acquire railway rolling 

stock plant equipment or other assets that will benefit the 

railway industry. So we know, Mr. Speaker, that the 

government is willing to provide significant and substantial 

financial assistance to the railway industry, but we don’t know 

to what extent in the years to come. 

 

We don’t know, Mr. Speaker, to which specific players will be 

assisted, and I think that is troubling especially when we look at 

the track record of this government in other deals, other deals 

— whether that’s the taxpayers tower that is proposed here in 

Regina, whether that is the Modus relocatable classrooms that 

were a one-off deal in the Swift Current constituency, Mr. 

Speaker, or whether that is the Amicus deal that has been 

discussed at length in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, or whether 

that was some of the murky dealings with respect to the sale of 

Parkridge in Saskatoon as well, Mr. Speaker. 

When it comes to deals that are not transparent, when it comes 

to deals that are not in the best interests of Saskatchewan 

taxpayers, when it comes to deals that benefit a select few 

insiders but not the entire Saskatchewan population, when it 

comes to deals, Mr. Speaker, that can have serious long-lasting 

implications for the financial health of this province, Mr. 

Speaker, we know that members opposite, through their current 

actions and through their actions past in the 1980s, that they are 

more than happy, more than happy to engage in those types of 

those deals. So when I see that track record and when I see this 

type of legislation, Mr. Speaker, that is big on dollars but small 

on details, I certainly have some concerns. 

 

And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks on 

Bill No. 167. Thank you so much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

extremely pleased this afternoon to enter into debate on this 

very important Bill, An Act to Amend the Saskatchewan Grain 

Car Corporation Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In our province, we have a very long and proud history being a 

producer province, Mr. Speaker, and providing food for not 

only our province and Canadians, Mr. Speaker, but around the 

world. And, Mr. Speaker, that heritage of our province in 

providing food for the people of our world and around the 

world, Mr. Speaker, goes back many, many years. And, Mr. 

Speaker, over the last 100 years or so that we have been major 

producers, agriculture producers, Mr. Speaker, we have seen 

changes occur. And the Grain Car Corporation or the . . . 

[inaudible] . . . to the Grain Car Corporation was one of those 

changes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the early 1970s there was a challenge in moving our products 

to market, Mr. Speaker, a challenge that needed to be taken up 

by somebody in order to ensure that our products would hit the 

markets around the world, Mr. Speaker, and not directly just on 

the railcars, Mr. Speaker, but to ports where they could then be 

loaded on ships and transported to other parts of the country. 

And, Mr. Speaker, in the 1970s there was a need and there was 

a void. So what happened? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan in 1970 

stepped up and put in place the Grain Car Corporation, Mr. 

Speaker. And it was there to assist producers in a method of 

purchasing cars so that we had a fleet of cars that could provide 

to take our products to market, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 

in the 1970s about 1,000, or I believe it was 1,000 grain cars 

were purchased, Mr. Speaker, for the purpose of assisting the 

movement of our products to market. Mr. Speaker, that was a 

very appropriate acquisition at the time, Mr. Speaker. It helped 

both local Saskatchewan producers, Mr. Speaker, but it also, 

Mr. Speaker, helped the railways. And at the time it was a 

needed injection of capital into the system, Mr. Speaker, in 

order to ensure that the farmers’ products, our Saskatchewan 

farmers’ products, were able to get to market. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, being an agrarian province like we are, in the 

1970s we probably had about 60 per cent, between 50 and 60 

per cent of our gross domestic product one way or the other 



7378 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2011 

came from agriculture, Mr. Speaker. Today it wouldn’t be 

anywhere near that percentage, Mr. Speaker, because we have a 

much larger and more diversified economy. But, Mr. Speaker, 

in some ways some of the challenges that we faced in the 1970s 

are once again faced by producers in our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, but with every piece of legislation there is 

both the positives and the negatives, and there are concerns and 

issues that need to be fully debated, fully understood, and fully 

put before the people of Saskatchewan prior to being 

implemented. Well, Mr. Speaker, if we look at the changes 

being made to The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Act, 

Mr. Speaker, it talks about . . . Section 12 is about the powers of 

the corporation, Mr. Speaker, and that’s where the changes are 

being made. Powers of the corporation itself are being amended 

and changed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And I want to go through what the powers of the corporation 

are so that the people of Saskatchewan have the opportunity to 

understand what the Grain Car Corporation has the ability to do. 

Under section 12(a), Mr. Speaker, it has the ability to “acquire, 

by purchase, lease or otherwise, railway rolling stock suitable 

for the transportation of grain, commodities and other 

products,” Mr. Speaker. Well that is, Mr. Speaker, the historical 

responsibility of the Grain Car Corporation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But section 12(b) says it has the ability to “enter into 

agreements with the Canadian Wheat Board, railways and 

others respecting: the use of railway rolling stock, plant, 

equipment or other assets acquired by the corporation.” So the 

corporation can in fact acquire assets beyond the rolling stock, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

It also has, Mr. Speaker, “the provision of consulting, 

management or administrative services [that can be paid for] to 

persons who are involved with the railway industry.” And, Mr. 

Speaker, it also has the ability to enter into agreements for “any 

other purposes that the corporation considers advisable.” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that leaves a very wide and broad mandate to 

the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation. And, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s in examining that broad mandate and its responsibilities 

within that mandate that we need to look at what liabilities, 

risks, and benefits that are there for the people of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, the producers of our province, and our province in 

general, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we go on to look in a little more detail at other 

sections of the powers, Mr. Speaker, on section (e) it says you 

can “enter into agreements for the maintenance, servicing, 

repair and upkeep of railway rolling stock, plant, equipment or 

other assets acquired by the corporation.” Now, Mr. Speaker, 

that would seem on the surface to be pretty straightforward, Mr. 

Speaker. If you have a fleet of rolling stock, Mr. Speaker, it has 

to be maintained. There needs to be regular changes made. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, over the last decade I can remember, just 

prior to the last election, there was a period of time in which 

the, all the cars that were owned by the Grain Car Corporation, 

Mr. Speaker, required changes to their wheel base, Mr. Speaker, 

to the structure. Mr. Speaker, that’s something that has to be 

done on a regular basis if you’re going to keep your fleet up to 

date, Mr. Speaker, make it as efficient and safe as possible. And 

so those types of maintenance and repairs to be undertaken by 

the corporation would be a normal business activity for the 

Grain Car Corporation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They can also “construct or acquire, by purchase, lease or 

otherwise, any plant equipment or other assets that the 

corporation considers beneficial for the railway industry,” Mr. 

Speaker. So it gives a broad mandate for the corporation to 

purchase and acquire other assets that are in the interest of the 

railway industry, Mr. Speaker. It also has the ability to 

“transfer, sell or otherwise dispose of any railway rolling stock, 

plant, equipment [and] or other assets acquired by the 

corporation.” 

 

Now these are all fairly standard clauses that you would see in a 

business entity such as the Grain Car Corporation, Mr. Speaker. 

From time to time as your needs change or your assets perhaps 

age and somebody else has an interest in purchasing your assets 

as you need newer, more up-to-date assets, Mr. Speaker, you 

would dispose of or sell off some assets and purchase others, 

Mr. Speaker. Those are normal transactions done by any 

business, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now it also allows or provides for “the means by which grain, 

commodities or other products . . . in Saskatchewan or 

elsewhere may be transported.” And again those, it’s just 

clearly outlining what the powers of the corporation is. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we have a new clause today which does 

create some concern for, I think, the province of Saskatchewan, 

the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. In the clause (g) it 

says: 

 

subject to any orders or directives of the Treasury Board, 

[Mr. Speaker, that would be the government in power] 

provide financial assistance by way of grant, loan, [loan] 

guarantee or other similar means to persons for the 

purpose of allowing those persons to acquire railway 

rolling stock, plant, equipment or other assets that will 

benefit the railway industry. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is a concern because during a period of 

time in the 1980s we had a provision that allowed the 

government to undertake similar guarantees and debt on behalf 

of third parties, Mr. Speaker, in the Grain Car Corporation, and 

it resulted in a significant, significant amount of debt and loss 

that had to be written down by the province of Saskatchewan in 

1992, Mr. Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan had to write 

down some $36 million after 1992 that was lost through 

inappropriate loan guarantees and investments, Mr. Speaker, 

through the Grain Car Corporation during the 1980s. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the concern is that we’re going down the 

same path we have been down once before, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

going backwards, Mr. Speaker. We’re going down the same 

path that we saw in the 1980s, and it has the potential, it has the 

potential, Mr. Speaker, to create the same types of liabilities and 

risks for the people of Saskatchewan that we saw during the 

1980s, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, after the 1980s there was a commission 



April 20, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7379 

called the Gass Commission that undertook an in-depth 

examination of how the government, on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan, should enter into agreements, and what it should 

participate in and what it shouldn’t participate in, and what 

types of rules and regulations should be in place when entering 

into these agreements, Mr. Speaker. And that was after the 

province had to write down some $36 million from the Grain 

Car Corporation alone. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we see this government entering into 

numerous long-term commitments on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan without any transparency, without any ability of 

the people of Saskatchewan to review whether those contracts, 

leases that are being entered into on their behalf are in the best 

interests of the province of Saskatchewan and are suitable for 

use of their tax dollars, Mr. Speaker. Because governments 

don’t have money that don’t belong to the people and, Mr. 

Speaker, the people should have a right in determining how 

their money is being spent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the early 1980s — 1984-85, I believe it was, 

Mr. Speaker — we saw the government then, the Conservative 

government of the 1980s enter into a very, very long-term lease, 

Mr. Speaker, on a nursing home, on a nursing home in 

Saskatoon which we have been trying to get answers to what it 

actually cost for some time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last night in committee, last night in committee, 

Mr. Speaker, we got an answer from the Ministry of 

Government Services that on that very, very, very same nursing 

home project in Saskatoon, that the then Conservative 

government entered into a 25-year lease, Mr. Speaker, the 

impact or cost to the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

for a nursing home that would have cost about $8 million at the 

time to build, Mr. Speaker, about $8 million to build over a 

lease of twenty-three and a half years, Mr. Speaker, it cost the 

taxpayers of . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I’m having trouble 

hearing the speaker. I would ask the member to continue debate 

on the Bill, which is The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I was 

talking about agreements and the financial impact of those 

agreements on the people of Saskatchewan. And like we see 

now in the Grain Car Corporation Act, there was an ability for 

the government to enter in, there is ability for the government to 

enter into long-term grants or loans or guarantees on behalf of 

the people Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I was pointing out that in the 1980s, early 1980s, the 

government entered into a 25-year arrangement for a nursing 

home called Parkridge in Saskatoon, for a capital construction 

project that would have been about $8 million at the time it was 

built, Mr. Speaker. And that lease, we finally got the numbers 

for that lease last night, Mr. Speaker, in committee. And over 

that period of time, Mr. Speaker, between 1985 to today, Mr. 

Speaker, 2011, the lease on that property cost the people of 

Saskatchewan . . . Now I hope everybody’s sitting down 

because it cost the people of Saskatchewan to lease that 

property more than $60 million — $60 million that, had we 

paid a cash payment, as you should on those properties, of 

about $8 million, Mr. Speaker, we would have saved the people 

of Saskatchewan some $52 million. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is what is a concern in the Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Grain Car 

Corporation Act because they can enter into agreements on and 

put at risk public dollars, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve seen the Grain Car Corporation in the 1980s enter into 

similar agreements, and we saw a writedown, Mr. Speaker. And 

this is coming from the Report of the Saskatchewan Financial 

Management Review Commission, Mr. Speaker, better known 

as the Gass Commission, Mr. Speaker, a very detailed 

examination of how government money was spent and should 

be spent, Mr. Speaker. And we saw a very similar provision as 

we see being put back into the Grain Car Corporation Act today 

result in a $36 million writedown of the taxpayers’ money, Mr. 

Speaker. So we wrote off a $36 million loss as a result of 

guaranteeing loans, Mr. Speaker, that were not repayable. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, we saw similar things in a 

nursing home project in the same period of time in the city of 

Saskatoon called Parkridge, which was about an $8 million 

capital construction project at the time it was built, cost the 

taxpayers more than $60 million to lease that property back 

from a third party. Very lucrative deal for that company, Mr. 

Speaker, but not very good for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why am I raising these issues as I’m talking about 

this piece of legislation? Mr. Speaker, I think it should become 

clear. The provision we see in clause (g) of the Act gives the 

government the ability to enter into similar types of 

arrangements that they did in the 1980s which resulted in a $36 

million loss for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we see on the other hand the Government of 

Saskatchewan now again entering into 25-year leases, 

long-term leases on property, Mr. Speaker, that could cost the 

people of Saskatchewan even more than the Parkridge 

agreement, Mr. Speaker. And we have no means to look and 

challenge whether or not it’s appropriate, Mr. Speaker, because 

there is absolutely no transparency. The government refuses to 

reveal or to bring forward the information on those tenders, Mr. 

Speaker, or on those leases, Mr. Speaker. And it’s taxpayers’ 

money. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a pattern here. We have a government 

that is following a pattern of activity that was followed in the 

1980s under the previous Conservative government, Mr. 

Speaker, and putting in place the same abilities that they had in 

those years that resulted in significant losses in taxpayers’ 

money. So, Mr. Speaker, that’s a significant issue. That is a 

significant issue to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t define, doesn’t define who these 

individuals would be. It says: 

 

subject to any orders or directives of Treasury Board, 

provide financial assistance by way of grant, loan, 

guarantee or other similar means to persons for the 

purpose of allowing those persons to acquire railway 

rolling stock, plant, equipment or other assets that will 



7380 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2011 

benefit the railway industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that isn’t publicly debated in this Assembly. We 

don’t know what potential liabilities the government may enter 

into on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. But what we do 

know is the Gass report said we shouldn’t be doing it. The Gass 

report indicated very clearly this was not the way, was not the 

way that government should enter into arrangements on behalf 

of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’re going backwards again. We’re going 

backwards to an era that saw significant financial loss to the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we see other similar arrangements being 

entered into. Mr. Speaker, we saw an arrangement that will see 

the Government of Saskatchewan guaranteeing up to $252 

million in the immigrant investor program, Mr. Speaker, where 

the Government of Saskatchewan is guaranteeing loans on 

behalf of the immigrant investor funds, Mr. Speaker. We got 

out of those very funds a number of years ago because they 

changed the rules that you had to guarantee those funds, Mr. 

Speaker. You had to guarantee those loans, Mr. Speaker, and 

those investments. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And the previous government, because of the Gass Commission 

and rules that were put in place in this province governing how 

you manage the people’s money, we got out of using immigrant 

investor funds, Mr. Speaker. Because you need to have a level 

of protection on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan when 

you’re guaranteeing loans, Mr. Speaker, and if you don’t have 

that level of protection, you don’t enter into those arrangements, 

Mr. Speaker. So the previous government got out of using 

immigrant investor funds because there wasn’t the security 

required to guarantee those investments. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if the public dollar is at risk and we are 

putting public dollars at risk on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we need to be very prudent in 

doing that. We need to be very, very prudent because the money 

that the Government of Saskatchewan gets — whether it be 

from resources, from our utilities, or from taxes, Mr. Speaker, 

or any of our sources of revenue; transfer payments from the 

federal government even, Mr. Speaker — it’s the people’s 

money. It’s not the government’s money. It’s not the Crown 

corporations’ money, Mr. Speaker. It is the people’s money, 

Mr. Speaker. The people own the resources, Mr. Speaker. The 

people pay the taxes, Mr. Speaker. The people pay federal taxes 

to the federal government which results in us getting some 

transfer payments back. It doesn’t matter how you look at the 

issue, Mr. Speaker, it is the people’s money. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we are in fact providing guarantees or 

loans or grants of public money, Mr. Speaker, we need to 

ensure that there is appropriate guarantees and financial stability 

around those investments. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it is most unclear who would be eligible to 

borrow this money, who would be eligible to get grants, and 

who would be eligible to enter into agreements that would get 

public money, Mr. Speaker. It’s very open. It does say it would 

be the Treasury Board of the province, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, we haven’t seen a stellar record in the last year about 

entering into agreements on behalf of public money. I think we 

have to look no further than St. Peter’s College, Mr. Speaker, 

and the Carlton Trail merger to see millions of taxpayers’ 

dollars put at risk. And now, hundreds of thousands of dollars 

on auditors to try to find out what occurred there, Mr. Speaker, 

because we had a ministry and a minister enter into an 

agreement with a known felon, Mr. Speaker. A known felon — 

somebody that had been convicted of fraud, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The minister was aware of this conviction. He was made aware 

of these convictions, Mr. Speaker, and he continued — 

continued, Mr. Speaker — showing confidence in this 

individual even though the opposition raised this issue several 

times, Mr. Speaker. The opposition raised this issue several 

times in several different forms, Mr. Speaker. The government 

continued to show confidence and continued down a path, Mr. 

Speaker, until they had no other course, until it was so obvious, 

Mr. Speaker, the financial mismanagement and financial 

problems. And now we’re spending over $400,000 on auditors, 

Mr. Speaker — again, taxpayers’ money — to straighten out the 

mess that a minister got us into. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, how’s that supposed to give public 

confidence to the people of Saskatchewan? How is that 

supposed to encourage the public of Saskatchewan to look at 

any decisions made with confidence, Mr. Speaker? And I think 

it, Mr. Speaker, raises grave concerns that we’re going down a 

path of guaranteeing money again, which we haven’t done in 

this method since the 1980s. And, Mr. Speaker, we need to be 

concerned about that. 

 

Now having said that, all of us in this Assembly, I think and I 

believe, all of us support the industry. We support our 

producers, and we want to see a vibrant railway industry and 

producer grain car industry in our province, Mr. Speaker, 

because it’s essential to our way of life. It is absolutely essential 

to our way of life. We understand that. But, Mr. Speaker, 

what’s most important is the due diligence that goes on prior to 

putting at risk taxpayers’ money in this province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have seen, raised just yesterday in this 

House, an agreement made with a company in Swift Current to 

build modular classrooms, Mr. Speaker. And lo and behold, 

upon examination, what do we find? An admission by the 

minister herself that they’re paying $75,000 more per unit, Mr. 

Speaker, than the school boards could build themselves. And 

this is a deal that wasn’t tendered, Mr. Speaker, was never 

tendered, the final deal. It was sole sourced, given to a Swift 

Current company in the Premier’s riding, Mr. Speaker. That 

was political interference, Mr. Speaker, a sole source contract to 

a business that was having financial trouble in the Premier’s 

riding to build modular classrooms at $75,000 more than school 

boards could buy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what confidence does that give me and the people 

of Saskatchewan that under the Grain Car Corporation Act the 

government or Treasury Board is going to enter into 

value-for-dollar contracts, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, why 

would we expect it to be any different in the Grain Car 

Corporation, Mr. Speaker, than we saw it in, Mr. Speaker, in the 

modular classrooms? Mr. Speaker, you need to ensure that 



April 20, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7381 

you’re protecting public dollars and getting value for dollars 

when you enter into agreements on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We had the opportunity to meet with school boards who told us 

they didn’t buy the modular classrooms because, one, they were 

considerably more expensive than what they could build 

themselves. And, Mr. Speaker, how do I have any greater 

confidence that they’ll enter into agreements or guarantee grants 

or loans to third parties that have the value for dollar that 

Saskatchewan people deserve to see, deserve to see, Mr. 

Speaker, on any investment that’s made or any loan or 

guarantee or grant that’s made on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I heard one of the members opposite say, 

put kids in grain cars. Well I don’t know what . . . You know, 

that is so ridiculous it doesn’t deserve comment, Mr. Speaker. It 

does not deserve comment. Mr. Speaker, our children, our 

children deserve more respect than that and, Mr. Speaker, 

they’ll get it from this side of the Assembly. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, looking at, looking at the fundamental issue 

of investment of public dollars, the investment of public dollars, 

we all have a responsibility to ensure that there’s prudent 

investment. And, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, if they 

have ever read the Gass Commission, it’s contained on page 

132 of the full document, Mr. Speaker, Report of the 

Saskatchewan Financial Management Review Commission. It 

came out in February 1992. It’s probably the most in-depth 

review of government fiscal management that’s occurred in the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And the Gass 

Commission, it was looked at, Mr. Speaker, as a model across 

not just this province but around this country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the recommendations contained within the Gass report 

were thoughtful. This report took some time to examine in 

detail the financial operations of the Government of 

Saskatchewan under the then Conservative government, Mr. 

Speaker, and to make recommendations on moving forward. 

And it identified many negative pitfalls of how governments or 

how that government had operated, Mr. Speaker, and 

recommendations to ensure that we didn’t go down similar 

paths again. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have concerns that we’re headed down that 

path again because during that period in the 1980s, the Grain 

Car Corporation guaranteed loans, Mr. Speaker, loaned money 

to individuals. Those loans were never repayable, Mr. Speaker. 

And then in 1992, Mr. Speaker, the Grain Car Corporation, the 

Government of Saskatchewan on behalf of the Grain Car 

Corporation, had to write down $36 million in bad loans. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that was only one of several writedowns, 

that was only one of several writedowns that were undertaken 

in that year because the government had entered into a large 

number of arrangements, Mr. Speaker, that resulted in a failure 

of repayment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, today we’re talking about the Grain Car 

Corporation amendment Act, Mr. Speaker, and we’re talking 

about the ability under that Act for the government to enter into 

agreements to loan money, to grant money, or to guarantee 

money, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan 

to third party individuals, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, do those loans, Mr. Speaker, come under 

direct scrutiny of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker? No, Mr. Speaker, 

those decisions will be made by the Treasury Board of the 

government in power, Mr. Speaker, a government who we are 

well aware of in the St. Peter’s College and Carlton Trail 

attempted merger, Mr. Speaker, now are paying not one, not 

two, not three, Mr. Speaker, but four different accounting firms, 

Mr. Speaker, to examine and review what’s going on at a cost 

of some $400,000 to the taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. And that is 

what raises the very serious concerns that members on this side 

of the House have with this particular clause, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, clause (h), the final clause that’s being changed, 

Mr. Speaker, says: 

 

do any other thing that the corporation considers 

necessary, incidental or conducive to meeting its 

objectives and purposes or to exercising its powers”. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is a clause that gives it very broad powers, 

Mr. Speaker, and a very broad ability to spend money. Mr. 

Speaker, once again I want to indicate the Grain Car 

Corporation is a Saskatchewan government entity, Mr. Speaker, 

in which we have a significant potential liability if in fact 

money is spent inappropriately. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s in all our interests not to find ourselves 

putting liabilities into the Grain Car Corporation that we know, 

that we know we aren’t going to have paid off, Mr. Speaker. To 

go into loans that we know we’ll never be able to see repaid or 

to give grants to people, Mr. Speaker, of taxpayer’s money, Mr. 

Speaker, needs to be done very carefully and very prudently, 

Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Speaker, needs to be done very carefully. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation and its amendments 

are taking us back to the 1980s and a period of time in which 

the government ran up significant debts on behalf of the people 

of Saskatchewan, significant debts on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan that had to be written off. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that we as taxpayers in the province of Saskatchewan, the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan need to be concerned 

because, Mr. Speaker, this is exactly where we were some 20 

years ago, a little over 20 years ago, Mr. Speaker — 25 years 

ago, pardon me, Mr. Speaker — and we don’t want to go back. 

We don’t want to go back to a situation where we don’t have 

adequate controls or that we’re paying far more for things than 

what they’re worth. 

 

And if I couldn’t point to, Mr. Speaker, two very recent 

examples. I’m talking about the Modus agreement for modular 

classrooms, Mr. Speaker, where you can talk to any of the 

school boards around the province of Saskatchewan and, by the 

minister’s own admission, we’re paying $75,000 more than 

what school boards could build them for themselves. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that was done with a company on a 

sole-source contract, Mr. Speaker, in the Premier’s riding. So 

anybody that believes there was not political interference, Mr. 

Speaker, and this was not, was not a deal that wasn’t in the best 

interest of the people of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 



7382 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2011 

Speaker, are fooling themselves because when you’re $75,000 

more than what the value is on a modular classroom that should 

cost about $100,000, Mr. Speaker, that is a concern. That is a 

serious concern to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we can point to the merger attempt of 

St. Peter’s College and Carlton Trail, Mr. Speaker, in which 

serious concerns were raised very early in the process, Mr. 

Speaker, by the official opposition and by community leaders, 

Mr. Speaker, and a government, in its blind, dogged 

determination to do something on behalf of a friend, Mr. 

Speaker, plows ahead and puts at risk significant taxpayers’ 

money, Mr. Speaker, then why wouldn’t we have concerns 

about changes that resulted in a Conservative government in the 

1980s, Mr. Speaker, were running up over $36 million of debt 

that had to be written off, Mr. Speaker, in a manner that’s very 

similar to today. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite seem to want to, they 

want to try to say well, you know, no big deal, no problem. 

They don’t take, Mr. Speaker, they don’t take the use of public 

money seriously enough, Mr. Speaker, if they don’t take these 

concerns being raised by the official opposition seriously 

because, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Nobody takes you seriously. 

 

Mr. Yates: — They can yell across that nobody takes us 

seriously, and they can say whatever they want, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, they can say whatever they want, Mr. Speaker, but 

they’re the ones that are entering into contracts for modular 

classrooms that are worth $75,000 more than what the market 

is, Mr. Speaker. And they are the ones wasting Saskatchewan 

taxpayers’ money. Well, Mr. Speaker, and we need to be 

diligent, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that the government doesn’t 

enter into inappropriate, inappropriate guarantees, loans, or 

grants through the Grain Car Corporation Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I have spent some time talking about the very 

seriousness of these changes being made, Mr. Speaker, and the 

potential liability on the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And so at this time, Mr. Speaker, I 

will take my seat to allow my other colleagues the opportunity 

to enter into the debate, Mr. Speaker, and to share their 

perspective on the future changes that are being on the Grain 

Car Corporation Act and the impact it will have on the people 

of the . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I’ll ask 

the member from Athabasca to come to order. There is a 

member on his feet. I can’t hear him speaking. I would ask the 

member from Regina Dewdney to continue debate on The 

Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Act. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I was concluding my 

remarks and indicating that at this time there are other members 

who wish to enter into the debate and bring their perspective 

and concerns about this particular piece of legislation to the 

public of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So at this time I’ll take 

my chair. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to rise today to speak at second 

reading of Bill No. 167, An Act to amend the Saskatchewan 

Grain Car Corporation Act. Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to 

rise and speak on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, for a number of 

reasons. Number one, of course, is that agriculture in 

Saskatchewan is hugely important, Mr. Speaker, very important 

to the people of Saskatchewan whether you farm or not. 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the rail lines are very important to 

Saskatchewan, to agriculture, to other industries, and again to 

the people of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, this province 

has a very strong and proud history around the whole area of 

rail transportation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’m going to make some comments in that regard throughout 

my time on my feet, Mr. Speaker. Just in advance of some of 

the specifics, I want to indicate quite clearly that I think that it’s 

very important that the province of Saskatchewan — through its 

government, through its communities, Mr. Speaker, through the 

efforts that are made on behalf of public officials — support 

shortline railways throughout the province of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s important that we do that. Any move that 

governments can make and can explain to the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that ultimately support the 

movement of grain, that support the workings and operation of 

shortline railways, and which, Mr. Speaker, serve the 

transportation of goods and services between and away from 

our communities, Mr. Speaker, is a benefit to all of us. 

 

The bottom line, Mr. Speaker, is if this Bill had only to do what 

the minister says it will do then, Mr. Speaker, our speeches 

would be very short. They’d be very supportive and we’d move 

forward. But, Mr. Speaker, throughout my remarks this 

afternoon, I want to explain what it is that this Bill does, Mr. 

Speaker. This Bill decreases transparency. Mr. Speaker, this 

Bill increases liability and debt. Mr. Speaker, this Bill transfers 

responsibility from the public to a smaller separate group within 

government, Mr. Speaker. Decision making is taken out of the 

hands of the public, Mr. Speaker, which back to my first point, 

reduces transparency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s go back for a few moments to the day that 

this legislation was introduced. Mr. Speaker, this legislation 

was introduced a very short period of time ago on April the 6th, 

just a couple week ago, Mr. Speaker. This Bill was introduced 

by the Minister of Highways, and it’s most appropriate that the 

Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure is the minister 

responsible for rail, Mr. Speaker. It just makes perfect sense. 

 

For far too long, and I’m going to talk about this in greater 

detail later, Mr. Speaker, but for far too long the rail lines, the 

established long-term national rail lines, Mr. Speaker, have 

been taking advantage of provinces like Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, where they have taken and turned our highways into 

branch lines. The railway considers the Saskatchewan highway 

system as its branch line corridor, Mr. Speaker. And I will 

speak at greater length about that in a few minutes. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, because our history is so closely tied to rail 

and because, in the minister’s own words, it’s important that we 



April 20, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7383 

get more of the heavy traffic off the highways and onto the rail 

lines, it’s entirely appropriate for the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure to be the minister responsible for rail and to be 

the minister bringing forward this piece of legislation. 

 

Now let’s just think for a minute, Mr. Speaker. We have two, 

two ideas in front of us. One is the minister’s speech which 

outlines what he thinks this Bill does and, number two, Mr. 

Speaker, is the Bill itself. And I want to argue that what the 

minister says is not what the Bill does. And as a result of that, 

Mr. Speaker, there are individuals and organizations and 

perhaps whole communities that will say we have to support 

this piece of legislation because of what the minister says, who 

don’t know, Mr. Speaker, what the Bill actually does because 

the minister hasn’t told them. 

 

And I hope the members opposite, government members who 

are supportive of shortline rail in the province of Saskatchewan 

will pay very close attention to not only some of the things that 

I’m going to say but that my colleagues have said, Mr. Speaker, 

because if the only things that the government members know 

and understand is what the Minister of Highways has told them, 

then, Mr. Speaker, they don’t understand fully what the 

legislation itself is going to do in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So let’s review for a minute, Mr. Speaker, what’s in the 

minister’s speech, the second reading speech. Before I do that, 

Mr. Speaker, for the people who are watching, a second reading 

speech is a debate in principle. When a Bill comes into this 

legislative Chamber at second reading, the debate is about the 

principle of the Bill. The Bill is then going to committee for 

clause by clause, and it comes back for debate. There isn’t often 

debate at third reading, but third reading is debate that’s specific 

to an amended Bill. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about principle of the Bill. So 

this is an opportunity for the minister to outline exactly what’s 

in front of us, give the people of Saskatchewan a full 

understanding of what it is that the government intends to do 

with this piece of legislation. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all the Minister of Highways says in 

his opening remarks, “. . . we are proposing to broaden the 

authority of the Grain Car commission to allow it to become 

more active in assisting the shortline railway industry in the 

province.” Okay, Mr. Speaker, very simple comments. “We’re 

going to broaden the authority . . . to provide more assistance to 

the shortline railway industry.” 

 

On the surface, Mr. Speaker, this sounds tremendous because 

the shortline industry in Saskatchewan has indeed faced a lot of 

challenges as it has developed. But more importantly, Mr. 

Speaker, that shortline industry is evolving with the growth of 

the province of Saskatchewan and continue to face, even as old 

challenges fall off, new challenges that present themselves. 

 

We have one case that I’m also going to refer to in a few 

moments, Mr. Speaker, specifically that OmniTRAX-owned 

rail line, Meadow Lake to Speers in northwest Saskatchewan 

that I think we should review, Mr. Speaker, in the context of 

this piece of legislation. So the minister says we’re going to 

assist the shortline rail industry in the province. Then he says, 

Mr. Speaker, the legislation is driven by responsibilities and 

funding changes introduced in the budget released in March of 

this year. 

 

What the minister’s trying to do is tell us this is a budget Bill. 

It’s really not anything else, Mr. Speaker. There was an increase 

in funding in the budget. That increase in funding needs some 

legislation backing and therefore, in order for that funding to go 

forward, we need legislation to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again if this legislation only dealt with the 

budgetary provision, the increase in funding, Mr. Speaker, then 

my speech would be very short and we’d proceed very quickly 

to committee on this Bill. But, Mr. Speaker, this Bill, as you’ll 

see in a moment, does much more than deal with the financial 

commitment of increased funding. 

 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, I think a good argument could be 

made that this Bill doesn’t address that budgetary matter at all, 

Mr. Speaker. That language does not appear in Bill 167. So it’s 

difficult to understand how the minister can stand, explain the 

interpretation of the Bill by saying, we’ve got some extra 

funding; we need to move it forward through this legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister also says that I directed . . . This is a 

quote: “I directed the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation to 

use its resources and expertise to look at new and innovative 

ways of providing assistance to the Saskatchewan shortline rail 

industry.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government seems to use the words new and 

innovative for everything that they’re doing. Mr. Speaker, as 

some of my colleagues have indicated, and that I will also 

address in more formal remarks here shortly. Mr. Speaker, this 

Bill is far from new and innovative. In fact, Mr. Speaker, this 

Bill takes us back to the days where funding and financing was 

under the table. It wasn’t transparent. It was not dealt with in 

the interests of communities or the public. It was dealt with in 

the interests of government and government friends, Mr. 

Speaker. In fact, this Bill is far from being new and innovative. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, the minister’s remarks indicate that 

this Bill will ensure there is more product moving on rail; that 

means less wear and tear on provincial highways. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s the message that the public is getting about this 

Bill. This Bill will assist the shortline rail industry. This Bill 

will allow us to provide more funding for the shortline industry. 

This Bill provides new and innovative ways of support, and it 

will reduce wear and tear on our provincial highways. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s the message of the minister in this Chamber, 

expressing the intent of this legislation — nothing else. No 

reference whatsoever to anything else. If the members opposite 

in caucus or in cabinet, if the general public, if the media are to 

understand what’s in this Bill and the only message they get is 

the message from the Minister of Highways introducing this 

Bill, Mr. Speaker, they don’t understand the Bill. They haven’t 

got the information that they need to understand what is in the 

Bill. 

 

I’m going to come back to some of the specific comments, but 

in order to tie my remarks together, Mr. Speaker, with what the 



7384 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2011 

minister said and what the Bill says, I need to first outline what 

is in the Bill, Mr. Speaker. And you tell me if it is anywhere 

near what the second reading intention speech was of the 

minister. 

 

This Bill allows the corporation, the Saskatchewan Grain Car 

Corporation, to “acquire, by purchase, lease or otherwise, 

railway rolling stock suitable for the transportation of grain, 

commodities and other products.” So it allows the corporation 

to buy and lease stuff. It allows the corporation to “transfer, sell 

or . . . dispose of . . . rolling stock, plant, equipment or other 

assets acquired by the corporation.” It allows the corporation 

“the means by which grain, commodities or other products 

produced in Saskatchewan or elsewhere may be transported.” 

 

And more importantly, Mr. Speaker, and this is the key phrase: 

 

subject to any orders or directives of Treasury Board, 

[this Act allows the corporation to] provide financial 

assistance by way of grant, loan, guarantee or other 

similar means to persons for the purpose of allowing 

those persons to acquire railway rolling stock, plant, 

equipment or other assets that will benefit the railway 

industry. 

 

Bottom line, Mr. Speaker, is this legislation provides the 

Saskatchewan rail car corporation the ability to acquire assets, 

to make loans, to sell rolling stock, to make decisions with 

regards to the transportation of commodities that might not even 

be rail oriented. And, Mr. Speaker, it allows for the expansion 

of the Grain Car Corporation to move other commodities, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now I can see why moving other commodities would be of 

some interest to the people of Saskatchewan because of course 

that’s one of the key components of shortline rail in northwest 

Saskatchewan, where we want to move more than just grain 

product off the highway onto the rail, from the Meadow Lake 

area, Mr. Speaker, down to the main CN [Canadian National] 

line in The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker, something that can’t be 

done today. And, Mr. Speaker, which is causing no end of grief 

to the Highway 4 North, the highway that the government has 

just spent a tremendous amount of money on previously and 

currently, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that you’ve got a good, safe, 

high-quality road. It’s now being battered, Mr. Speaker, by a lot 

of truck traffic because the rail line is closed. But we’ll get back 

to that, Mr. Speaker, in a few minutes. 

 

The central point of what I’m trying to get at, Mr. Speaker, is 

that the Minister of Highways presents the intention of this Bill 

in one way, a way in which it’s all flower and roses. We can all 

support the language that the minister has brought forward. The 

Bill on the other hand, Mr. Speaker, takes us back to the 1980s 

where loan guarantees transferred debt and liability to a hidden 

entity where decisions were being made by individuals other 

than the Legislative Assembly through the normal budget 

process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve gone backwards with this legislation, not forward, and I 

don’t believe, Mr. Speaker, that those who have been 

supporting the legislation because they believe that it’s a 

shortline support legislation don’t fully understand this, Mr. 

Speaker, and we need to ensure that that information circulates 

more broadly in the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have heard this language in this Chamber 

before. It wasn’t that long ago that the government brought 

forward legislation to change the way in which wildlife habitat 

lands were to be dealt with, Mr. Speaker. And this government, 

in their second reading speech, indicated that there was wide 

consultation amongst the groups that were important, Mr. 

Speaker, in regards to changes that the government wanted to 

propose. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister at the time indicated the Wildlife 

Federation, Ducks Unlimited, the Nature Conservancy were all 

consulted and supportive of the legislation. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

it turned out after the organizations were contacted that in fact 

they’d been consulted on something other than the legislation, 

and in fact they were outraged at the legislation that was being 

brought forward as it stood, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in proof of that, subsequently we’ve now seen changes 

brought into this House, Mr. Speaker, to that piece of legislation 

because the Wildlife Federation, Ducks Unlimited, Nature 

Conservancy, and others came forward, were consulted, Mr. 

Speaker. It still isn’t good legislation, but, Mr. Speaker, it 

proved beyond the shadow of a doubt that what we in this 

Chamber were being told at second reading speech wasn’t 

actually what was happening out there in the real world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another example that supports my contention that 

the intention outlined by the government and what happens in 

the Bill are different, is on Bill 160, the legislation that will 

change the human rights tribunals — not just change the human 

rights tribunals, Mr. Speaker, but eliminate them altogether. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice stood in the House — he 

had people in the galleries, Mr. Speaker — and he said, we’ve 

consulted widely on this change. Mr. Speaker, we’ve got 

support from, and he named off a list of 17 or 18 organizations 

supporting the elimination of the human rights tribunals. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, it now turns out that the consultations that 

occurred were talking about all sorts of things but never the 

specifics of the Bill itself, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have uncovered — and anyone who wants to read our 

speeches on Bill 160 can do so, Mr. Speaker — but we’ve 

determined that in fact organizations were told one thing, the 

Bill said something completely different, and, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re now seeing individuals in very high places around North 

America and across the world becoming very critical of the 

intention that is specific to the language in Bill 160, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And every day my colleague from Saskatoon Meewasin rises in 

this Chamber with petitions signed by people from all over 

Saskatchewan calling for the withdrawal of Bill 160 because, 

Mr. Speaker, the support that existed, existed because the 

minister had all these wonderful things to say about human 

rights commissions and tribunals, but it had absolutely nothing 

to do with the legislation. Just like the wildlife habitat 

protection lands, which were and are being stripped away from 

the people in Saskatchewan, the minister had indicated all these 

wonderful things that happen in the environment in support for 

landowners, etc., etc., Mr. Speaker. But it had nothing to do 



April 20, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7385 

with the actual intent of the legislation. 

 

So here, Mr. Speaker, we have Bill 167 which the minister says, 

it’s our way of supporting shortline railroads in the province of 

Saskatchewan, when in fact, Mr. Speaker, what it’s supporting 

is the government’s bent towards lack of transparency, lack of 

openness, lack of honesty, Mr. Speaker, lack of transparency in 

the process of government. We’re finding . . . The government 

is finding numerous ways, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that the 

public doesn’t know what’s going on and, more importantly, 

that the government provides opportunities to financially 

reward its friends and supporters in ways that the public won’t 

fully, will never accept, Mr. Speaker, if they had all of the 

information. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleagues who spoke before me outlined 

some very good examples of what’s been happening in this 

regard just in the last few months, Mr. Speaker, where we have 

seen the government talking about new and innovative ways of 

doing things, but have simply been reverting back to ways of 

the 1980s. We’re told by the government opposite, Mr. Speaker, 

that the ’80s are in the past. You know, we’ve learned from the 

’80s. We’re a better government now because of the ’80s, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But there are a lot of people in Saskatchewan who haven’t 

forgotten the massive debt that was left after the two terms of 

government led by Premier Grant Devine, Mr. Speaker, a 

massive debt that took this province years to get back under 

control, Mr. Speaker, years of sacrifice by municipalities and 

people living in Saskatchewan all over the place. Mr. Speaker, 

this legislation has started this process again to take us back to 

those days. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s quite a bit that my colleagues have 

said about that during their remarks. And I want to say, Mr. 

Speaker, that I am extraordinarily proud of my colleagues, 

members from Saskatoon and Regina — urban constituencies, 

Mr. Speaker — who have made some very passionate speeches 

about agriculture in Saskatchewan, about rail line development 

and activity in Saskatchewan, about the relationship between 

the economy and rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Very 

passionate, intelligent, and, Mr. Speaker, compelling speeches 

from my colleagues from urban ridings in Saskatchewan 

demonstrating, Mr. Speaker, that my colleagues fully 

understand the value that rural Saskatchewan has provided to 

the entire nation of Canada, Mr. Speaker. They’ve demonstrated 

in their comments on Bill 167, Mr. Speaker, they’ve 

demonstrated an understanding of this history. 

 

I can outline in fact my memories at the kitchen table in my 

house when I was in high school, Mr. Speaker. My grandfathers 

both farmed the land, Mr. Speaker. My grandfathers were 

actively engaged in their community. My grandfathers were 

very much a part of building the agricultural and community 

history that we now benefit from, Mr. Speaker. A lot of the talk 

around the kitchen table, as it was for a lot of members in this 

House, Mr. Speaker, a lot of that talk around the kitchen table 

was about the rail lines and how, how mistreated the 

Saskatchewan farm community was by CP [Canadian Pacific] 

and CN. Mostly, Mr. Speaker, CP got most of the brunt of those 

comments. And I think we all remember some of those famous 

sayings about CP rail that circulated in our communities, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But the rail lines forced people in Saskatchewan to do things 

collectively, communally, Mr. Speaker, in ways in which have 

created a whole different way of looking at the economy of our 

province. And we’re the beneficiaries today as a result of that. 

We know, Mr. Speaker, that farm communities banded together 

to ensure that we had support for things like the Crow rate and 

later the Crow benefit, as Ottawa governments tried to pull that 

away from us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I might mention, Mr. Speaker, that the result of the loss of 

the Crow and the Crow benefit, Mr. Speaker, has cost 

Saskatchewan producers hundreds of millions of dollars since 

the loss of that benefit — a benefit, Mr. Speaker, that the rail 

lines argued away. Nobody gave it away, Mr. Speaker, but the 

rail lines argued it away because they said we can’t make 

enough money off of agriculture to move the product to port to 

sell it. We in Saskatchewan know better than anyone, better 

than anyone that our product is further from point of sale than 

any other agriculture product in the world, Mr. Speaker. We 

have to move our product from point of growth, Mr. Speaker, to 

point of delivery and sale — tremendous distances, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So we rely heavily on rail to do that. It’s the most economical 

way of moving product. We also know that at the time that the 

rail lines were moving away from providing farmers with the 

benefit of moving grain, and there was an understanding of 

course that why the Crow Rate and the Crow Benefit existed 

was so that all of Canada would share in that transportation 

cost. 

 

And I was involved in that debate, Mr. Speaker, back in the 

early 1980s in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. I was involved in that 

debate, and part of that argument was very simple. If I am 

buying a car from Detroit, I’m paying the freight on that car 

from Detroit to Saskatchewan. But if someone in Indonesia is 

buying grain, I, as the producer of that grain, am paying the 

freight to get it to Indonesia. What’s the big deal here, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

[16:30] 

 

So part of the Crow rate and part of the Crow benefit was to 

share that cost out across all of Canadians, Mr. Speaker, 

because everyone benefitted by the sale of our agriculture 

product on the international market. Farmers, agriculture 

producers, Mr. Speaker, developed all sort of systems 

collectively and co-operatively because the private sector, 

whether it be the elevator companies or the rail lines, were 

working against them, Mr. Speaker. The Canadian Wheat Board 

was developed in response to elevator companies taking 

advantage of producers. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, we’re in a federal election campaign in 

which Saskatchewan producers should be talking daily about 

the Canadian Wheat Board. We have a Minister of Agriculture 

— my own Member of Parliament, Mr. Speaker — Minister of 

Agriculture who is campaigning, not in this election but outside 

of the election parameters, Mr. Speaker, to get rid of the 

Canadian Wheat Board. Well, Mr. Speaker, if producers who 

support shortline railways understood what the Minister of 



7386 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2011 

Agriculture was doing to get rid of the Canadian Wheat Board, 

I think there would be a broader debate in our communities, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Shortline railways to a certain extent depend on the Canadian 

Wheat Board, Mr. Speaker, because it’s the Canadian Wheat 

Board that assures the external and export markets that we’re 

moving grain on rail primarily for. If everyone wants to sell 

grain to a domestic or a nearby market and doesn’t require rail 

cars to do that, Mr. Speaker, we’ll truck all our grain. We don’t 

need shortline railways, we don’t need the national railway, 

that’s all we need. But, Mr. Speaker, we are going to continue 

to export large quantities of our agriculture product — grains in 

particular, Mr. Speaker — and the Canadian Wheat Board 

assures those sales and assures a sale, Mr. Speaker, that 

provides the necessary return for Saskatchewan producers. 

 

So when we’re talking about supporting the Saskatchewan 

Grain Car Corporation and supporting the needs of the local 

communities in the fight, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that we can 

keep those rail lines growing, operating, Mr. Speaker, then we 

also need to be fighting that fight to support and save the 

Canadian Wheat Board. But that wasn’t my intention, Mr. 

Speaker, to get into that secondary argument. 

 

What we’ve got in front of us, Mr. Speaker, is a government 

whose intention is twofold. There’s a public intention to show 

support for producers for the rail industry, and in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re seeing some additional funding being made 

available. We’ve got a Bill that doesn’t discuss additional 

funding. We have a Bill that discusses the secondary intention 

of this government, Mr. Speaker, which is providing the 

Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation the ability to make loan 

guarantees. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, sometimes loan guarantees are beneficial in 

our communities. And if they’re done in a transparent way, if 

they’re done with information that’s available to the public, if 

it’s done based on a policy that’s had open debate in this 

Chamber through the media in the public, Mr. Speaker, then 

you know you’ve got an understanding of what’s going on. 

 

But this Act simply gives the corporation the ability to make 

loan guarantees to grain car corporations, shortline rail. Mr. 

Speaker, some of those shortlines are community owned. 

They’re looking for financial support and the ability to borrow 

money, and I have no objection whatsoever to supporting 

community organizations who want to find some way to grow. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that there is a role for the provincial 

government to support and help. 

 

But there are also private corporations like OmniTRAX, Mr. 

Speaker, who are running shortline rail, who have completely 

abused the privilege that they’ve been granted to operate on a 

rail bed in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we are 

now seeing a highway, people’s lives being put at risk because 

that rail line is no longer operating. And, Mr. Speaker, that is 

not the sort of thing that we should be giving the Grain Car 

Corporation the power and the privilege to negotiate with and to 

provide loan guarantees. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, granted the Act says “subject to any orders 

or directives of Treasury Board, provide financial assistance 

. . .” I say granted, Mr. Speaker, because there’s a process after 

the Grain Car Corporation does its deals and then brings 

forward whatever recommendations that it has. 

 

But I went to the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation website, 

Mr. Speaker, and I took a look at some of the things that are 

listed there. The first thing that came to my attention, Mr. 

Speaker, is the board of directors of the Grain Car Corporation. 

Remember this Act introduced by the Minister of Highways 

that gives the Grain Car Corporation, essentially the board of 

directors, the right to make loan guarantees? So who are the 

board of directors? Who are the members of the board of 

directors, Mr. Speaker, that are being given the right by 

legislative authority to make loan guarantees to virtually 

anybody in the industry? The board of directors of the 

Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation is the Minister of 

Highways and the Minister of Agriculture. That’s it. That’s 

what’s listed, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Highways and the 

Minister of Agriculture. 

 

This legislation has just put the power of loan guarantees in the 

hands of two cabinet ministers, Mr. Speaker. Did the minister 

mention this in his remarks? Did the minister mention this in 

caucus or at cabinet? Did the minister mention this to the media 

when he introduced the legislation, Mr. Speaker? There are 

people in Saskatchewan who support railcars — myself 

included, Mr. Speaker — who find this premise unacceptable. 

 

We want to support the government’s intention to support the 

shortline rail industry, but how do we do that, Mr. Speaker, 

when we know that we’re setting up a system whereby loan 

guarantees can be made between two ministers sitting side by 

side in the Chamber with no public consideration. It is certainly 

an interesting point I think, Mr. Speaker, that people have to 

consider when they’re thinking about what it is that we’re 

doing. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, what’s the current, what’s the current 

mandate for the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation? Well 

first the vision of the Grain Car Corporation is to have an 

effective, efficient, and affordable grain handling and rail 

transportation system that’s the best in the world. Can’t 

disagree with that, Mr. Speaker; I’ve supported that for some 

time. Vision: effective, efficient, affordable grain handling rail 

transportation system. 

 

What does this Bill do, Mr. Speaker? This Bill . . . The very 

first change, the corporation may “acquire, by purchase, lease or 

otherwise, railway rolling stock suitable for the transportation 

of grain, commodities and other products,” Mr. Speaker. Also 

powers of the corporation, 12(f) “provide the means by which 

grain, commodities or other products produced in Saskatchewan 

or elsewhere may be transported.” And, Mr. Speaker, finally, 

“(h) do any . . . thing that the corporation considers necessary, 

incidental or conducive to meeting its objects and purposes or 

to exercising its powers.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this very short Act that changes the powers of the 

corporation, that’s what this Act does. I didn’t say that at the 

beginning of my remarks. It changes the powers of the 

corporation, Mr. Speaker, seems to have ignored the vision 

statement of the corporation itself, which is “grain handling and 

rail transportation system,” Mr. Speaker, to be a transportation 



April 20, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7387 

system that could include forestry products, mining products. 

I’m not saying that’s bad, Mr. Speaker, but that’s not what the 

government’s been telling us in the speeches that have been 

made so far. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at the mandate of the 

corporation as it exists today. Again no change in the legislation 

with regards to mandate or the preamble of the Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, but the mandate on the corporate strategy is quite 

simple: “In partnership with farmers, and community groups, 

and in cooperation with shippers and railroads enhance the 

effectiveness and efficiency of transporting and handling grain.” 

So, Mr. Speaker, the key phrases there, of the mandate, is 

partnership with farmers and community groups and 

secondarily, co-operation with shippers and railroads. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this Bill certainly takes us further than 

co-operating with the railroads. Mr. Speaker, this legislation 

would actually allow the corporation to partner with 

corporations, shippers, and private sector operators, not just 

communities and farmers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The whole idea of the Grain Car Corporation at the beginning 

of time, Mr. Speaker, at the beginning of its time, was to build 

into that co-operative nature of Saskatchewan agriculture and 

communities; that co-operative nature that was part of the Crow 

rate and the Crow benefit, the development of the Canadian 

Wheat Board, Mr. Speaker, and so many other things that are 

important to us. Mr. Speaker. It was built around the 

transportation of grain. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if the government intends that they want to 

shift the direction of the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation 

to a transportation agency for all commodities, they should tell 

us that. They should tell us that. The minister’s speech talked 

about how important shortline railways are to farmers in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but the Bill is substantially 

changing the nature in which the corporation, the commission, 

functions. Mr. Speaker, if the government wants to do that, they 

should have the courage to say so. But the minister’s second 

reading speech ignored that entirely. 

 

Let’s just jump back here. We take a look at what the 

Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation says about its own 

history. I just quote one statement here: 

 

In the early 1970’s Canada lost major international grain 

sales because the country’s grain car fleet was obsolete 

and did not have the capacity to get grain products to 

export position. As a result of this situation, the 

Government’s of Canada, Saskatchewan, Alberta and the 

Canadian Wheat Board began to purchase hopper cars for 

use in its grain handling and transportation system in 

Western Canada. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve mentioned to you before my 

grandfather sitting around the kitchen table, having coffee and 

complaining about the rail lines, Mr. Speaker. The rail lines, the 

major rail lines totally failed the producers of Canada. 

Saskatchewan and Alberta governments, having no control 

whatsoever over a national rail line policy, decided the only 

things that they could do to help farmers in Saskatchewan and 

Alberta was to invest in hopper cars themselves. The rail lines 

weren’t prepared to do it. The rail lines were not putting any 

new money into the system whatsoever. 

 

And in fact later, after the cars are bought and painted and put 

into work, Mr. Speaker, the rail lines started to drop its rail line 

rehabilitation program, Mr. Speaker. And shortly thereafter the 

federal government dropped its rail line rehabilitation program. 

And as a result we had railbeds all over Western Canada torn 

up, Mr. Speaker, and more and more product put on trucks. 

 

And as a result of that, our highways got beat up. The rail lines 

were happy because they didn’t have to maintain so much line. 

They used our highways as branch lines, Mr. Speaker, to get the 

product from the farmer’s gate to the point of shipping, a major 

shipping point, Mr. Speaker, and the provincial taxpayer had to 

pick up the tab, Mr. Speaker, had to pick up the tab for 

rebuilding roads, for maintaining roads, Mr. Speaker, and we’re 

still doing that today. 

 

And in fact the Minister of Highways indicated how supportive 

he is of this legislation because it should take truck traffic off 

our highways and roads. Well, Mr. Speaker, I hope he’s correct 

because that’s indeed what needs to be done. 

 

[16:45] 

 

But getting back to my comments earlier, the rail lines 

completely abandoned the Saskatchewan and Alberta, the 

Prairie grain farmers, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan government, 

Alberta government, the Canadian Wheat Board, Mr. Speaker, 

made investments to support farmers throughout Western 

Canada and, Mr. Speaker, they did a very good job of it. More 

importantly, Saskatchewan created the Grain Car Corporation 

which, by its annual reports, indicates it has been very 

successful. It has done the job that it was meant to do. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I acknowledge that things have to change. 

As the economy changes, as our technology changes, as our 

practices change, there is an evolution, Mr. Speaker, and change 

occurs to ensure that you keep up. But, Mr. Speaker, in order to 

keep up, we have to be very honest and open with the 

Saskatchewan people so they know what government is doing 

on their behalf. Government doesn’t exist, Mr. Speaker, to do 

what government wants. Government exists to meet the needs, 

the wishes of the people within the jurisdiction for which that 

government is responsible. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, our responsibility is to farm families, to 

agriculture producers, to communities, Mr. Speaker, some of 

those communities who are heavily engaged in operating and 

managing shortline railways. Mr. Speaker, we have to do 

everything that we can as a government to ensure that those 

communities have the tools necessary to get the job done. 

 

That’s why I’m not surprised whatsoever when the Minister of 

Highways reads into the record for almost half of the time he 

was on his feet, reads letters from agricultural organizations 

supporting shortline railways in Saskatchewan. I expect nothing 

less from those who represent people and communities in farm 

country in our province, Mr. Speaker. I expect the farm 

organizations and the representatives of farm people in our 

province, Mr. Speaker, to speak very highly of and support 

shortline railways, Mr. Speaker. But I don’t think those 



7388 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2011 

organizations believe that we should be going back to the 1980s 

and ensuring that we have a government that allows individuals, 

board of directors, to reach agreements for loan guarantees that 

are hidden from the Saskatchewan public. 

 

Those organizations are upset already, Mr. Speaker, at the 

government’s efforts with regards to the loan guarantees offered 

to Amicus, the long-term care, private long-term care facility 

that’s being built in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, a loan guarantee, 

Mr. Speaker, that essentially puts Saskatchewan taxpayers’ 

money at risk when long-term care organizations in 

communities across this province are not getting similar 

treatment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve also seen this government announce 200, $230 million 

worth of loan guarantees for the federal Immigrant Investor 

Fund, Mr. Speaker, because that Immigrant Investor Fund is 

expected to provide loans to improve affordable housing in 

Saskatchewan. I say affordable because that’s the government’s 

word, but I think we all understand, Mr. Speaker, that the 

housing that the government has announced they expect to be 

built is not considered affordable in the majority of 

communities in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The same organizations and individuals, Mr. Speaker, are also 

upset at this deal with regards to the Hill tower in Regina, 

essentially a 20-year agreement that provides a loan guarantee 

for Harvard Development, Mr. Speaker, a corporate entity, Mr. 

Speaker, that at the end of the day ensures that the funding, the 

liability of government, is hidden, Mr. Speaker, in a lease 

arrangement. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve also got the 

circumstances where the government has been less than 

transparent with the Carlton Trail, St. Peter’s College 

circumstance that existed. 

 

So what we’ve got here, Mr. Speaker, is a piece of legislation 

that is ensuring that all those things will continue not just within 

government but within the Grain Car Corporation, something 

that nobody in rural Saskatchewan really thinks is appropriate. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of the work that the Grain 

Car Corporation has done to date. I’m taking a look at the 

Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation, it’s called Quick Facts as 

of July 31st, 2010: total dividends paid to the General Revenue 

Fund from the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation — $15 

million. 

 

So not only is the Grain Car Corporation saving individual 

farmers money, Mr. Speaker, it’s also providing funds to the 

General Revenue Fund that allows the government to increase 

spending on other matters such as education, health care and, 

Mr. Speaker, highways. 

 

The unfortunate thing is, on the one hand if you’ve got the rail 

lines using the highways as branch lines and breaking them up, 

you’re not really ahead of the game if you have to use the 

funding from the grain corporation to fix the highways. So we 

have to be doing something about that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve also seen significant increases in volumes. 

The Grain Car Corporation corporate report says that in 

2009-10 crop year, Saskatchewan saw overall grain volumes 

moved in Grain Car Corporation hopper cars increase from the 

’08-09 year; 1 260 891 tonnes of grains are estimated to have 

been hauled in Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation hopper 

cars in ’09-10, as compared to 1 010 880 tonnes in the previous 

year, equating to a year-over-year increase of about 24.7 per 

cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a testament to the work that’s been done in 

our farm communities, and a testament to the work that’s done 

by a Grain Car Corporation that’s doing what, Mr. Speaker? It 

is managing a fleet that once was 1,000 hopper cars and now is 

900-and-some hopper cars, Mr. Speaker, because over the 30 

years of the corporation, a number of cars have been damaged 

or withdrawn from the fleet. 

 

The new Bill of course allows the corporation to sell those cars 

if it wants to, Mr. Speaker. So it goes from actually being a 

corporation that manages those cars in the interests of the 

farmers to a corporation that actually may not have any assets at 

all at the end of its, at the end of its full mandate because it has 

the power to sell those cars. And what we might be left with is 

simply debt, similar to what the government in 1991 was left 

with after the operation of the Grain Car Corporation during the 

1980s where it ran up a significant debt. And actually the 

Government of Saskatchewan, through its General Revenue 

Fund, had to bail out the Grain Car Corporation $32 million 

worth in 1991, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Quite a number of things have happened in support of shortline 

railways over the year. I also was able to find a number of ways 

in the past that government has supported the communities, Mr. 

Speaker. The Grain Car Corporation has found ways without 

going into significant debt. 

 

I have a news release here dated July 31st, 2001, in which the 

West Central Road and Rail was provided with a $400,000 

investment towards the work that they were doing. The 

corporate report of last year indicates that West Central Road 

and Rail today has seen loading facilities constructed at Eston, 

Laporte, Lucky Lake, and Beechy, and they estimate that this 

has increased producer returns an average of 10 to $20 per 

tonne, depending on the blending opportunities that were 

available during the various crop years. Mr. Speaker, so in 2001 

government was supporting the shortline rail system. 

 

In 2002 we have another news release here that says, “The 

Saskatchewan government provides the Farmer Rail Car 

Coalition $450,000 in funding and in-kind technical support to 

develop a business plan, including financing, to buy federal 

government hopper cars.” Mr. Speaker, this also has been a 

successful initiative. 

 

Those were all done while New Democrats were in 

government, Mr. Speaker. But for some credit, in November of 

last year, 2010, the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation under 

the new Sask Party government gave priority to leasing its 

hopper cars to Saskatchewan shortline railways. Mr. Speaker, 

we have found ways over the years to be innovative in the way 

in which we address our shortline rail operators, particularly the 

community rail line operators, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the words of the Minister of Health from previous debates, 

there’s more work to do, Mr. Speaker. There’s more work to do. 

But this legislation, Bill 167, does not do what the government 



April 20, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7389 

says they want to do, and it will not necessarily — that’s what 

the debate is all about — will not necessarily, Mr. Speaker, 

achieve the goals that it says it wishes to achieve. That having 

been said, Mr. Speaker, I think that it is important that this piece 

of legislation go to committee so that questions can be asked, 

Mr. Speaker. And we in the opposition today are prepared to 

send this legislation to committee so that we can ask the 

appropriate questions, some of which I’ve outlined in my 

comments, some of which my colleagues have outlined in their 

comments. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that I will take my seat and indicate to 

yourself and the government that we are prepared now to send 

this Bill to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Highways that Bill No. 167, The 

Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 be 

now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Government Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. I recognize the Deputy 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, it being very near the 

time of adjournment, I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Government House Leader has 

moved that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 

until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:59.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7359 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7359 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7359 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7359 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7359 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7359 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7359 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7360 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7360 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7360 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7360 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7361 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7361 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7361 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 The Generosity and Commitment of Volunteers 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7361 

 Annual Better Newspaper Awards 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7362 

 Housing Development in Esterhazy 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7362 

 Le Concours d’art oratoire  

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7362 

 Growth in Saskatchewan 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7362 

 Human Rights 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7363 

 Volunteer Medal Awards 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7363 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Contract Negotiations with Health Care Workers 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7363 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7364 

 Security of Health Information 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7365 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7366 

 Issues in Health Care 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7366 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7666 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on House Services 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7368 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7368 

 Standing Committee on Private Bills 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7369 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 166 — The Renewable Diesel Act 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7368 

 Bill No. 906 — The Bethany College Amendment Act, 2011 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7369 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7369 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7369 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7369 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 172 — The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les victimes d’actes criminels 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7370 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7370 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 167 — The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7371 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7372 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7377 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7382 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


