




















































Hansard: December 13, 2011


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 6B  TUESDAY, DECEMBER 13, 2011, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 183 

 December 13, 2011 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — Order . . . [inaudible] . . . Order. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 18 — The Degree Authorization Act 

(continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to rise this evening to continue my 

second reading of the degree authorization speech. Where I was 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And there’s an invitation from 

my colleagues to begin again, and I think everyone knows in 

the Assembly I’m more than able to do that. I shall just continue 

where I left off. 

 

Where we were is I was just explaining that the government and 

the ministry, we put out a call for case studies right across the 

province, and as a result, we heard from two individual 

institutions — SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology] and Briercrest. Using this case study 

approach, we are working with both SIAST and Briercrest 

College, and we will be able to test and refine this quality 

assurance process that it will be ready by the time this 

legislation will be proclaimed. 

 

In the first stage of the application process, the ministry will 

review a program proposal to determine its fit within the 

post-secondary system and how the proposal will benefit 

students. Mr. Speaker, each proposal will then go to cabinet 

with a recommendation to either refer it to the quality assurance 

body for a full quality assurance review or to deny it at the 

proposal stage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the quality assurance body will be a small 

arm’s-length board appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council. It will have no less than three members who will have 

the expertise in quality assurance and have extensive 

experience, both academic and administratively, in 

post-secondary education. Through institutional 

self-assessments and expert panel reviews, the quality assurance 

body will assess the institution’s capacity to offer degree-level 

programming, as well as the quality of the proposed and 

specific degree program. It will then make a recommendation to 

the minister as to whether to support or deny an authorization 

for the proposed degree program. To ensure transparency and 

accountability, the minister can only authorize a degree 

program with a positive recommendation by the quality 

assurance body, thereby ensuring again the high standards and 

traditions of quality that have been associated with 

Saskatchewan degrees for more than a century. 

 

If granted, Mr. Speaker, an authorization will be only for a 

certain period of time, after which the institution must apply for 

renewal, thereby ensuring that the quality is sustained for our 

students, for their families, for our communities, for employers, 

and for the people of Saskatchewan. This will involve the 

institution having to undergo some or all of the quality 

assurance review process again. 

The authorization to grant degrees may also have terms and 

conditions attached to it in order to ensure greater 

accountability. Cabinet can reject an authorization that the 

quality assurance council has recommended. If rejected, an 

appeal process has been put in place to ensure that there is fair 

hearing. Although funding is outside the scope of the Act, I 

would like to add that any institution requesting public funds 

must request it through the normal governmental budget 

processes, and it will be a legislative requirement that any 

private institution make financial security arrangements to 

ensure greater certainty for Saskatchewan students. Regulations 

are being prepared to legislate and put in place these financial 

security requirements, as well as to further expand the powers 

and functions of the quality assurance body. 

 

As we work on developing the regulations and policies, we will 

continue to consult with our key stakeholders for the benefit of 

Saskatchewan’s post-secondary system, and most especially for 

our students. 

 

The intent, again, of this new legislation is to provide a 

balanced approach that affords a reasonable level of consumer 

protection, if you want, the quality assurance component 

without imposing unreasonable restrictions that might stifle 

innovative educational practices or create unnecessary barriers 

for students and their families across the province. 

 

Regarding the universities, Mr. Speaker, we’ve made every 

effort to protect the autonomy and integrity of our two 

universities. As noted earlier, the university degree programs 

are exempt from the Act. We’ve consulted with both 

universities, and we find their response both encouraging and 

helpful. And we want to work with both of these institutions to 

help make sure that we are taking some of the lessons learned 

from their existing practices and applying these lessons learned 

into the process that’s moving forward. 

 

We have also agreed that the internal quality assurance 

practices of both the University of Regina and University of 

Saskatchewan provide sufficient oversight for their existing 

degree programs. Essentially what we are working to do is 

address a public policy gap that exists, that is, the authorization 

of degrees from different institutions. This in no way casts any 

doubt and is meant to offer reassurance to both the University 

of Regina and University of Saskatchewan regarding the solid 

work that they have sustained for decades. As a result, Mr. 

Speaker, partnerships they have with other institutions to offer 

degree programs will also not be affected by this proposed 

legislation. 

 

A final and important point, Mr. Speaker, is to note that 

institutions authorized to grant degrees will not be granted 

permission to use the word university. In fact the title university 

involves much more than granting degrees, and we want to 

ensure that this term is well protected and preserved within the 

Saskatchewan context, again taking some lessons learned from 

jurisdictions across the country and well beyond. 

 

The use of the words university and varsity are currently 

restricted by The University of Regina Act, and the restrictions 

focus on both the University of Saskatchewan and University of 

Regina. But consequential amendments to this Act will transfer 



184 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2011 

that authority from the University of Regina proper to cabinet. 

 

And I want to be clear, a fundamental tenet of this piece of 

legislation is to further protect the term university. For, while 

this Act contemplates expanding degree options for students, 

for institutions, and for communities, it is intended to further 

protect and in fact restrict the use of the term university within 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, this is important and timely legislation 

for students, for parents, for institutions, and for communities. 

Essentially it is important for us to address this public policy 

gap for the future of our province. It acknowledges and respects 

the strong foundation of our two pre-eminent universities, both 

considered to be in the top 10 of their respective criteria, while 

making sure that we are enabling our system to move forward 

through strengthened and more broad-based quality assurance, 

essentially making sure that we have that balance, that there is 

greater accessibility for students, Mr. Speaker, while preserving 

and protecting the quality of Saskatchewan’s post-secondary 

educational system and the degree granting authority that has 

helped to define it. And finally, the legislation is meant to align 

our province with best practices both nationally and around the 

world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Degree 

Authorization Act. I appreciate the opportunity to offer these 

remarks this evening. Thank you, sir. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 18, The Degree Authorization Act. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to join the minister in looking at the Bill and certainly 

offering our perspectives and our comments on the Bill. And of 

course it says the authority to provide degree programs and the 

designation at the university should be protected and so on and 

so forth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the comments that the minister mentioned just towards 

the end of his comments was the fact that he had done some 

consultation on how we can strengthen the post-secondary 

institutions, the universities, and where he mentioned he looked 

across Canada and beyond. And certainly when he mentioned 

beyond, I’m assuming that beyond would mean the States as 

well, a few states if that’s the case. Or is it further north, say, 

the territories? It would be nice to know what kind of 

consultation that the minister did do when he made the 

reference, across Canada and beyond. Because obviously there 

is certainly a genuine interest from our perspective to ensure 

that the grant degree programs are protected, that they remain 

intact because obviously there is many fly-by-night operators 

that come along and they offer all kinds of degrees and 

programs. They can do it online. They can create a virtual entity 

out there in cyberspace, and yet they still want to be able to 

grant all kinds of honorary degrees and so on and so forth and 

actual certification that might not exist. 

 

So I think it’s important that we look at some of the efforts of 

this minister to really qualify our institutions, U of R 

[University of Regina] and the U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] and to make sure that we don’t have these 

fly-by-nighters that come along and pretend to be — as this 

government does at times — pretend to be the answer to 

everybody’s solutions, Mr. Speaker. I think we need to set 

standards and I think the university, both of them, are doing a 

remarkable job of not only making sure that we keep their 

institutions alive and thriving, but they also have the standards, 

like as the minister mentioned. That’s pretty darn important. 

 

I take interest in the comments in reference to the board that 

will be actually hearing applications from some of the other 

institutions that may want to have the degree offer. And he 

mentioned that there may be three or a minimum of not less 

than three members. And I think that’s important, Mr. Speaker, 

to know who these potential members are. Are they nationally 

recognized figures? Are they people of course that the Sask 

Party might want to put from their own quarters? We need to 

know who these people are that they are going to be putting on 

this board to hear all the applications and to hear why certain 

applications were not accepted and why others may have been, 

when you look at the granting of degrees. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think we need to find out how they intend to 

structure this board. Who would be involved in the structure of 

that board? Any of the groups that the minister has consulted, 

will they be active in that? Will the U of S have a rep? Will the 

U of A [University of Alberta] or the U of R have a rep? And 

these are some of the questions I think we need to ask, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I notice the members would know that the U of A has been 

active in our area. We look at Métis land claims and the 

traditional use of Métis lands, are they considered intruders in 

this whole process? Well that’s a question that I certainly have 

as well, Mr. Speaker, because we know that university of 

Yukon and there’s a number of different groups that do come to 

Saskatchewan and do case studies, Mr. Speaker. Are they 

exempt now from this Act? Are they allowed to do that? And 

these are some of the questions that we often have when we 

have Bills of this sort come forward. 

 

So it’s important to take the time, as I mentioned, with all the 

Bills that we’ve discussed in the last couple of days to see what 

the impact overall is. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I noticed that there have been a few 

members of their caucus that have claimed certain degrees, and 

when you look at it, really there was never that qualification of 

theirs. And I don’t want to get into names, Mr. Speaker, but a 

couple of them actually put in their resumé that they’re 

engineers when in fact they took a two-week welding course. 

So where exactly do we get some of these, some of these 

programs that give these guys the authority to claim, to claim 

that they have all these degrees and have all these abilities on 

their resumé when in fact they may have gotten a certificate 

from a two-week course, Mr. Speaker? 

 

That’s what’s really important as well, is that if you have the 

university actually design the program, deliver the program, and 

accredit the program, that makes a big difference. So I don’t 

think from our perspective that there’s any argument of the 

integrity of the universities in Saskatchewan, that we certainly 

applaud any efforts to recommend that they be a part of the 



December 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 185 

process to make sure we don’t have the fly-by-night operators 

coming to Saskatchewan and offering all these engineering 

degrees when really they aren’t engineering degrees. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think this is quite important. People out there 

have often spoke of the incredible ability of our educators to 

mould new and exciting minds and create opportunity for many, 

many quarters of our province. So that’s something that 

certainly I would support and I would recognize. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of folks . . . What happens a lot 

of times is people tend to want to represent something that they 

are not. And I think it’s important when we look at the degrees 

in general that a lot of people claim to be able to do some of 

these things, and yet when you look at the accreditation, when 

we look at the history, really there isn’t that kind of ability that 

they would have. 

 

And I can remember one day, Mr. Speaker, I was actually 

making a speech, and before I got introduced, Mr. Speaker — I 

took a page out of one of their candidates — and before I got 

introduced I told the MC [master of ceremonies] to make sure 

that they announced that I took a four-year business admin 

program at the U of S. But the problem was my brother was in 

the audience, got up and yelled out that it was only a two-week 

program. 

 

[19:15] 

 

But the problem we had is that it was, it was actually pretty 

funny at the time, but there are members out there that, on their 

side, that claim to have certain accreditation and certain 

degrees, and I hope that this Act targets those individuals and 

tells them to fess up — it wasn’t really the U of S or U of R that 

awarded you this degree. That is something out there in the 

community college system that may have given you that title. 

So I think it’s important that not only do we hold our 

institutions to account, that we have the proper process, that we 

don’t have people on the other side saying, I’ve got a degree in 

this, when in fact they don’t. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think this Bill certainly warrants a lot of 

attention. It certainly warrants a lot of discussion with a lot of 

the stakeholders and to see exactly what the minister meant 

when he mentioned that he looked at different provinces and 

beyond. Like what were some of the models that he 

implemented when he looked at this? And the whole concept of 

this body having the authority to decide who can grant degrees 

or not, I think it’s important we look at the structure, the 

makeup of this board and so on and so forth. Those are really, 

really key points that I want to raise. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as we know, this minister had some 

challenges in the last session. And when we look at the 

community college system, there was all kinds of trouble and 

all kinds of cost and all kinds of concerns. And if that’s par for 

the course with this particular minister, you want to make sure, 

you want to make sure that you get the people that know what 

they’re doing as part of this process. And that’s why I think the 

U of R and the U of S should make part of that body that he’s 

speaking about, that there not be any kind of special deals or 

any special groups of people or a special educational institution 

that might have a seat on this board. Again, what we don’t want 

to see is any kind of conflict of interest or, worse, a political 

agenda being accomplished on the backs of our great U of R 

and U of S. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I looked at the Bill very briefly. I know that 

some of my colleagues have a lot of questions on the actual Bill 

and some of the definitions, some of the sections, and certainly 

some of the work that the minister has done because we need to 

hold him to account as to what this Bill in its present form 

really means for Saskatchewan. And if there’s any hidden 

agendas out there, we need to find that out very quickly. 

 

So I would . . . And make sure that, again, we look at the degree 

authorization — very, very important. We want to make sure 

the people we put out there are responsible people, the people 

we put out there with degrees know what they’re doing. They 

have the skill; they have the ability; they have the certification; 

and therefore they have the protection. I think those are things 

that are really important to the economy of Saskatchewan. We 

on this side of the Assembly understand that. 

 

So we’re not going to argue with the intent of the Bill because 

the intent is to make sure the right institutions have the right 

authority to authorize degrees and that there’s no compromise 

of that particular principle. By the same token, if there’s other 

institutions throughout the lands and beyond that may want to 

come here and do certain things in Saskatchewan, that they also 

have a process that would actually challenge their authority and 

ability to provide those kind of programs and to make sure that 

they’re quality programs and of course very high-quality as 

well. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, again I would point out that the opportunity 

to be heard, as he’s indicated, you know I’m not sure how long 

the process is to determine whether somebody has the authority 

or has the ability to offer a program. And it doesn’t really define 

timelines here as well because it’s about the minister 

considering it appropriate. There’s no specific timelines as to 

how long the process will take to determine whether an 

institution can actually do this. 

 

So these are some of the things we need to find out at the outset 

and make sure that we put provisions within the Act that would 

encourage people to come forward and make changes where 

necessary. And that’s what I think is really important in any of 

these Bills, is that we have to challenge the government 

certainly on its consultation phase to see which groups liked 

this and which groups didn’t and the reason why they didn’t 

like it or did like it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, overall the Bill and its, again, intent seems to 

be honourable in making sure that we don’t have every Tom, 

Dick, and Harry giving degrees out there. I think that’s pretty 

darn important. And we also want to recognize the authority of 

the U of S and the U of R. I think they’re a great presence here 

in Saskatchewan, and certainly they have attributed much to the 

makeup of all of our province. So I think we want to protect 

them as well. So from the opposition’s perspective, absolutely. 

Absolutely I think, as I mentioned, the integrity of our 

institutions is great. We want to build on that and we want to 

support that and we want to recognize that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that being said, we’ll take our time looking at the Act. We’ll 



186 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2011 

take our time consulting with different people that we know that 

would have some interest in this. And we would encourage the 

minister to share the information as a result of some of the 

consultation that he’s done in Canada and beyond. I think it’s 

important to find out where that beyond is. And then we can go 

from there, Mr. Speaker, in terms of making sure we have the 

right information and that if it’s not beyond his mandate to 

share that stuff with us because it’s important to us. And quite 

frankly I don’t think the minister went beyond Canada at all. I 

think he consulted with a few jurisdictions, and what happened 

was he came up with this model. So it’s important to know who 

consulted, who did you consult with, and what were some of 

their ideas and some of their problems with this Act. 

 

The other thing I think is also important, Mr. Speaker, is this 

New West Partnership. Does this affect this particular Act at 

all? We don’t know that. I’m sure Alberta and BC [British 

Columbia] must have some programs out there, might have 

some private teaching institutions or learning institutions that 

might not like this. They might not like this idea. Now does that 

New West Partnership counter this one? Does it really . . . If 

this Bill is what it is intended to protect, does a New West 

Partnership come along and say, well we don’t like that Bill 

because it compromises our agreement, so get rid of it. These 

are some of the things we need to find out, and that’s some of 

the things that some people I know will be very interested in. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again, we’ll take our time looking at this, and I 

move that we adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 18, The Degree 

Authorization Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 13 — The Constitutional Questions Act, 2011/ 

Loi de 2011 sur les questions constitutionnelles 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate 

that, and I thank my colleagues for the warm reception this 

evening. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of Bill 13, 

The Constitutional Questions Act, 2011. The Constitutional 

Questions Act, 2011 is a new bilingual act that will repeal and 

replace the current constitutional questions Act. This change is 

part of the government’s ongoing process of reviewing and 

updating legislation. 

 

A number of issues in the current Act require clarification. 

Without this clarification, these issues may themselves become 

the subject of separate judicial proceedings. This would be an 

expensive and time-consuming distraction from the timely 

consideration of important constitutional issues that the Act was 

intended to facilitate. These types of disputes can be minimized 

by amendments to the Act. 

The current Act gives the Lieutenant Governor in Council the 

power to refer any constitutional or legal issue to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal for its opinion. The opinion of 

the Court of Appeal is considered to be a judgment for purposes 

of an appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada. 

 

The current Act requires that notice be given to the attorneys 

general of Canada and Saskatchewan when the constitutional 

validity or applicability of a law or regulation is challenged, or 

an application is made to obtain a remedy under the Charter. 

 

Finally, the current Act provides that questions arising under 

federal–provincial taxation agreements can be referred to the 

Court of Appeal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the current Act fails to adequately address a 

number of issues, leaving them to the interpretation of the 

public, the parties, or the court. This Bill maintains all of the 

provisions contained in the current Act, but also adds new 

provisions to make the legislative intent of the Act as clear as 

possible to avoid any future potential conflicts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill will address standing to participate in a 

reference and specify who is a party to a reference and who is 

an intervenor. The Bill will specify that the Attorney General 

for Saskatchewan is a party to a reference, to a chambers 

application pursuant to a reference, or any appeal of a reference. 

The Bill will specify that if the Attorney General of Canada 

gives written notice, then he or she is also a party. In contrast, 

the Bill will not grant party status to governments of other 

provinces or territories or to other interested persons who are 

granted leave to intervene. 

 

The Bill will clarify the right of appeal. If the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council includes in the terms of reference that a 

decision of the Court of Appeal is deemed to be a judgment, 

then it may be appealed by a party to the Supreme Court of 

Canada. Conversely if the decision of the Court of Appeal is not 

deemed a judgment, the opinion and reasons of Saskatchewan’s 

highest court will be final. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill will include provisions that allow a Court 

of Appeal judge sitting in chambers to hear and dispose of the 

matters incidental to the reference. This will ensure that there is 

a mechanism by which parties can deal with procedural 

disagreements. A new provision is also included that will allow 

the Court of Appeal to make rules for the purpose of hearing a 

reference. 

 

This Bill will also clarify the service provisions by setting out 

who can accept service on behalf of the Attorney General for 

Saskatchewan and the Attorney General of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill will ensure that references and 

constitutional questions or challenges are able to proceed with 

certainty and that unnecessary delays caused by confusion over 

incidental matters can be avoided while still maintaining and 

upholding the current process to address constitutional issues 

before our court. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 

13, The Constitutional Questions Act, 2011. 

 



December 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 187 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved second reading of Bill No. 13, The Constitutional 

Questions Act, 2011. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 

as I mentioned at the outset at every one of these Bills, I am 

pleased to stand on behalf of the opposition to offer our initial 

comments on any Bill that this particular government may 

throw our way. And certainly from our comments here, Mr. 

Speaker, the constitutional question and challenge is to make 

sure the regulations and consequential amendments to The 

Court of Appeal Act, 2000 is certainly a very . . . It’s a 

document that has a lot of questions in relation to the 

relationship between the provincial government and the federal 

government, Mr. Speaker. And what we tell folks out there that 

certainly aren’t aware of some of the legal jargon and the 

language attached to this particular Bill, that this is the purpose 

of the opposition, is to make sure that we take the time to digest 

the information, to see where this impacts Saskatchewan 

overall. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that there is a lot of discussion here 

in terms of what the minister is trying to achieve, in terms of 

whether there is procedural challenges or the ways that we 

make the system work better. And I go back to some of the 

earlier comments in terms of the relationship within the federal 

and provincial government, is that it’s so complicated and so 

complex in many ways that people need to take the time to 

understand what is being proposed by this Bill. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned at the outset, I’m not a 

lawyer. I’m just a hockey player. So that’s one of the reasons 

why, that’s one of the reasons why I think it’s important that we 

take the time to understand the Bill and have our own legal 

team and have our own legal association come along and say, 

well this is what this actually means to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And what prompts me to get up to speak to this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, is the fact that this is exactly what I mean when people 

ask the role the opposition, the role of different associations out 

there, is to try and make sense of what this government may try 

and do when it comes to legal matters. 

 

So I think without question that this Bill does have some impact 

on Saskatchewan. They talk a lot about the relationship and the 

procedural challenges and certainly trying to make sure we have 

some good, good proper language when we talk to each other in 

terms of the Supreme Court of Canada or the Saskatchewan 

government. And that’s kind of where this is headed. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to make sure that people are invited to 

participate in analyzing this Bill, that the legal team that we 

have in place, our legal supporters, have the opportunity to 

explain this very quickly and to also identify the challenges 

attached with this. 

 

Now does this create problems for Saskatchewan? Does it 

hinder Saskatchewan in any way to challenge the federal 

government on a number of constitutional issues, whether it be 

the whole notion of the Aboriginal people, whether it be on land 

settlements, on whether it be any of the federal-provincial 

points that we often find ourselves at odds with? 

 

And that’s one of the important things, is that while the issues 

are out there and generally people understand what they’re 

about, does this affect the procedure of having fairness afforded 

to those issues? And that’s the real question that we have on 

this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why we need to 

take the time to go through it and to see what this is totally 

going to do to try and either sidetrack those issues or to try and 

put some procedural problem that would stop us from 

discussing those major issues. 

 

As you know, at one time this provincial government 

challenged the federal government and something like an $800 

million lawsuit. Would that have been . . . Was that case, could 

that somehow be impacted by this Bill? 

 

[19:30] 

 

And these are some of the questions that we need to find. And 

at all times when you have legal discussion and legal 

terminology in place, it’s always important to know that there is 

some significant difference of words and interpretation of those 

words, and that has an impact on many people’s lives. 

 

So I point out that even in some of the Acts that we have, the 

opportunity to use the words ―shall‖ or ―will,‖ there is a 

significant difference between those two words, and people 

understand them. And from the political perspective there’s 

totally, a total different understanding from the layman’s use of 

those words. 

 

So that’s why it’s important that we take the time to understand 

these Bills and to ask for legal advice to make sure that some of 

the points that we’re raising in this Bill, while procedural in 

nature, may have some change in intent or certainly change in 

terminology that we should be concerned about. And that’s why 

we will take the time, Mr. Speaker. So I hereby adjourn the 

debate on Bill No. 13. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of The Constitutional Questions Act, 2011. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 14 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2011 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again 

today to move second reading of Bill 14, The Securities 

Amendment Act, 2011. This legislation will introduce a number 

of updates that are necessary to enhance Saskatchewan’s capital 

markets and protect participants in those markets. 

 

Firstly these amendments will permit financial advisers to 

conduct their business through a professional corporation. This 

is a privilege that is enjoyed by many other professions in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, and it will allow those people to make 



188 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2011 

better succession and tax planning decisions. Saskatchewan has 

taken a lead role by introducing this legislation. Several other 

provinces are considering similar amendments. 

 

These amendments will also grant certain powers to audit 

oversight organizations such as the Canadian Public 

Accountability Board. Auditor oversight organizations perform 

a key role in the financial services sector as they ensure that 

information made available to investors and the general public 

by publicly traded companies is reliable and of high quality. 

 

These amendments will also provide these organizations with 

the statutory power to compel disclosure of documents and 

records from accounting firms that audit publicly traded 

companies. This ensures that the audit process is accurate and 

independent. All other provinces are planning to implement 

similar amendments if they have not already done so. 

 

In addition these amendments ensure that officials of auditor 

oversight organizations cannot be subpoenaed or otherwise 

compelled to disclose privileged and or confidential information 

in third party proceedings. Additionally these amendments will 

allow for the regulatory oversight of credit rating organizations. 

 

Credit rating organizations provide opinions on the credit 

worthiness, issued security, and financial obligations of a 

particular company. The importance of these opinions to 

investors and other market participants and the influence of 

these opinions on the securities markets have increased 

significantly over the past decade. This is due in part to the 

increased number of issuers in the advent of new and complex 

financial products such as asset-backed securities and credit 

derivatives. Mr. Speaker, these ratings are very important to 

investors, to managers of investments and retirement portfolios 

since they are intended to reflect the risk associated with a 

particular investment. 

 

After the stock markets suffered severe losses in 2008, 

international and Canadian officials conducted an analysis 

which determined that poor quality credit ratings were 

contributing factors that lead to the market turndown. For 

example many investors purchased asset-backed securities and 

other investments that were tied to US [United States] subprime 

mortgages that were extremely unstable. Many of these 

investments were made on the basis of favourable credit ratings 

that were issued prior to the market crisis. There are now 

concerns that credit rating organizations have in the past relied 

on flawed methodologies to determine many ratings. 

Unfortunately many of these investments failed. This had a 

negative and lasting impact on hard-earned retirement savings, 

pensions, and other long-term investments. 

 

These amendments will require credit rating organizations to 

comply with a code of conduct that will impose tighter controls 

on the quality and integrity of the credit rating process. The 

code of conduct will require the credit rating organizations to 

maintain a high level of independence in order to avoid 

conflicts of interest. These measures have already been or will 

soon be adopted in most other provinces as part of a 

harmonized national effort to improve the quality of credit 

ratings, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These amendments will also remove the $100,000 limit on the 

amount of financial compensation that the Saskatchewan 

Financial Services Commission may order to be paid to an 

individual who has suffered financial loss due to a 

contravention of securities legislation. The Financial Services 

Commission may hold a hearing into an allegation of 

contravention or wrongdoing, and an order, if they decide the 

contravention actually caused the financial loss. The hearing is 

a formal proceeding that hears and reviews evidence, quantifies 

the amount of the financial loss, and ultimately rules on whether 

the contravention caused the financial loss in whole or in part. 

 

Where losses are proven to have exceeded the current $100,000 

limit, Mr. Speaker, the claimant must go before the Court of 

Queen’s Bench to prove and recover those additional losses. 

This unnecessarily burdens both the claimant and the court with 

further proceedings and associated costs. Mr. Speaker, this 

amendment will ensure that where claimants have suffered 

financial loss because of unlawful activity, the entire amount of 

the loss may be recovered through one proceeding before the 

Financial Services Commission. 

 

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, these amendments will introduce a small 

number of housekeeping measures that keep Saskatchewan’s 

regulatory framework up to date and harmonized with other 

provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill 13, 

The Securities Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved second reading of Bill No. 14, The Securities 

Amendment Act, 2011. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased to rise on behalf of the official opposition to offer our 

early insight into this particular Bill, which is An Act to amend 

The Securities Act, 1988. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple of points I certainly want to 

touch on when the proposal in the Bill spoke about things like 

credit rating improvements and determining credit worthiness 

and to make sure that different people are protected out there in 

case there’s some bad advice. There is no question that there’s 

other jurisdictions that are looking at this. I think overall that 

the people of the States certainly taught us a lesson in Canada in 

terms of what you need to do to avoid major problems. And 

anything that we can do to strengthen certainly the people that 

are involved with this industry and the people that are impacted 

by this, certainly the opposition wants to look at this. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the credit rating improvement, I 

want to make sure that when you look at how that is certainly 

being monitored today, we are going to ask the question of, 

what improvements are put in place now? What is the 

difference between the credit rating worthiness of the States 

versus Canada or Ontario versus Saskatchewan? Like there’s 

obviously a different style in different places, so we need to 

know what kind of standard that will be put in when it comes to 

the credit rating process that different places use. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, obviously we want to see Saskatchewan 

investment happen. We want to see the different groups out 



December 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 189 

there that may have ways and means to improve that particular 

industry. And why not? Because it’s something that the people 

of Saskatchewan should have — make sure that people that are 

investing, people that are involved with markets, and people 

that are able to work in this industry are held to account. 

 

Now the minister also made reference to a, that in event that 

there is some bad advice that people may have had losses, that 

they should get their money back. And the question that I 

instinctively ask is, where would they get this money from? Is 

there a process? Is there a fund? People ought to know that kind 

of information as well. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think when you look at the giving certain 

powers to auditors’ oversights, as we all know, the auditors are 

people that have the incredible skill to tear apart a business 

plan. They also can find out the problems instinctively as to 

what is necessary to improve a business or a government. And a 

lot of times their advice is very, very well taken. 

 

So you look at this Bill, Mr. Speaker. There is three or four 

areas that we certainly want to investigate further. Rather it’s 

the credit rating improvements that the minister spoke about. If 

there’s some people have gotten bad advice, they get some of 

their money back, and where is that money coming from. Like 

all these different questions that we have on this particular Bill, 

that we have to take the time to understand it. 

 

Now I want to pay a bit of attention to the notion that the 

minister talked about certain powers to auditor oversight. He 

mentioned a couple organizations, if I’m not wrong. And the 

people ask me, like certainly, what is an audit? And I’m 

actually quoting from a book here, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll find 

the name of the book. And the auditors, they detail look at the 

accounts, ―. . . the risks associated with them, the controls that 

the executive put in place to reduce risks, an assessment of 

those adequacy of the controls and how they are operated, as 

well detailed testing of those controls.‖ And there’s a list of 

things that the auditor must do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s fairly, it’s fairly complex, and there’s no question that 

there are ways that you could become a very quick and efficient 

armchair auditor. And that’s kind of the things that we 

encourage people to do when you look at this particular Bill. 

How is the auditor oversight process going to be fixed up, and 

how can the average person understand what is being done with 

this particular Bill? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, whether we want to enhance Saskatchewan 

investment, whether we want to provide certain powers to a 

auditor oversight player, whether we want to look at how 

they’re doing the credit rating improvements and how we can 

improve credit worthiness in the whole notion of where the 

money is coming from in the event you have some bad advice 

— these are some of the initial questions we have on this 

particular Bill. So we need to reach out to different folks that 

understand the Bill and are able to give us some very good 

information on how we could strengthen the Bill because 

obviously much advice on this particular front is very, very 

necessary. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the Bill is straightforward in terms of the 

explanation. But as always we want to take a second look, a 

third look, a fourth look as to what is being proposed, and we 

want to make sure that the people of Saskatchewan are afforded 

that opportunity. 

 

So therefore, given the time frame that we have to look at this 

over the next several months, I move that we adjourn debate on 

Bill No. 14, An Act to amend The Securities Act, 1988. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 14, The Securities 

Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 1 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 1 — The Queen’s 

Bench Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 

1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to enter 

into this debate on Bill No. 1. First of all . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — We’re really happy that you are too, 

because it’s not Buckley. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — First of all I just want to speak a little bit to the 

comments that the Minister of Justice made in relation to this 

Bill. He indicated that there seems to be a fairly straightforward 

piece of legislation that’s being tabled here, and particularly the 

goal of this particular amendment to The Queen’s Bench Act of 

1998 is to keep the number of judges the same. But they’re 

making a slight change to have 32 judges including the Chief 

Justice — which is the current makeup of the court — but to 

delegate an additional role within one of the other judges as the 

Associate Chief Justice. Of course the Chief Justice of the court 

is responsible for all the functions of the administration of the 

court, including scheduling matters, and apparently that takes a 

lot of time. The Chief Justice, according to the Minister of 

Justice, is spending most of his time on administration and not 

actually hearing decisions in the court, which is something that 

is unfortunate because the reason he’s Chief Justice is because 

of his legal abilities as a judge. 

 

So I guess the idea of this Bill is to share the administrator 

responsibilities with someone identified as the Associate Chief 

Justice. There’s other amendments that will allow the Associate 



190 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2011 

Chief Justice to also take on the duties and responsibilities of 

the Chief Justice if in fact the Chief Justice is not able to attend 

to his duties. So it seems to be allowing for basically a subbing 

in of an Associate Chief Justice in the event that the Chief 

Justice is unable or absent, unable to act or is absent. And the 

goal as stated by the Minister of Justice is to ensure the 

seamless operation of the court. 

 

The Minister of Justice made an interesting comment that this is 

one of those provisions that the government hopes it never 

needs but it is best to have in place just in case. It seems a bit 

odd that we have a government here that is putting in place 

things that they hope they never need, when indeed it appears to 

me that there are things that this government should be doing 

that are needed but are not in place. So it seems a bit odd to be 

focusing on this kind of provision where there’s a number of 

legislative needs in the province that aren’t being addressed at 

all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[19:45] 

 

And again I’m not sure, you know, that this is a hugely 

necessary piece. Already the Act has provisions within it for the 

Chief Justice to be able to assign duties, although it’s not 

explicitly provided for. And it seems that the reason we’re 

doing this is because there are several provinces that do it. 

Again, it’s not clear to me why it’s absolutely needed, but this 

is something that I think we would need to take a close look at 

and consult with our colleagues and the resources that we have 

at our hand. 

 

It does appear to be a housekeeping type of legislation, as I 

said. And right now, as you know, the Queen’s Bench court has 

the family law division and the general law division. And 

apparently in Quebec, as the minister pointed out, there are two 

associate chief justices for the general division and the family 

law division. 

 

What concerns me, Mr. Speaker, is that there may be 

unintended consequences that we have not had an opportunity 

to identify at this point in time, and why we need to have 

measured debate on these types of housekeeping Bills as well as 

other pieces of legislation. For example, it’s not clear to us what 

kind of remuneration would be involved or any additional costs 

to the taxpayer to implement this position. 

 

The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 makes very scant reference to the 

role of the Chief Justice, and it’s not clear to me exactly what 

the Chief Justice is expected to do. In part 4 of The Queen’s 

Bench Act, 1998, section 14 reads that: 

 

The chief justice shall co-ordinate and apportion the 

business of the court and assign the judges to hold court 

and chambers at any times and places that the chief 

justice considers appropriate. 

 

And in section 15 — it’s called the meeting of judges section: 

 

At least twice in each year, on a day and at a place fixed 

by the chief justice, the judges shall meet to consider any 

issue affecting the performance of their judicial duties. 

 

Other than that, Mr. Speaker, there’s very little mention of the 

role of the Chief Justice in The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 except 

perhaps in section 19, which indicates that the judge of the 

Court of Appeal and a judge of the Queen’s Bench court shall 

sit in chambers on days and times that the Chief Justice of 

Saskatchewan and the Chief Justice agree on. 

 

So that’s really basically the duties, additional duties of the 

Chief Justice, in addition to hearing decisions. So as I said, Mr. 

Speaker, the mention of the Chief Justice in The Queen’s Bench 

Act is very scant. It appears that this type of administrative 

assistance is something that may already be available to the 

Chief Justice. Certainly he’s been managing quite well to date. 

But if the true intention of this Bill is to provide the Chief 

Justice more time to actually hear decisions in the court, it may 

be a good piece of legislation. But we need time to consider it, 

and we need to take due diligence to ensure that this is in the 

best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So I’d like to say in conclusion, thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker, and of course many of my colleagues here on the loyal 

opposition will also want to comment. So as such, I would like 

to move to adjourn this Bill for further debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Nutana has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 1, The Queen’s Bench 

Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 2 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 2 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Collaborative Law) Amendment Act, 

2011/Loi corrective (droit collaboratif) de 2011 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to enter debate on Bill No. 2, An Act to amend certain 

Statutes with respect to matters concerning Collaborative Law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill, the minister outlined yesterday, it’s 

amending a few different Acts. One of them is The Children’s 

Law Act and it will be requiring now, Mr. Speaker, that lawyers 

will be required to inform their clients about available 

mediation as well as collaborative law services that may be of 

assistance in resolving their matters. So the addition of 

collaborative law services is the change there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s also going to be amending The Family Maintenance Act in 

the same way. Both these Acts are from 1997 where negotiation 

and mediation were deemed to be cutting edge. But 

collaborative law is a new tool now, Mr. Speaker, in lawyers’ 

tool kits for resolving disputes when relationships end, Mr. 

Speaker. So this Bill will also be, will be amending The Family 

Maintenance Act to ensure that lawyers will be required to 

inform their clients about the available mediation and 



December 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 191 

collaborative law services once again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And a third change that will be taking place, Mr. Speaker, will 

be to The Family Property Act. In the past, Mr. Speaker, 

mediation and negotiation, lawyers weren’t required to tell their 

clients about mediation and negotiation. So this is a complete 

addition to The Family Property Act now. Lawyers will be 

required to inform their clients of collaborative law or 

mediation services that may be available to assist in resolving 

their own matters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, any time that parties can come together without 

having to go to court is a positive thing. And speaking from 

experience, Mr. Speaker, in my own, in my own experience, 

I’ve had the opportunity to use mediation when my marriage 

ended a decade ago. My husband at the time and I were in 

counselling and didn’t know lawyers, didn’t know . . . I think 

for the average citizen who isn’t a lawyer or isn’t connected to 

lawyers and who’s never been through the end of a relationship, 

it’s all a very foreign world. These aren’t things that we like to 

think about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So having the opportunity, I was fortunate enough, Mr. 

Speaker, to already be in counselling, and it was our counsellor 

who recommended mediation. And my former husband and I 

were able to . . . It wasn’t easy, but we were able to negotiate 

and go through the mediation process quite smoothly. And I 

think that that’s proved fruitful in our ongoing relationship now 

as co-parents of our daughter Hennessey who is 13 years old. 

It’s allowed us, I think, the opportunity to have that 

relationship, to want to continue to parent without great 

hostility. And I have to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that mediation 

wasn’t easy, but I think it built the foundation for us to carry on. 

 

But mediation and collaborative law aren’t for everybody, Mr. 

Speaker. Looking at a paper here actually written by Wanda 

Wiegers and Michaela Keet out of the U of S, they argue that 

with collaborative law: 

 

. . . [its] potential impact will depend largely on how 

sensitive lawyers are to the existence of gendered power 

imbalances, on whether they screen [clients] effectively 

[into collaborative law and] provide timely and specific 

legal advice, and work at more effective communication 

with their clients. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, collaborative law isn’t for everybody, and it 

really requires . . . So it’s, I’m very glad to hear it’s not being 

mandated, Mr. Speaker. But the fact that lawyers now are going 

to be required, I think, to tell their clients about other possible 

ways of resolving disputes is a positive thing. But we always 

have to remember that no relationship . . . It’s not a 

one-size-fits-all situation, Mr. Speaker. And having the 

opportunity to put different tools into place is very important. 

 

I think putting on that gendered lens when you’re looking at the 

creation of public policy is absolutely imperative, and I think 

that there are definite pros and cons with respect to 

collaborative law. How does public policy affect men and 

women differently? And again, this paper entitled 

―Collaborative Family Law and Gender Inequalities: Balancing 

Risks and Opportunities‖ outlines some of that, that we have to 

think about how our policy is going to impact different groups. 

So I did have a conversation on Friday with a collaborative 

lawyer, one of the growing numbers of lawyers here in 

Saskatchewan who do practice collaborative law. She was very 

keen on these amendments, but our job as the opposition is to 

talk to as many stakeholders as possible. Unintended 

consequences are one thing we have to be on the lookout for. 

Sometimes when you look at a Bill at its face, it’s one thing, but 

when you get deeper in to it, various outcomes that you’re not 

expecting take place. 

 

And so our job, Mr. Speaker, is over the next while to reach out 

to stakeholders. I know the minister mentioned, Mr. Speaker, 

that the Law Society of Saskatchewan and the family law 

sections of the Canadian Bar Association, Saskatchewan 

branch, Collaborative Lawyers of Saskatchewan, and the 

provincial dispute resolution office were consulted, and they 

support these amendments. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the opposition will be also reaching out to 

these organizations and other organizations to make sure that 

we fully understand the implications and ramifications of this 

Bill. Though on the face of it, it seems to be a positive move, 

Mr. Speaker, to ensuring that lawyers are informing their clients 

of the various services out there. But we always have to 

remember, Mr. Speaker, that there isn’t a one-size-fits-all way 

of resolving disputes. So with that I will . . . I know that I have 

colleagues who are interested in waiting into the debate down 

the road here. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Riversdale has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 2, The Miscellaneous 

Statutes (Collaborative Law) Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 3 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 3 — The 

Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2011 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And to 

the member from Indian Head-Milestone, thank you for the 

encouragement right off the top. 

 

The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2011, Bill 

No. 3 of this government on their exciting legislative agenda, 

Mr. Speaker. Some of these Bills seem to have the . . . smack a 

bit of housekeeping, Mr. Speaker. Not that housekeeping is a 

bad thing; I wouldn’t be saying that, Mr. Speaker. But certainly 

some of these measures that they’re bringing forward are less 

than, less than ushering us into a brave new legislative world, 

which is not necessarily a bad thing otherwise, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What this Bill is consumed with or seized with is primarily 



192 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2011 

making some administrative changes to the current summary 

offences procedure, again trying to keep up with changes in 

technology and the issuance of tickets and summonses, again 

trying to make it a bit more time-sensitive in terms of how the 

administrative aspect of this law is carried out. And again, 

summary offences applying to a fairly wide range of provincial 

offences — as the minister had cited in his remarks off the top 

— from the minor traffic offences to more serious ones such as 

poaching, environmental pollution, and the unsafe transport of 

goods on our highways. 

 

The thing I find interesting, Mr. Speaker, is later on in the 

remarks from the minister where he talks about the current 

maximum number of days for which an offender who defaults 

on payment of fines may be imprisoned. As it stands right now, 

Mr. Speaker, the Act provides for a 90-day limit on the amount 

of jail time that may be imposed on an offender who is in 

default of fine payment. To go on to quote from the minister’s 

remarks: 

 

The 90-day cap on imprisonment is insufficient to deal 

with those offenders who accumulate a large number of 

fines or an extremely high fine. In those cases, the higher 

maximum term of imprisonment will act as a deterrent. 

 

So as it stands right now in the legislation, Mr. Speaker, there’s 

a 90-day cap on the penalty that can be assessed to people in 

default of fine payment. There’s analysis that has apparently 

taken place in the Ministry of Justice determining that that 

current penalty, that 90-day cap, is insufficient. What the 

minister fails to mention in his remarks but which of course is 

included in the legislation itself, Mr. Speaker, is that they’re 

moving the cap from 90 days to two years less a day. So they’re 

moving to the maximum provincial penalty that can be levied in 

terms of jail time, you know, two years less a day being two 

years less a day — one day short of federal time, Mr. Speaker 

— from the current cap of 90 days. 

 

So I guess some of the questions that that would suggest, Mr. 

Speaker, is what is the analysis that this is based on? How did 

they come to the conclusion that the current 90-day cap was 

insufficient? And how is it that they’d move from 90 days all 

the way over to two years less a day? And I guess we await 

further information from the minister or further research that we 

as the official opposition will be undertaking to dig more deeply 

into this. 

 

Again, The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act 

doesn’t seem like a real screamer, but the fact that they’re 

moving the cap, the hammer in this legislation, the fact that 

they’re moving it from 90 days, Mr. Speaker, to two years less a 

day is a pretty significant jump in the severity of the penalty 

and something that we’ll be looking into as we go about doing 

our due diligence and our research into this legislation. 

 

[20:00] 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other administrative 

changes that are made in this legislation in terms of making 

better use of telecommunications, keeping up with other 

jurisdictions in terms of what documents can be issued in an 

electronic format — again, not necessarily bad things in and of 

themselves. And there’s a reverse onus in terms of we’re 

making more clear that failure to appear can result in a 

summary conviction, Mr. Speaker, or an automatic conviction. 

And again these things would seem to be fairly commonsensical 

and straightforward, but as we’ve found on many fronts with 

this government, Mr. Speaker, sometimes the devil does indeed 

lie in the details. We’ll be going through this legislation with a 

fine-tooth comb. 

 

So to recap, Mr. Speaker, as we go about doing our due 

diligence, we want to know more about the analysis that was 

employed to move from a 90-day cap on penalties assessed for 

people failing to appear or those that have accumulated a large 

number of fines. We’d like to know about the incidence of 

people that have run up against that 90-day cap. We’d like to 

know about just what are those fines that have been levied and 

then not paid. Is there a character to those offences, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

We’d like to know what is the character of the people who are 

committing these offences in terms of, do they live in a certain 

place? Are they of a certain income bracket? Are they 

committing particular offences, Mr. Speaker, and is it perhaps 

something that’s related more to the offence itself as opposed to 

the administrative aspect of this Bill? 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, the fact that they’ve moved it from a 

90-day cap to two years less a day is a fairly breathtaking jump 

in terms of the severity of this penalty. And again it’s not that 

two years less a day sentences aren’t warranted in a great 

number of circumstances, Mr. Speaker, but we’d like to hear a 

bit more about why this jump in the severity of the penalty. 

 

So we’ve got a number of questions on this piece of legislation, 

Mr. Speaker, questions that we’ll be following up as we do our 

due diligence on this legislation, as we talk to professionals in 

the field, as we consult with legal practitioners within our own 

caucus, Mr. Speaker, and throughout the legal community at 

large. But at this time, I know that a great number of my 

colleagues also want to participate in this debate, and as such, 

Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 3. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 3, The Summary 

Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 4 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 4 — The Pension 

Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m just very eager 

and keen to get on and into the debate here on Bill No. 4, An 

Act to amend The Pension Benefits Act, 1992. 

 



December 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 193 

It is a pleasure to enter into debate on this, Mr. Speaker, 

because we know that the issue of pensions, the issue of 

pension benefits is very important, a very often top-of-mind 

issue for Saskatchewan people and for all Canadians. And that’s 

because, Mr. Speaker, we know that pensions really are a very 

important part to ensuring that Canadian citizens, Saskatchewan 

residents have a good quality of life throughout one’s entire life 

not only on the front end, the middle end, but also in the golden 

years as some people phrase it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know pensions and the discussion of pensions is a topic that 

is in the media, is in the news a lot because of the importance 

that it has to Canadian families. And when we think of some of 

the current events that have been discussed over the past year, 

there’s been a great discussion, Mr. Speaker, on the national 

stage as to what is the best approach to pensions in order to 

deliver the stability and the quality of life for everyday 

Saskatchewan people and Canadians. 

 

There’s been discussions about whether the Canadian pension 

plan should be expanded as is, whether there should be other 

options. We’ve seen an approach, Mr. Speaker, that the federal 

Conservatives have taken, and there’s been a good amount of 

debate around that and whether or not that is the proper 

approach. 

 

This is a bit of a tangent from the Bill at hand, Mr. Speaker, but 

I wanted to start with those comments because it shows the 

importance of pensions to Saskatchewan people and to 

Canadians in general. 

 

When we look at this particular Bill, we know that it is a very 

important one. While it could be termed as housekeeping or not 

of the, perhaps, the garnering the greatest attention or having 

the brightest light shone on it, I think it is important to look at 

it. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, of some of my experiences over the past 

year, past few months in door knocking, and actually pensions 

are something that’s brought up. Pensions are something that is 

brought up on a fairly regular basis. Often, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

constituents thinking that politicians have golden pensions, and 

I know that’s a discussion that I’m sure members on both sides 

of the House have more than once. But, Mr. Speaker, I think 

that when we look at the issue of pensions, we need to ensure 

that the decisions that we’re taking, the decisions that we’re 

making around any sort of changes to pension law, pension 

regulations, especially when we look at different jurisdictions, 

we need to make sure that we’re acting on the best interests of 

all Canadian people and of all Saskatchewan people, especially 

from a perspective here of the provincial legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I understand it based on the minister’s second 

reading remarks on this piece of legislation, this piece of 

legislation is intended to provide the legal authority for the 

provincial government to enter into a new national agreement 

with respect to multi-jurisdictional plans. I’m not an expert on 

pensions, Mr. Speaker, but as I understand it, a 

multi-jurisdictional plan is a plan which would be registered in 

one jurisdiction, one province of the country, but may have 

members from different provinces. It may be offered to people 

across the country. So whether that . . . Most often I would 

assume this would be in a situation where you have a company 

that may be based in one province where the plan is registered 

but would have members belonging to the plan in a variety of 

provinces in different places. 

 

Based on the minister’s remarks, a bit of information about the 

relevance or the prevalence of these plans, Mr. Speaker, in a 

Canadian context: we know that there are about 3,000 

multi-jurisdictional plans in Canada covering 2.5 million 

people. So it’s certainly a large amount of people. We know 

here in the Saskatchewan context, there are about 50,000 people 

that would fall under these multi-jurisdictional plans, or MJPs 

as it can be abbreviated to. We know, Mr. Speaker, that in 1968 

there was an agreement that provided some of the framework 

for these multi-jurisdictional plans. 

 

As I understand though from the minister’s remarks in his 

speech, the problem that we’ve seen is that with the 

multi-jurisdictional plans, they may be registered in one 

province, but the way that it was structured is that the laws 

would apply where the plan was registered as well as where the 

participants in the plan may be living. So you can come into a 

situation or a situation can arise where it’s impractical or 

impossible to have the dual laws applying to this plan because 

of the conflict that may exist. And there have been cases, as 

suggested by the minister in his speech, where there has been a 

conflict between the jurisdictions over the details of the plan. 

And court cases have come about, Mr. Speaker, and as a result, 

there needs to be greater clarity and a better approach to ensure 

that people’s interests are protected and that plans can meet the 

needs of their members, even when the multi-jurisdictional 

reality is there. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, when we look at this multi-jurisdictional 

plan and we look at this national agreement — there was a 

reference in the minister’s remarks how some provinces have 

come on board already and other provinces are in the works of 

making the legislative changes in order to allow for sign-on to 

the agreement — I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, to ensure 

that the decisions we’re making here in Saskatchewan are in 

fact in the interest of Saskatchewan people. We want to make 

sure that when changes occur through a national agreement that 

this doesn’t in any way erode the benefits or the protection for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, when we’re dealing with pensions we 

know that the aspect of risk is a very important one, and who is 

assuming the burden of risk, and who is put in a perhaps 

vulnerable position with any sort of changes that may take place 

with the rulings. And we want to make sure that for 

Saskatchewan people, for our constituents, that they’re not put 

in a situation where they are assuming risk that is not 

reasonable or that is not appropriate. 

 

When dealing with pensions, as I said in my remarks off the 

top, we know that it’s very important to get it right because 

people really do rely and depend on pensions for many years. 

They need them to meet their basic needs and enjoy some of the 

luxuries in life that people like pursuing when they have the 

benefit of being able to retire and enjoy some pursuits that they 

can’t do during their normal working career. So we need to 

make sure that any sort of changes that we have are sound ones, 

are positive ones. 

 



194 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2011 

In the minister’s remarks I see that he stated that a significant 

amount of consultation has occurred on this, and I hope that is 

in fact the case. And I hope, Mr. Speaker, that the consultation 

with various stakeholders, whatever group that may be, I hope 

that the consultation has been genuine and that the ministry 

listened well to what was said. And I hope that there is a 

general consensus, Mr. Speaker, that this is the appropriate 

approach, a well-thought-out approach for Saskatchewan 

people, for Saskatchewan people, the 50,000 people enrolled in 

these multi-jurisdictional plans. If that hasn’t occurred, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that’s a problem because we know that those 

50,000 people are in fact relying on the plans. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, just as in our own individual lives, 

things don’t always go as planned or as we might expect or 

predict, and the same can be said, Mr. Speaker, for pension 

plans. Sometimes when individuals rely on a plan, they expect 

it to be there over the long term. They expect it to be there in 

the future, and it is not there. We know that it has horrible 

effects on their lives. I can think of a conversation I had with a 

constituent, Mr. Speaker, a member who was — a 

Saskatchewan resident — part of a plan based in Ontario that 

had problems and some of the negative consequences it’s had 

on her life as she’s tried to make the best of retirement. So we 

know we have to get it right. 

 

I understand in the minister’s remarks that the changes being 

proposed here or the changes, the legislative change that would 

occur here allowing the government to engage in the national 

agreement, would improve the scenario or improve the ability 

of government to deal with the situation when a plan ends or a 

plan splits. This ties into the comments I made, Mr. Speaker, 

about life not always going as we think it may. So when a 

pension plan is not there, when changes occur between 

companies or providers of plans, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to 

know that the right regulatory framework is in place to ensure 

that Saskatchewan people are protected as best as they possibly 

can be. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I do appreciate the opportunity to have shared 

a few thoughts and views that I have on Bill No. 4, An Act to 

amend The Pension Benefits Act, Mr. Speaker, as I understand 

it, to recap that this legislation is to allow the government to 

participate in a new national agreement that would provide the 

framework for multi-jurisdictional plans, pension plans. And I 

hope, Mr. Speaker, that the consultation that the minister says 

he has engaged in, the ministry has engaged in, I hope that 

consultation has been sound and, Mr. Speaker, I hope that there 

are no surprises in this legislation. But as is only appropriate 

when we are looking at legislation that deals with important 

things, especially important things like pension plans, it’s 

important to make sure we get it right. 

 

So I know there are more people that we want to speak to 

within the province on this important piece of legislation, and 

we look forward to doing that as an opposition in the coming 

months and providing the opportunity for people to share their 

views with us. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would conclude my 

remarks on Bill No. 4, An Act to amend The Pension Benefits 

Act, and I would move to adjourn the debate on this piece of 

legislation at this time. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Massey Place has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 4, The Pension 

Benefits Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[20:15] 

 

Bill No. 5 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 5 — The Credit 

Union Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

join in discussion here tonight and in debate as it relates to Bill 

No. 5, The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

Certainly this Act as it sets out is making some changes by way 

of regulation and oversight of financial industry here in 

Saskatchewan and of credit unions. Any time we are dealing 

with legislation that deals with credit unions, we’re touching on 

something that’s truly Saskatchewan, and something that arose 

out of a challenge in our economy as it relates to credit unions 

and addressed local needs in a really significant way back in the 

1930s and earlier, but predominantly in the 1930s, at a time of 

economic calamity and a time where eastern big banks had shut 

down lending in a significant way to our province and to our 

farm families and to businesses and to people. The local 

solution that were credit unions were a very meaningful 

response to these challenges and to provide for the getting by in 

some difficult and challenging circumstances and the 

opportunity to really flourish and capitalize as times improved 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

So when we’re talking about credit unions, we’re speaking 

about institutions that have an incredibly proud history in our 

province and institutions that have certainly been there for those 

difficult economic times and certainly enabled the prosperity 

and good economic times in Saskatchewan and certainly 

allowing that to translate back to Saskatchewan people, 

producers, businesses in this province. 

 

I know we have the new member to the Assembly on this side 

of the House — the member from Nutana that’s here — and I 

believe the first chartered rural credit union was in fact in her 

home community of Lafleche. And these are proud pieces of 

local history and part of our shared history as a province. 

 

Now these aren’t just parts of history in Saskatchewan, but 

they’re also part and should be part of our bright economic 

future and continuing to fulfil the roles that are required in our 

modern economy. And I’m certain that given the opportunity 

and the proper regulation, proper tools, that credit unions will 

be able to continue to deliver to Saskatchewan people in 

meaningful ways. 

 

And I think of the fact that we have well over 300 locations 



December 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 195 

right now in Saskatchewan, 61 credit unions, I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, and over 500,000 members — I think over 520,000 

members. And when you think about that, Mr. Speaker, when 

you have a population of 1 million people, this is incredibly 

well-subscribed, a very well-subscribed business to 

Saskatchewan people, and therefore touches the lives of 

Saskatchewan people and businesses and producers in a 

meaningful way to this day and to those local communities for 

whom they serve and provide employment and the economic 

activity in each of those communities. 

 

So when we’re looking at regulation as it relates to credit 

unions, we need to keep in mind not only that great, proud, rich 

history but the relevance to Saskatchewan communities across 

our province and certainly to our future. 

 

So this legislation here right now proposes to address two 

different circumstances as laid out by the minister. And we look 

forward to the consultation that we’ll have with a broad set of 

stakeholders and certainly the financial industry as a whole, but 

also Saskatchewan people and credit unions on this front are 

financial stakeholders. And it’ll be important from that to derive 

the impact and consequences of this legislation. 

 

Certainly the minister’s set out to lay out some consequences or 

intended objectives of this legislation. What we want to make 

sure that we’ve done is that we bring forward the meaningful 

consultation that must occur to drive good public policy to 

make sure that we understand fully the unintended 

consequences as well, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to this 

legislation or potential unintended consequences. So we look 

forward to that consultation process with Saskatchewan people. 

 

I know the minister highlighted a couple pieces within his 

speech. He did speak to aspects of this providing SaskCentral 

the ability to continue under federal legislation and the federal 

Act. We want to ensure that we fully understand what that 

means, that the minister fully understands what that means, and 

to make sure that the credit unions and the financial, our 

financial stakeholders have understood all of the potential 

consequences of these changes. 

 

I know, as it relates to the continuance under the federal 

legislation, the minster references that this, and I quote, ―allows 

credit unions to remain competitive.‖ We need to understand 

exactly how this allows them to remain competitive. Certainly 

being vital to our future is something very important to 

members of this side of the House in serving Saskatchewan 

people. But we need to understand just entirely what, I quote, 

―remain competitive‖ means to that minister and that 

government, Mr. Speaker, who sometimes has its priorities 

upside down and backwards, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we need to understand, as it relates to remaining 

competitive, what changes are going to be brought forward, 

what impacts exist, Mr. Speaker, and certainly what analysis 

has been done by this government and by credit unions and the 

financial industry to understand the implications of this policy. 

 

And certainly these sorts of analyses and as well the broad 

consultation is how you derive good public policy. And 

unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we’ve learned as an opposition that 

with this government, Mr. Speaker, we need to engage in that 

process fully to make sure that meaningful process has 

occurred. And it’s part of our responsibility, and we’re more 

than up for the task of doing so. 

 

I do have some concern, by way of a reference in this message 

and within this Act, that we’ll reduce accountability or 

reporting to government by way of SaskCentral, Mr. Speaker. 

I’m not sure that I understand what’s being presented right now, 

but what I do know is that we should be really cautious as it 

relates to the financial industry and requiring less 

accountability. We’ve seen consequences bear out around the 

globe and certainly to our neighbours in the United States 

where deregulation caused many circumstances and certainly 

many unintended consequences for far too many across that 

country and for the country itself, Mr. Speaker. So we’re going 

to understand why this government is bringing forward 

legislation that in fact will eliminate by way of legislation 

reporting back to that government of their financial 

circumstance. 

 

What we believe, Mr. Speaker, is we should be very careful on 

these fronts in understanding the important role for oversight, 

the important role for regulation, of accountability, and then of 

course how that translates into protection of people, and in this 

case, the well over 520,000 members that are members of credit 

unions and that are reliant on those services by way of 

individual households or farm families, producers, or businesses 

here in this province. So we’ll undertake that study, that 

analysis. We’ll certainly look forward to further processes to 

engage in this Assembly, and certainly through committee 

process to engage the minister and seek clarity to this reduction 

in reporting that is going to be a consequence of this Act and 

seek clarity from officials as to questions that may arise as we 

continue our consultation with the broad set of stakeholders for 

whom this legislation is relevant. And of course when I talk 

about for whom this is relevant, that includes Saskatchewan 

people in a broad way. And we’ll be engaging in that thoughtful 

dialogue. 

 

This Act as well, I understand, intends to make some changes to 

the accreditation or qualifications of individuals who serve on 

the Credit Union Deposit Guarantee Corporation, a corporation 

that plays a very valuable and instrumental role of protection to 

the public. 

 

Now as I read this Act and as I interpret the minister’s 

statements, I understand that these changes are in fact going to 

enhance qualifications that are required and in fact bring them 

in line with the changes that many credit union boards have 

brought online. And this will be representative of those 

changes. And on that front, at first blush that would seem to be 

something that we would supportive of, making sure that the 

Credit Union Deposit Guarantee Corporation continues to play 

the vital role it should and must in protecting the interests and 

assets of Saskatchewan people, producers, and businesses, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So as it relates, as I’ve said, to changes to the financial industry, 

as it relates to a financial regulation, we need to look at the 

global context and times that we’re living in. We need to 

understand the consequences of deregulation in the 1980s in the 

United States and the impact that that had for so many families 

and individuals across the United States, and making sure that 



196 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2011 

we’re not making Saskatchewan people vulnerable to similar 

circumstances here. 

 

So that will be some of the discussion and consultation we carry 

forward. And it’s a matter of making sure that these proud 

institutions, credit unions, have a vital and strong and rich part 

of our bright future here in this province and that quite simply 

that Saskatchewan people, the 520,000 plus members who 

subscribe to credit unions and utilize their financial services, 

that they’re protected, Mr. Speaker, because that’s our role and 

responsibility. And it’s a role the government should never 

abdicate itself of or a role that government should reduce, that 

ability to have effective oversight, meaningful regulation, and 

with the interest of making sure that proud institutions like 

credit unions are in strong positions but also that we’re 

addressing the needs of Saskatchewan people. 

 

At this point in time, there is certainly more consultation that 

we’ll do as a caucus, and I know that many other members of 

the nimble nine are looking forward to weighing in on 

discussion as it relates to The Credit Union Amendment Act, and 

those consultations and discussions will occur in the days and 

weeks ahead. Certainly for the many individuals that are 

watching at home here today and stakeholders, we welcome 

their dialogue, their input on these fronts as we always do, and 

we look forward to seeking the kind of clarity and protection 

that Saskatchewan people deserve through these processes and 

certainly at that committee table from that minister, Mr. 

Speaker, in making sure that this process has been sincere and 

consultations have been broad and that the legislation is in the 

best interests of Saskatchewan people. 

 

So those are some of the questions that we will be going 

through, some of the processes that we will be going through. 

And at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, I will simply adjourn 

debate as it relates to Bill No. 5, The Credit Union Amendment 

Act, 2011. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — The member for Regina 

Rosemont has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 5, The 

Credit Union Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Bill No. 9 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hutchinson that Bill No. 9 — The 

Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — Can you please advise me 

where you’re from? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Cumberland. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — I recognize the member 

from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Ms. Deputy Speaker. And I 

guess to join the debate on Bill No. 9, The Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2011, and just to give a, I 

guess, a response to it on behalf of the official opposition, to 

give a few words, comments about it. 

 

The Community Initiatives Fund was created to take some of 

the profits from the Casino Regina and Moose Jaw and to allow 

it to benefit communities. And some of these are 

community-based organizations. We’re heard of different ones 

that have applied, and there is a board that oversees those funds 

to make sure that the funds are utilized in a proper way. There 

is rules, legislation that gives the board the powers or limits the 

powers, and at this time it looks like the amendments are going 

to give some strength to the board in a way, I guess, to make 

sure that they can operate. 

 

And, you know, they make it very clear. The board, it’s 

managed arm’s length, and that’s an interesting thing when you 

say arm’s length and what legislation you’re going to give 

them. What powers will you give the board to make sure they 

do the job that the government asks them to do? 

 

But having said that, I’m going to go back to some of my 

comments because it’s interesting seeing the powers the 

minister will then have with this new board and the powers he’s 

given them, but he’s going to also receive some powers. So 

we’re going to have to watch this and make sure it’s very clear. 

We’re going to have to do a lot of work to make sure that 

whatever powers are given to the board, we have to make sure 

that we review this. We’re going to ask some of our colleagues, 

some people with the interest in legislation like this and 

amendments that are being made, and how it impacts them and 

the fund. 

 

And I say that I know the fund does provide some good services 

to individuals. Organizations out there apply for these funds, 

and they are supposed to benefit the communities and all 

communities in our beautiful province. And I hope that 

happens. But we’ll make sure we monitor that, make sure that it 

happens. 

 

We know that we have a lot of community volunteers and some 

of them, you know, are willing to volunteer for certain boards. 

And they get on these boards and the opportunity to manage the 

funds that I guess they are asked to manage have a little bit of 

strength. And it looks like they are providing them the 

opportunity to hire some staff to be able to operate and make 

sure that they oversee, I guess, their staff as well, and liability. 

They’re talking about liability, whether it’s insurance so that the 

board is protected, but also the employees are protected. And 

sometimes I guess we assume that’s a good thing, depend where 

it’s going and what’s the reason. 

 

[20:30] 

 

And I don’t know who they’ve consulted. And I’ve noticed that 

in part of the minister’s comments he says that he did consult 

with the board, CIF [Community Initiatives Fund] board, to 

make sure that the provisions and the amendments that are 

being provided to them, that they’ve had an opportunity to give 

their input. And it sounds like the minister says that they have 

agreed to the recommendations and the amendments, and we’re 

going to have to find that out, and, you know, if it’s a positive 

thing. We’ll look into that stuff. 

 



December 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 197 

I guess at the end of the day the liability protection . . . 

everybody, whether it’s a board, an employee, people 

volunteering, they want to be protected and they should be 

protected, whether it’s legislation, whether it’s insurance that 

they have to have, whether it’s bonding to protect them. If 

they’re done due diligence, if they’re done the job that’s been 

asked of them, and they’ve made sure that they’ve done, I 

guess, everything in their power to protect the assets of the 

Community Initiatives Fund, then you have to wonder, should 

we have provisions to protect them? 

 

And at this point, I think we have to look at it. What’s the 

reason? And if there are any concerns out there that have come 

to light why this legislation is being . . . Every time you bring 

something forward, and I think we have to question ourselves 

when we’re making amendments, changing. The official 

opposition, I think the province, people in our province expect 

the official opposition, they expect even the government to 

make sure legislation, amendments that we are passing or 

bringing forward are truly going to improve our province, 

improve the opportunity for people in this province. 

 

So there are some changes going on, and it looks like they 

might have some employees. That’s interesting to see where 

that’s going now. They’re going to have power over employees, 

so will there be liability? Should they have issues with their 

employees, will they be protected? So we’re going to question 

that a little bit. And I know we have a lot of questions that we 

will ask. We’ve got to look into this. We just wanted to get into, 

I guess, a little bit of discussion: where are we going with this? 

 

And if you look at, I guess, the letter, we talk about the powers 

of the minister. The powers of the minister was designed, or he 

was given those powers with an MOU [memorandum of 

understanding]. And I think now they’re going to pass it where 

he’s going to, it’s going to be strengthened, where the minister 

will have certain powers. Now we’re going to question those 

powers and wondering, you know, the ministry, you know. If 

you look at the powers . . . And I guess to look at this, the 

minister will be provided the power and clearly the authority to 

establish reporting, performance, and management expectations 

— very clear expectations will be. And I don’t know how he’s 

going to develop that with the ministry, how they will ensure 

that the board lives up to the expectations of the minister or 

what they’ve been provided with. So there’s going to be some 

challenges there. 

 

They also talk about the amendment. We looked at 

modernization of the wording, gathering and granting 

provisions to make sure that Saskatchewan people — those that 

are applying for the Community Initiatives Fund, the grants — 

have access to that, to make sure that we make it easier for them 

to access, to make sure that they’re comfortable with accessing. 

Because sometimes some of these grants, the wording of it 

causes some of the organizations grief if they’re not familiar 

with the process, and sometimes that has happened. We’ve 

heard that. So maybe this is going to clear it up. We don’t know 

that, but we’ll look at the wording if they’re talking about that. 

So it’s going to be interesting to see if that’s going to clear it up 

for them. 

 

They talk about giving the ability to the board to manage the 

fund and to give them certain powers to be more effective, to 

reach out to the community. That will be . . . And I guess 

there’s different communities, organizers that will apply for this 

funding. We want to make sure that the changes that are being 

proposed are going to help Saskatchewan people who apply to 

this fund, are going to give the powers. 

 

It is a lot of money — we know that — that our casinos 

generate. It’s good revenue. There are challenges sometimes, 

people will say, with casinos, gambling and all that. But at the 

end of the day, the monies that are provided to the board, to the 

CIF board, to go ahead and use as, I guess, a grant, provide 

whether it’s sports, culture. 

 

There’s different people who will apply, different organizations 

that apply for this funding. And we hope that at the end of the 

day, the board in its wisdom has the regulations and the rules 

set down by the ministry and outlined. And maybe these clear 

up some of those or it gives them strength, to the board, gives 

some strength to the minister. 

 

We just want to make sure, I guess, and that’s why we’re 

debating the Bill, to make sure the changes, when we’re 

proposing changes, that we’re doing our job to make sure, are 

they the best changes? Is there any suggestions we can give? 

And we will, sometimes we will provide suggestions as official 

opposition, provide some suggestions, opportunities for the 

ministry to do some positive changes. 

 

And we’ve heard from the Premier that he’s open to those ideas 

and those suggestions, and we’ll see at the end of the day how 

open as we bring suggestions forward on some of the Bills and 

some of the legislation that’s being, amendments that are being 

brought forward before the House, before all of us, and the 

work that’s been asked of all of us to do. And we’re going to 

work forward. 

 

I know that my colleagues have a lot of questions yet. And 

we’re going to have to get some background information on 

some of the legislation, and we’ll consult with different people, 

organizations. We’ll get to ask, are people in support of this 

legislation, the changes that are being proposed, amendments? 

And we’ll do what we need to do to make sure we hold the 

government to account, to make sure that if it’s changes that are 

positive, great. That will benefit Saskatchewan people. That is a 

good thing. If not, we’ll bring it to light. And at this time, you 

know, Mr. Speaker, I’m ready to deal with this and ready to 

move forward on adjournment of debate. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — The member for 

Cumberland has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 9, 

The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2011. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 10 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hutchinson that Bill No. 10 — The 

Parks Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 



198 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2011 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Here 

you go. Ma’am. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

Mr. Forbes: — [Inaudible] . . . I’d like to enter the debate on 

Bill No. 10, An Act to amend The Parks Act. And it’s a very 

important Bill that we have before us. I know it’s getting late in 

the evening and we all need to take time and focus a little more. 

And I will do my part to keep my speech focused. 

 

I think this is an important piece of legislation. I appreciate the 

opportunity to enter into the debate. Of course, as a former 

minister responsible for the parks, I find this very interesting 

and I will have to get myself up to speed more on the 

implications of this piece of legislation before us. The minister 

did speak about it and talked about the three pieces, the three 

reasons why the legislation is before us. And they look 

relatively straightforward. But my colleague, the member from 

Athabasca, who was also a minister responsible for the parks 

and knew the file quite well, raised some concerns. And I share 

some of those concerns. 

 

And of course it’s our obligation as the opposition is to make 

sure there’s appropriate and sufficient review of the legislation 

before us and so that there are no unintended consequences and 

we are clear what the legislation does, what it’s intended to do, 

and nothing more. And that’s what good legislation does. It 

doesn’t get into a lot of grey areas that may or may not impact 

this or may or may not impact that. So it’s important for us to 

ask these questions. 

 

And of course we know the parks have gone through a lot of 

changes. And I did find it interesting that the minister referred 

to the four years of record success for the parks, and that’s good 

news. We all love our parks here in Saskatchewan. They are 

something that we all take a lot of pride in. And I would be 

curious to know . . . I think that parks now and the park system 

are about 80 years old or 81 years old now. 

 

An Hon. Member: — 80. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — 80 years old. And I know we celebrated 75 a 

couple of years ago. It seemed like just a couple of years ago, 

but clearly it was five years ago. And they really are important. 

And when you think about the heritage of the parks, and some 

like Moose Mountain are significant. And we’ve all had, all our 

families, all of us have had something to do with the parks, and 

whether they were recreation parks, wilderness parks, they’re 

important. 

 

But some of the questions we have about the parks from this 

side, particularly in the last four or five years, is the transition 

from the parks from the Ministry of Environment when clearly 

the idea there is an ethic of conservation. And we still hope that 

ethic of conservation exists within the parks department. In fact 

I’m confident because I know many of the people who work 

within the department — I knew them when I was a minister — 

and I have a lot of confidence in their work to continue on. 

But now they are moved over to Tourism, Culture, and that’s a 

bit of a worry because it’s not quite the same. It’s not quite the 

same conservation ethic. And we know the highest level of 

protection that any natural area can have is when it’s designated 

as a park. And so it’s clearly an important piece of legislation, 

and I think there will be lots of interest in this over the months 

ahead. What does this really mean? 

 

The other piece that I think is important is that we would really 

want to see what this means in terms of the impacts, in terms of 

the two new parks that are proposed and that are under 

consultation right now. We don’t know what stage that is, but 

I’m sure we’ll hear in the new year. And of course, one is 

around Emma-Anglin Lake area, and the other one is around the 

Hudson Bay area. We don’t know if there’s any direct 

implications. Maybe there’s no implications at all. But of course 

we’re always anxious to see what’s the driving force for this 

legislation. Why this? Why now? But it seems relatively 

straightforward. 

 

And one of the things we’ll be asking for — and I hope the 

minister will be able to provide us, particularly when it comes 

to the issues around the new land descriptions — we’re very 

concerned to make sure that there is no land loss. I mean the 

minister was very clear in his comments that there was some 

land in the Moose Mountain Provincial Park that would be sold 

to the village of Kenosee Lake, and that seems relatively 

straightforward. But we’d like to see these things, particularly 

in a more visual form. You know, Mr. Speaker, when you get a 

list of land descriptions — and a long list — what does this 

mean? What does this mean? And it has been I think a bit of a 

tradition that when you have these kind of things, that if it can 

be provided in a map form, or some more of an appropriate 

visual form, it sure is appreciated and makes life a lot easier. 

 

So I think that when the minister . . . He highlighted three areas 

that The Parks Act is to be amended. The first talks about 

invested capital in reference to dispositions in parks, meaning 

invested private capital, not government investment. It does say 

that cottages are not included in this. 

 

I have some flags go up; I’m not sure what all of this means. 

And so we’re going to have some real clear questions because 

when we see private investments in parks, I think there is a role 

for that but we have to make sure we understand what that is. 

And I’m looking forward to hearing more about this, 

particularly from people who may have some interest in this. 

You know, the parks are a pretty special place, and of course 

there’s a lot of competition to be in there in some parks, and 

some parks maybe not so much. So this is really around, you 

know, more of a business role in the parks. And so we have 

some questions, and I think my colleague over here actually 

went to quite a length talking about privatization. I’m not sure 

how far this plays into that, but we do want to make sure that 

we understand this fully as we move ahead. 

 

I find it interesting, as I just looked through the minister’s 

remarks in Hansard, I think there are about six lines referring to 

this, this one section in terms of the private capital. He didn’t go 

into this in any detail, didn’t give any examples. And so that’s 

why we probably have many more questions about what does 

this really mean because we need to understand this fully.  

 



December 13, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 199 

[20:45] 

 

And of course, as I said, flags go up and not only with us but 

many people in the province will want to know. So what’s 

exactly on the government’s agenda? What’s in this ministry? 

What are they looking for? Because parks are going through a 

big, big change. And it is important that they keep current, but 

at the same time there’s some core values that we have around 

our parks that we do not want to see, do not want to see lost. 

 

Now the other area, and the minister went in quite detailed 

about this, was around park enforcement and allowing officers 

more . . . a stronger ability to deal with individuals who 

shouldn’t be in our parks, and particularly over long weekends, 

and the ability to expel or get them out of the park, evict them 

out and get them out from 48 hours to 72 hours, seems to make 

a lot of sense. 

 

And so I know, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a lot of discussions 

about long weekends in parks and we go back a long ways 

talking about that, and so this is an important area. People want 

to feel safe in their parks, and they want to feel like it’s a good, 

good time for families and for young people and seniors. Parks 

mean, as I said, so much to so many people that it’s important. 

 

So I think this makes a lot of sense. And it makes a lot of sense 

too that, you know, that we take a look back and say are the 

fines keeping up with the time? You know, like he refers to the 

fact that the maximum fine for summary convictions at the 

current level of $1,000 was established in 1986. And I would 

almost think the minister at the time might have been Colin 

Maxwell. And he was quite a strong advocate for conservation 

for the government at the time. And I know that it’s been 25 

years have come and gone, and we should really be taking a 

look at that. So that’s an important part. 

 

It does talk about some of the impacts that are happening, 

whether it’s bulldozing trails, major park encroachments 

without proper approvals. Very, very important that we take a 

good look at this. And it’s interesting to see that Alberta and BC 

have higher fines than we do, and so we take a look at this. It is 

interesting though that it seems like we’re having a lot of things 

to do with crime and punishment in this legislative agenda, and 

it’s right across the board. But I think this is an important one, 

and as well Manitoba’s stepping up their game on this as well. 

 

And as I said, the third one around the legal descriptions, I 

always get nervous about this. Because while they seem to say 

it’s just corrections, and I know our ministry officials do the 

very, very best job they can, and as we’re getting more 

computerized and the data’s getting much stronger, that we’re 

seeing errors that may not have been caught earlier. But as I 

said, if we could have maps or any kind of way to help us along 

with this it would be, it would be very important. 

 

So with that, I think that it’s very important that we hear from 

the people, the stakeholders, and people who have been talking 

about the parks. And it would be interesting to hear particularly 

around the two new parks that are coming on stream and what 

their plans are and what the implications are for this. This will 

be very important for us to take a look at that and also make 

sure that we don’t lose any ground in terms of what we have in 

terms of keeping our parks pretty special. 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have any more to contribute 

tonight except, you know, as I know many of my colleagues 

will want to speak to this after our consultations. And I’m very 

much looking forward to hearing them speak and to learn more 

about this Bill because I think it’s important. We love our parks. 

And I think Saskatchewan has the best parks in Canada, I think. 

They truly do. And anybody who is associated with the parks in 

any form is truly honoured. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I move adjournment of Bill No. 10. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Centre has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 10, The Parks Amendment 

Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this Assembly do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 

until tomorrow at 1:30 pm. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 20:50.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 18 — The Degree Authorization Act 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 183 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 184 

 Bill No. 13 — The Constitutional Questions Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 sur les questions constitutionnelles 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 186 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 187 

 Bill No. 14 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 187 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 188 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 1 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 189 

 Bill No. 2 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Collaborative Law) Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi corrective (droit collaboratif) de 2011 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 190 

 Bill No. 3 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2011 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 191 

 Bill No. 4 — The Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 192 

 Bill No. 5 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2011 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 194 

 Bill No. 9 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 196 

 Bill No. 10 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2011 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 198 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


