




















































Hansard: May 02, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 54A  MONDAY, MAY 2, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7417 

 May 2, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

The Speaker: — Before routine proceedings and pursuant to 

section 30 of the Ombudsman and children’s Act, I’m 

submitting two copies of the child advocate 2010 annual report. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the Assembly I’d like to 

introduce a good friend of mine seated in your gallery, Mr. 

Wayne McCord. Wayne is from Markham, Ontario, but Wayne 

still keeps a residence in Saskatchewan. He grew up in southern 

Saskatchewan near where I live, and he keeps his residency 

there. And I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. McCord is 

very in tune with Saskatchewan politics. So I’d like all 

members to welcome Wayne to the Assembly here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to the members of the legislature, I’d like to introduce two 

young women who are very important to me. My niece 

Lindsay, she’s studying commerce at the University of 

Saskatchewan. She was born in Saskatoon, but her family 

moved to Maple Ridge a number of years ago. We’re glad to 

have her back studying at the university. I know her father 

misses her a lot, but we’re happy to have her in Saskatoon. 

 

And my daughter, Allison. Allison’s also studying at the 

university. She’s almost finished her art history degree. 

Allison’s keenly interested in politics, Mr. Speaker. Regrettably 

we don’t often agree on politics in our family, but in any event, 

happy to have her here and she’s still, not withstanding that, 

still the light of my life, Mr. Speaker. So I’d ask everyone in the 

legislature just to welcome Allison and Lindsay to their 

legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — Members, my apologies. I didn’t read very 

accurately the child advocate report. I will hold it till 

Wednesday. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again today to present a 

petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens supporting the 

maintenance of quality health care services: 

 

The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth that the Government of 

Saskatchewan ought to recognize the need for timely 

access to comprehensive and quality health care services 

for all communities within the province, including Wakaw 

and surrounding areas, and that the disruption of 

emergency services and in-patient services at Wakaw 

Hospital will not serve the needs of the residents in this 

community and surrounding area; and 

 

That the cuts in access to timely and accurate diagnostic 

and laboratory tests within the community of Wakaw and 

surrounding area will also not serve the needs of the 

residents. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintain quality health care 

services through the commitment of necessary funding to 

address critical recruitment and retention issues. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The many signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Saskatoon, Regina, Colonsay, Allan, Battleford, Yorkton, 

Tisdale, Weyburn, Moose Jaw, Estevan, and Wakaw. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition signed by constituents who live in Hampton 

Village who are concerned about the need for a school for their 

children in the neighbourhood. The petition reads: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes, including education property tax; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to 

neighbouring communities to attend schools that are 

typically already reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition live in 

Hampton Village. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 

pleasure to rise today to present a petition regarding restoring 

funding equity to Regina Catholic schools. Regina Catholic 

schools received $275 less per pupil than Regina public schools 



7418 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2011 

in the last fiscal year, amounting to a funding inequity of $2.7 

million in total. That funding inequity places program delivery 

and staffing levels at risk and, Mr. Speaker, those funding cuts 

are already having an effect on program delivery for the 

upcoming school year. The government of Saskatchewan has 

denied Catholic school boards in the province representation on 

the government-appointed committee mandated to develop a 

long-term funding formula for Saskatchewan school boards. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to address the funding inequity between 

Regina Catholic schools and Regina public schools that 

provides $275 less per pupil funding for Regina Catholic 

school students, totalling $2.7 million, and make known 

that the continuation for another school year of funding 

inequity places program delivery and staffing levels at 

risk in Regina Catholic schools; and in so doing, 

immediately restore funding equity to ensure that every 

student in Saskatchewan, whether enrolled in a Catholic 

or a public school, receives equitable resources to ensure 

every student in Saskatchewan has access to a quality 

education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the residents of 

Prince Albert and Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again, once 

again today, Mr. Speaker, to present a petition signed by 

citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about the detrimental 

effects that Bill 160 would have on our human rights law if 

enacted. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

withdraw Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public 

consultations informed by a public policy paper before 

any amendments to the Human Rights Code, the law that 

supersedes all others in our province, are even considered. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Swift Current, 

Saskatoon, Delisle, Wynyard, Melfort, Warman, Lloydminster, 

Goodsoil, Weyburn, Moose Jaw, Viscount, Moosomin, and 

Hudson Bay. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions once again today on behalf of concerned 

residents from across Saskatchewan as it relates to the 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask. Party. They allude 

to the fact that the Sask Party has both run deficits and 

increased debt at times of unprecedented highs in revenues, 

increasing debt over the past three years consecutively to a 

grand total of well over $1.3 billion, and this year alone 

increasing debt to the tune of $548 million alone here this year. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents of Saskatoon 

and Churchbridge. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Heroic Rescue Prevents Tragedy 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to salute the heroic efforts of residents in my constituency 

who helped to save a man trapped in the Swift Current creek. 

 

Last Wednesday morning, Mitzy Tait-Zeller and her family 

were visiting her parents’ farm just south of the city of Swift 

Current. As they were leaving the farmyard, Mitzy’s daughter 

saw a van stuck in the creek at a low-level crossing at 

Valleyview Road just south of town. The driver was in obvious 

trouble. The water was 4 feet deep and was up to the van’s 

windows, Mr. Speaker. It was clear that the man would not be 

able to get out of the vehicle safely on his own. 

 

Mitzy immediately phoned her brother Chad who is a volunteer 

firefighter with the local RM [rural municipality] and he made a 

quick call to 911. Within minutes, the Swift Current Fire 

Department responded, led by Deputy Chief Normand 

Beauchamp who was on the scene with a boat to rescue the 

man, pulling him out of the vehicle. Immediately after getting 

the driver out of the van, the van was swept away by the 

fast-moving current. And as the rescuers attempted to head to 

shore, even the boat took on water, and they had to swim to 

safety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan spirit and quick action prevented 

the situation from turning into a tragedy. Today we honour and 

thank Mitzy Tait-Zeller, her brother Chad, the Swift Current 

deputy fire chief, Normand Beauchamp, and all of the 

firefighters from the city and rural departments and people on 

the scene who responded quickly to a neighbour in their time of 

desperation, a true example of what’s best of Saskatchewan. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Holocaust Memorial Day 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday was Yom HaShoah, or Holocaust Memorial Day. We 

remember, with deep sadness and lingering incomprehension, 

the genocide of 6 million Jews. Created by the Israeli 

government in the 1950s, Yom HaShoah, which means the day 

of Holocaust in Hebrew, begins at sunset of the 27th day of 



May 2, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7419 

Nisan in the Hebrew calendar. The day is close to the day of the 

Jewish ghetto uprising in Warsaw in 1943 and of course is an 

official holiday in Israel. 

 

Today we remember not only the brutality and evil but also the 

courage and strength with which it was faced. Fewer and fewer 

survivors are left to tell the stories, and let’s not let their 

memory fade. Too often brought here by tragedy and not 

receiving much of a welcome, Jewish Canadians have made our 

country stronger and more vibrant. 

 

The Holocaust profoundly transformed our perception of 

humanity and what humanity is capable of. Unfortunately the 

cry of never again has not been successful, and therefore the 

threat and crime of genocide in a dangerous world continues to 

haunt us in the 21st century. Mr. Speaker, we must remain 

vigilant against anti-Semitism and all forms of discrimination. 

We must pursue the ideal of a multicultural Canada founded on 

respect and compassion, celebrating difference and diversity. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in this House 

today to mention that yesterday marked the International 

Holocaust Memorial Day. The full name of this day 

commemorated the victims of the Holocaust as Yom HaShoah, 

which means the day of remembrance of the Holocaust. Having 

lost 300 members of my family in the Holocaust, this day is 

particularly poignant to my family, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Since the early 1960s, the sound of siren on Yom HaShoah 

stops traffic and pedestrians throughout the state of Israel for 

two minutes of silent devotion. The siren blows at sundown and 

again at 11 a.m. on that date. People of Jewish descent in North 

America observe Yom HaShoah in the synagogue as well as in 

the broader Jewish community. Commemorations range from 

synagogue services to communal vigils and education 

programs. The United Nations established International 

Holocaust Remembrance Day which urges every member 

nation of the United Nations to honour the memory of 

Holocaust victims and encourage the development of 

educational programs about the Holocaust history to help 

prevent further acts of genocide. 

 

International Holocaust Remembrance Day rejects any denial of 

the Holocaust as an event and condemns all manifestations of 

religious intolerance, incitement, harassment, or violence 

against persons or communities based on ethnic origin or 

religious belief. I would ask that all members of this Assembly 

acknowledge Holocaust Memorial Day and keep the memory of 

those fallen in mind. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Movement for May Day 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, on Sunday, May 1st, several 

members of the NDP [New Democratic Party] caucus and I had 

the pleasure of attending the Movement for May Day. May 

Day, also known as International Workers’ Day, marks the 

anniversary of the 1886 Haymarket massacre in Chicago. 

During a general strike for the eight-hour work day, Chicago 

police fired on workers, killing several demonstrators. Ever 

since, it has become a day around the world to honour their 

courage and to stand up for working people, their families, and 

the marginalized. 

 

Mr. Speaker, approximately 300 people from a wide variety of 

community organizations, students, workers, and citizens 

braved the cold wind and marched through the streets. They 

converged on the legislature to send a message to both levels of 

government that it’s time to consult with the people in a 

meaningful way about the future of Saskatchewan. They 

condemned the government for its lack of accountability and 

devastated record on human rights. Movement for May Day 

participants and the Prairie Lily Feminist Society pledged their 

support for the many workers in Saskatchewan who are 

currently in a strike position. A wall of shame was constructed 

in front of the doors of the legislature that included 

approximately 70 messages condemning the laws and policies 

of the Sask Party and Harper governments. It was decided 

unanimously that the wall must fall. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to encourage all members of the 

House to congratulate the ongoing work of citizens of this great 

province who want to ensure that Saskatchewan is inclusive, 

welcoming, and respectful. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mosaic’s Donation to the Children’s Hospital Foundation 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday the 

Mosaic Company demonstrated its commitment to 

Saskatchewan with a $4 million donation to the Children’s 

Hospital Foundation of Saskatchewan. This donation is part of 

the Be a Part of It campaign which aims to collect $25 million 

from private donors to provide the hospital with furniture and 

state-of-the-art equipment. Norm Beug, senior vice-president of 

potash operations for Mosaic said: 

 

. . . [Friday’s] announcement is an investment in 

Saskatchewan’s future generations — our children — and 

that’s an investment that strengthens our communities, 

our company and our province. 

 

Mosaic’s donation has been designated as a gift to enhance 

maternal equipment, research, and patient care services at the 

new children’s hospital of Saskatchewan. In recognition of this 

gift, the hospital’s postpartum unit will carry the Mosaic name. 

Mosaic has always been a positive corporate citizen in this 

province. Their support is welcome, and we thank them for 

their generous donation. 

 

In fall of 2010, our government announced that we would fully 

fund the construction of the children’s hospital. Private 

donations such as Mosaic’s will ensure that staff and patients 

will have the benefit of the best equipment available. As 

construction of this province’s first and only children’s hospital 

continues, I thank the people at Mosaic for priming the 

Children’s Hospital Foundation of Saskatchewan’s Be a Part of 

It campaign. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 



7420 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2011 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Remembering Nico Hawryliw 

 

Mr. Taylor: — I rise today to inform the members of the 

Legislative Assembly of the passing of an incredible 

19-year-old young man, Nicola Edward Kenneth Hawryliw. We 

knew him as Nico. Born on January 16th, 1992, Nico left us on 

April the 30th, 2011, after a six-year difficult but courageous 

and often hopeful battle to defeat his CNS [central nervous 

system] germinoma brain tumour. Nico leaves behind an 

equally courageous, dedicated, and very loving family led by 

his mother, Allison, his father, Lionel, and his sister Jane. 

 

He faced many challenges, much pain, torment, frustration, and 

uncertainty, but Nico was very much loved. And in return he 

was a loving and generous person. He was intelligent and 

enjoyed school. He was unselfish and compassionate. He hoped 

to become a social worker after he had beaten his cancer. 

According to the family’s formal notice of his passing, Nico 

“taught us how to love, to be courageous, and to never give up.” 

In 2010 Nico was awarded the Canadian Cancer Medal for 

Courage. He was very proudly humbled by the honour. 

 

The Battlefords and the province of Saskatchewan has lost a 

wonderful citizen. Anyone who had the chance to be in his 

company is a better person today because they were touched 

and influenced by this incredible young man. Because of who 

he was and how he lived his life, his memory will live with us 

for generations. I call on all members of the Assembly to take a 

moment today to think about the life of Nico Hawryliw, gather 

something from what you learn, and add it to the way you live 

your own life. We will all be better people for it. God bless you, 

Nico. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Emergency Preparedness Week 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Emergency Preparedness 

Week is an annual event that takes place each year during the 

first full week of May. During Emergency Preparedness Week, 

activities are organized across Canada to raise awareness of the 

importance of having an emergency kit, making an emergency 

plan, and identifying risks. These three simple steps can help 

Canadians prepare for all types of emergencies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during this time of year, emergency preparedness 

is at the top of the priority list for many people in our province. 

Over the last couple years, flooding has reached historic levels 

in many different areas within Saskatchewan. With a natural 

disaster like flooding, planning is necessary to ensure families 

remain safe. Every Saskatchewan household needs an 

emergency plan, and it will only take 20 minutes to make a 

plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if an emergency happens in your community, it 

may take emergency workers some time to reach you. That is 

why an emergency plan should cover 72 hours from the time 

the disaster occurs. People should be prepared to take care of 

themselves and their families for a minimum of 72 hours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that everyone takes the opportunity to go 

over their emergency preparedness plan with their family 

during this particular week. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Funding for KidsFirst Program 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, for 23 years the Circle Project 

has provided supports and programs based on an Aboriginal 

vision of wholeness, balance, and healing to inner-city Regina 

families. For the last eight years, they have partnered with the 

KidsFirst program to help vulnerable families in making 

healthy family choices. 

 

On April 13th, the decision was communicated that Circle 

Project’s KidsFirst funding was to be cut. This came after the 

community-based organization was told to fill staff positions, 

was given new computers, and received April funding for the 

new fiscal year. 

 

To the Minister of Health: the Circle Project has provided 

valuable services to many families, vulnerable families and 

children for upwards of two decades. How was this decision 

made, and why? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I think we all know in this House, 

that the responsibility of delivery of many health care services 

throughout the province are the responsibility of the health 

regions. In this case there is an issue regarding the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region and their decision to discontinue the 

contract with Circle, Mr. Speaker, with Circle Project. That 

discontinuation does not say that there’s any backing away of 

services delivered, and in fact all the services that were 

delivered by Circle Project will be picked up by other 

organizations. The same amount of service will be delivered, 

Mr. Speaker, just through various organizations. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, we understand, when it comes to 

the health regions, where the buck stops with that government, 

and obviously it’s in the Minister of Health’s office. 

 

As a result of the government’s decision to cut the funding, 32 

families and 75 children will have to find a new KidsFirst 

provider. The minister needs to understand that these vulnerable 

families and children are not commodities that can be thrown 

back and forth between agencies without causing even more 

problems for these families. Many of the affected individuals 

have been working with Circle Project for years, and there are 

many success stories. The families have built a sense of trust 

and security with the Circle Project. They have built a positive 

community which has now been stripped away and the families 

have no choice in the matter. 

 



May 2, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7421 

To the minister: does the government realize the impact this 

decision will have on these families? Why are these vulnerable 

families being made to pay the cost for that government’s 

decision? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my understanding 

that the Circle Project had some difficulties complying with the 

terms of the agreement that were set out by the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region. As a result of that, the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region is not backing away from KidsFirst 

programming. All they’re simply doing is reapplying the funds 

that were going to Circle first, reapplying those funds to other 

organizations throughout the city, Mr. Speaker, so that the same 

amount of service will be provided, not through this one 

organization. 

 

I think it’s the responsible thing that the Regina Qu’Appelle 

Health Region or any other health region for that matter, Mr. 

Speaker, when they enter into an agreement and some of those 

terms aren’t followed, they revisit that agreement. And if 

corrective measures can’t be taken, those funds are then 

redirected into other organizations that can deliver the KidsFirst 

program. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the Circle Project provides drug 

and alcohol counselling, traditional parenting programming, 

family literacy programs, and a child care centre to families in 

Regina’s inner city. Stripping the KidsFirst funding is a direct 

attack on the credibility of the Circle Project and the decades of 

good work that they have done helping families, children, and 

youth. 

 

On April 15th, the Circle Project met with the KidsFirst 

program to ask why the funding had been stripped and if there 

was an opportunity to appeal the decision. They were told the 

answer was no. The decision was final. 

 

To the minister: a direct attack on the credibility of the Circle 

Project has been made without meaningfully consulting them or 

giving them a chance at redress. Will that government and this 

minister give the Circle Project a real opportunity to address 

concerns and to defend and explain the exemplary work it does 

with kids and families? Will the Circle Project get something 

that halfway resembles proper process? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the Regina Qu’Appelle 

Health Region remains committed to the communities that 

serve these kids, Mr. Speaker, and the KidsFirst program, as 

evidenced by its ongoing support of the north central shared 

family services centre, Mr. Speaker. The Regina Qu’Appelle 

Health Region delivers a lot of services through not-for-profit 

organizations. It will continue to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I said, it’s our understanding, through the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region, that the terms of the agreement 

were not being met. Now I don’t know if the opposition is 

saying, ignore that, Mr. Speaker, because that isn’t the way the 

Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region operates — thank heavens, 

Mr. Speaker. They have pulled the funding from that project but 

put the funding back into KidsFirst through other organizations, 

Mr. Speaker. I think it was a responsible move by the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a fairly well accepted 

principle that when charges are brought against you, you can 

actually know what those charges are and you can understand 

what the problems have been identified and how those might be 

redressed. Circle Project is asking for a clear explanation of 

what the problems were with their programming. They’re 

asking for an appeal process where they can get a chance to 

defend the good work that they’ve done for 23 years, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And it strikes us as quite strange, in the opposition, that if this 

government is concerned about proper management and due 

stewardship of public dollars, where was the progressive 

discipline in terms of Circle Project delivering this program in 

the first place? So Circle Project, the families that they work 

with, and the opposition is wondering, where is that due process 

and will they get a chance to defend their good name which has 

been built up over many years working with some very hard 

situations in the inner city? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region found that the terms were not being 

met on the agreement. No money has been pulled away from 

inner city for the delivery of these services. Mr. Speaker, no 

money has been pulled away. That money is still there to 

address some of those issues on the inner city through a 

KidsFirst program. It is simply going to be redeployed to other 

organizations that will deliver those services. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Collective Bargaining 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, bargaining is supposed to 

involve two sides working together to achieve as fair a deal as 

possible for all involved. Apparently, Mr. Speaker, for this 

government, bargaining has been replaced with the government 

telling workers to take what we’ll give you, no matter how 

unfair, and then go away. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are several examples right now where this 

government has tossed traditional bargaining out the window 

and is trying to force unfair deals down the throats of many 

Saskatchewan people. My question to the minister is: why is the 

government tossing fairness out the window and putting health 

care and education systems at risk? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are, 



7422 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2011 

throughout the public sector, a number of contracts that have 

expired. It is the wish of this government to try and ensure that 

negotiations take place in an orderly fashion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we ought not debate contracts on the floor of the 

Assembly. I think we should urge all parties, whether they be an 

employer or SAHO [Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations] or other management, Mr. Speaker, that they get 

back to the bargaining table and that they should work as 

aggressively and as hard as possible to arrive at a satisfaction. 

 

We respect and value very much, Mr. Speaker, the good work 

that is done by the public sector employees in our province. 

They are valued and respected by this government. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we are not going to be negotiating contracts on the 

floor of the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, one group targeted by this 

government’s mean-spirited bargaining is the health 

professionals of Saskatchewan represented by the Health 

Sciences Association. The government is offering these workers 

an increase of less than 2 per cent a year, a raise that’ll easily be 

eaten up by gas, food, and skyrocketing housing prices. 

 

Last week, the HSA [Health Sciences Association] pointed out 

in the Leader-Post that the understaffing of health professionals 

is putting the lives of Saskatchewan people at risk. Mr. Speaker, 

the situation will continue without proper government funding 

for health care workers. Why is the minister willing to risk the 

lives of Saskatchewan people just so he can deny the province’s 

health care professionals a fair deal? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as the former minister mentioned, that we will not be 

negotiating individual contracts on the floor of the House. But 

what I can say, Mr. Speaker, in three and a half years of 

negotiating with many of the service providers, health care 

providers and professionals across this province, number one, 

we’ve increased the number of nurses working in this province; 

we’ve increased the number of doctors working in this 

province; and we’ve increased the number of all health care 

providers working in this province in the last three and a half 

years. That’s what this government has done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Not only to mention that we have settled with tens of thousands 

of workers in this province, whether it’s the nurses, whether it’s 

the doctors, whether it’s the residents, whether it’s CUPE 

[Canadian Union of Public Employees], whether it’s SEIU 

[Service Employees International Union], whether it’s SGEU 

[Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union], 

Mr. Speaker, this government has been getting it done. And I 

believe the contract will be settled with the Health Sciences 

very shortly, Mr. Speaker. I think they want it settled as this 

government does as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the minister misses the point. 

He introduces essential services legislation which ties the 

workers’ hands and then calls that bargaining, Mr. Speaker, and 

calls that settling contracts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people who help ensure we get the best health 

care possible are the only ones being treated badly by this 

government. No one can deny that our children are the future of 

Saskatchewan, and the people who help shape our children are 

our hard-working teachers. But this government doesn’t think 

they deserve to be fairly compensated. Now the province’s 

teachers have voted overwhelmingly in favour of job action 

because they feel it’s the only way they will get fair treatment 

from this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is this government pursuing this destructive 

bargaining strategy and risking the education of Saskatchewan’s 

children just so it can play petty games with the province’s 

teachers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Education 

has been a priority for this government, and that’s why year 

over year we have increased the funding as well as made 

unprecedented investments in infrastructure in our school 

system. Mr. Speaker, we do value the teachers and the great 

work they do. 

 

But it’s interesting when the member opposite makes such 

statements because the last time the teachers took job action 

was when the NDP were in power. Was that because they didn’t 

care about teachers at that time? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the teachers and professional 

workers at SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 

and Technology] have been without a deal for almost two years. 

This government is offering them less than 2 per cent despite 

the rising cost of living. 

 

The government has threatened to lock these workers out and 

force a deal within 30 days if there is any job action, Mr. 

Speaker. This is not bargaining; this is dictating. These people 

help prepare people for Saskatchewan’s workforce. Why is this 

government threatening and demonizing them, Mr. Speaker? It 

obviously makes no sense to us. 

 

For the sake of SIAST teachers, schoolteachers, and health care 

workers in this province, will this government finally sit down 

and bargain with these groups fairly and honestly? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Certainly we’re very pleased 

with our track record, Mr. Speaker, especially when it comes to 

post-secondary education — $2.8 billion invested in 



May 2, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7423 

post-secondary education. It’s a record, Mr. Speaker, over the 

course of four years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, regarding SIAST specifically, we’ve seen 

operating funding go up by 18.5 per cent, Mr. Speaker. We 

know, Mr. Speaker — I know this personally, Mr. Speaker; I 

began my teaching career actually at SIAST, Mr. Speaker — I 

know how hard, I know how hard, Mr. Speaker, those 

individuals work. That’s one of the reasons that we want to 

make sure, Mr. Speaker, that there’s a fair agreement, Mr. 

Speaker. And the best way to achieve that is to have the 

individual parties reach that agreement, not to be negotiated 

here on the floor of the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to make sure 

post-secondary education students, institutions, their instructors, 

and relating stakeholders continue to be a priority for this 

government, Mr. Speaker. That’s why it’s best for those parties 

to negotiate it and come to a fair agreement on their own. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Environmental Issues 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the Alberta oil sands industrial 

plants are pumping more than 300 million pounds of gases into 

the air each year. And where do you think those gases go, Mr. 

Speaker? Seventy per cent of them land right here in 

Saskatchewan, negatively affecting our environment and the 

health of Saskatchewan people. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan deserve to be compensated for 

having our wonderful province turned into a dumping ground 

by Alberta, Mr. Speaker. Will this government immediately 

take steps to develop a concrete action with the Government of 

Alberta to reach a fair compensation settlement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I want to thank the member for her question. This was 

something that was raised in the early days of this sitting of the 

legislature, Mr. Speaker, when the member for North Battleford 

asked questions on two days. Mr. Speaker, I just want to correct 

something that that member said. On two occasions he said that 

the air that we breathe is poisoned in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, going so far as to say, and I quote, “If there’s one 

thing we know, Mr. Speaker, we’re being poisoned.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that’s absolutely irresponsible, particularly 

coming from a former minister of Health, to say that the air that 

the people of Saskatchewan breathe is poisoning them, Mr. 

Speaker. We are working to address issues that are coming from 

Alberta because of the oil sands through a boreal management 

strategy which we announced in this budget — $1 million 

unprecedented — to test northern lakes in Saskatchewan as well 

as an agreement with Alberta that I look forward to signing 

shortly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

Ms. Morin: — What’s irresponsible, Mr. Speaker, is 70 per 

cent of the air emissions from Alberta oil sands coming into 

Saskatchewan, directly affecting the Saskatchewan economy 

and people, and not having any compensation sought by the 

Sask Party government that’s been sitting there for three and a 

half years, Mr. Speaker. That’s irresponsible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just a few weeks ago, we asked this government if 

it’s going to protect Saskatchewan people from excessive 

pollution coming out of the Alberta oil sands. Instead of 

standing up for the health of Saskatchewan people and 

province’s environment, the minister has done nothing. But we 

know the oil sands are affecting us negatively now. Of that 

there is no doubt. 

 

Why is this minister afraid to put Saskatchewan people first and 

seek the compensation the province deserves for the damage 

being done by the oil sands pollution? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, if that member and her party believed what she says, 

why did they not take action when a study was published in 

1996, Mr. Speaker, that indicated that 70 per cent of sulphur — 

not all emissions, but sulphur emissions — exiting Alberta 

enters the province of Saskatchewan? They knew this in 1996. 

Did they do anything about in ’96? No. Did they do anything 

about in ’97? No, Mr. Speaker, and so on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have done a number of important initiatives in 

this province under three and a half years of the Saskatchewan 

Party government, including, Mr. Speaker, air monitoring all 

across this province, Mr. Speaker, investing in a boreal 

management strategy — $1 million in this budget year alone, 

Mr. Speaker, far more than was ever done — and, Mr. Speaker, 

as I said, I look forward to signing an agreement shortly with 

the Government of Alberta. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the 

minister thinks reducing staffing in terms of monitoring the air 

pollution in Saskatchewan is moving forward, Mr. Speaker, but 

we’ll let him believe that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, air pollution is not the only way Saskatchewan is 

being harmed by Alberta’s oil sands. Studies have clearly 

shown that contaminants have gotten into the water around the 

oil sands, and some of that water eventually flows into 

Saskatchewan, affecting our beautiful lakes and rivers. This is 

dangerous for Saskatchewan people and needs to be dealt with 

now. This affects traditional ways of life for Aboriginal people, 

tourism, health of Saskatchewan residents, and thereby 

ultimately the economy. 

 

The Sask Party government introduced a Sask-first policy for 

Crowns. And yet with the government, the Premier and the 

Sask Party has an Alberta-first policy. When can the people of 

Saskatchewan expect compensation from the province of 

Alberta for the pollution that is being caused to the province of 



7424 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2011 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we are certainly committed 

to keeping our environment clean in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

To quote from actually a report that I believe that that member 

quoted from earlier in this session, the federal Minister of 

Environment report, oil sands advisory report: 

 

We make but one overarching recommendation. We 

recommend that a shared national vision and management 

framework of aligned priorities, policies, and programs be 

developed collaboratively by relevant jurisdictions and 

stakeholders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s why as a government we’re working with 

the province of Alberta. That’s why we’re working at the 

federal and provincial ministerial table of Environment 

ministers on a Canada-wide comprehensive air management 

quality, air management system, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why 

we’re working on the acid rain task force as a province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, when they were in 

government, to their credit they purchased the air bus, the 

mobile air bus. However, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t have the 

staff to actually operate the air bus. So, Mr. Speaker, if you’re 

concerned about the air quality in a parking garage used by the 

Ministry of Environment, then the NDP’s your party. We’re 

deploying that across the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Planned Highway Improvements 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 

Highways has announced where highways improvements, 

upgrades, and repairs will be made this year. He said his 

priority list for the year reflects a safe and efficient 

transportation network that supports current growth and 

generates new economic activity. And yet the area that begs for 

greater safety, more efficiency, and increased support for a 

growing local economy has been left out. Of course, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re talking about Highway 39. 

 

Why has the minister again failed to allocate funding to this 

major and important Saskatchewan highway? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

member in the House the other day raised the prospect of 

twinning Highways 6 and 39 south of Regina. I explained at 

that time, Mr. Speaker, that our twinning priority right now is 

finishing Highway 11 between Saskatoon and Prince Albert. As 

that nears completion next year, we’ll be making decisions 

going forward on the possibility of twinning projects or a 

combination of twinning and passing lane projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should point out though that last week or the 

week before when he asked the question the first time, he read 

quotes from the Estevan paper he attributed to the member from 

Estevan. Mr. Speaker, I find it surprising though that he didn’t 

finish the quote — took it out of context, Mr. Speaker; left 

people with the impression that the member had said that that 

project would be moving forward after No. 11 is done, Mr. 

Speaker. I read the rest of that article. That wasn’t the case, and 

I would suggest that that member owes this House an apology. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I have more quotes to 

read to the minister. And, Mr. Speaker, I was listening carefully 

to the minister and I hear today, as I heard back on April 11th, 

that the minister continues to talk about his thinking as 

including not twinning but putting in passing lanes on this 

important highway, Mr. Speaker — something that the people 

along Highway 39 have completely rejected. 

 

When we listen to people like Marge Young, who leads an 

organization known as the Time to Twin committee, she says, 

and I quote, “Everybody’s in a hurry because it’s oil. 

Everybody’s in a rush. And that’s what creates a lot of danger 

out there.” 

 

Why is the minister dismissing those concerns? Why has he not 

begun the important planning necessary so that this construction 

project can get under way as soon as possible? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m certainly not dismissing those concerns. I’ve had the 

opportunity to meet with Marge and her committee. I believe 

there’s another meeting scheduled for sometime in the next few 

weeks. I certainly understand their concerns, Mr. Speaker. That 

is a heavy traffic highway. 

 

When I’m referring to passing lanes, there is potential for 

passing lanes on a number of heavy trafficked areas in the 

province, not just Highways 6 and 39, but Highway 16 east of 

Saskatoon, Highway 7 west of Saskatoon, and a number of 

other highways as well, Mr. Speaker. Safety is paramount to 

this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we took office three and a half years ago, 

there was a massive infrastructure deficit in highways, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s just simply a case of on one hand we’re trying to 

plan for the growth in the new Saskatchewan. On the other 

hand, Mr. Speaker, we’re still trying to recover from years of 

neglect on our infrastructure under 16 years of NDP 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. Last week Saskatchewan 

Power announced its plans to proceed with the carbon capture 

project at Boundary dam. They said that this project will be a 

major economic stimulus for the area. 

 

The announcement of the project means that there will be even 

more industrial traffic on Highway 39 and the safety issue will 

be increased even more. Mr. Speaker, while they’re cheering 

economic growth, they better not be cheering the increased 



May 2, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7425 

safety issue that that brings, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If the minister is really serious about his priority to reflect 

safety, efficiency, and meet the needs of growth and economic 

activities, why isn’t he moving quickly to ensure that Highway 

39 is higher on the list so that planning can begin in earnest and 

people like Marge Young and the other members of the Time to 

Twin committee can really feel like their voice has been heard? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we’re not shortchanging safety. We’re extremely concerned 

about safety on highways in this province. All over the 

province, Mr. Speaker, we’ve taken a number of initiatives to 

ensure that our highways will be safer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our highways budget this year, $556 million. Mr. 

Speaker, the four largest highways budgets in the history of this 

province have been under a Sask Party government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the election campaign, we campaigned on 

a promise of $1.8 billion over four years if we were given the 

privilege of serving as government in this province. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the members opposite criticized that. They said it was 

impossible, that we wouldn’t be able to do that. Mr. Speaker, 

we not only did that; we did more. Over four years of 

government, Mr. Speaker, $2.2 billion. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. In every corner of this 

province, increased resource activity is putting strain on 

municipal infrastructure, affordable housing, and provincial 

highways. The Sask Party is lagging behind community leaders 

and concerned citizens in addressing that issue. 

 

We know that twinning of Highway 11 is nearing completion. 

Why can’t the minister announce today that his five-year plan 

contains funding for the twinning of Highway 39 so that 

planning can begin and no further loss of life or injury will 

occur because of increased and more aggressive traffic filling 

the asphalt all along Highway 39? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

answer to that question is very simple. We want to make that 

decision — on the next twinning project or combination of 

twinning and passing lane project — we want to make that on 

the most current data available. We will make that decision 

sometime next year as No. 11 comes to a close. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I realize that concept is foreign to the member 

opposite because he’s absolutely right: that heavy traffic is a 

result of economic growth in this province as a result of the 

position taken by this party, by this government, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s called economic development, something that member and 

that party knows nothing about. 

 

[14:15] 

 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Integrated Carbon Capture and Storage 

Demonstration Project 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m pleased to rise in the Assembly today to tell 

citizens right across our province, and in fact people right 

around the world who have expressed an interest in this recent 

initiative, about an important new initiative that SaskPower and 

our government are undertaking in co-operation, in 

collaboration with community groups as well as private sector 

groups. 

 

It’s an initiative, Mr. Speaker, which highlights a couple of 

things: the efforts of this government to become a world leader 

in the field of environmentally responsible electrical generation 

and, Mr. Speaker, as well our plans to put a sound foundation in 

place to support the province’s growing economy and, of 

course, our thriving communities not just for today but for years 

to come. 

 

It was my pleasure to be in Estevan on April 26th, along with 

key members of our SaskPower team as well as the member 

from Estevan, who also serves very, very well as our caucus 

Chair, as well as the Minister Responsible for CIC [Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan]. We were all there 

with a number of hard-working people from SaskPower and the 

local community, including the mayor and some councillors, to 

announce that this government has approved the construction of 

the SaskPower Boundary dam integrated carbon capture and 

storage demonstration project. 

 

In partnership with SaskPower, the Government of 

Saskatchewan is committing to just over $1 billion to the total 

cost of this $1.24 billion project, with the federal government 

thankfully having contributed a significant amount — about 

$240 million of this initiative. This will be the largest capital 

project in the history of SaskPower and certainly one of the 

most important. It will also be one of the largest construction 

projects in the history of Saskatchewan, providing a major 

economic boost to the Estevan area as well as to the rest of the 

province as a whole. In fact the project will generate more than 

6,000 years of direct and indirect employment, with the local 

construction workforce numbering approximately 600 

additional people working in and around Estevan at its peak. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s great news for our province’s already strong 

economy, one of the strongest in Canada. And people across the 

country recognize Saskatchewan as a growth leader. And in fact 

it was the very strength of our economy that was one of the key 

drivers behind this initiative. 

 

We all know, Mr. Speaker, that SaskPower requires a new 

generation of projects to meet Saskatchewan’s growing power 

needs. Mr. Speaker, over the past 10 years under the previous 

government, Saskatchewan’s electricity demand had grown by 

an average of far less than 2 per cent. But in the current decade, 

with the growth projections that are under way, this is expected 

to continue to accelerate and jump to well over 2 per cent, and 



7426 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2011 

in fact it’s anticipated to be 2.4 per cent. Mr. Speaker, quite 

frankly, that means there’s going to be continued increased 

demand for power right across the province. In response, the 

corporation has announced a multi-year, multi-billion dollar 

investment initiative to renew the province’s electricity system, 

one that was closely scrutinized by the legislature’s Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee just last year. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a legacy of the members opposite that 

they did not invest adequately into the SaskPower 

infrastructure. So while demand is on the rise, Mr. Speaker, we 

need to continue to invest in the basic infrastructure and new 

infrastructure to ensure that people across the province have 

safe, reliable, and sustainable power that they have relied upon 

for decades. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has long depended on three 

coal-fired power stations: Boundary dam, Shand, and Poplar 

River to generate affordable, reliable baseload electricity. But 

with our government’s commitment to reduce greenhouse gas 

emissions over the course of the coming years as well as 

anticipated federal emissions regulations, there is a very real 

risk that these coal-fired power plants would not be a part of 

future plans to help power our province and power the 

Saskatchewan advantage unless we could find a way to 

drastically reduce the greenhouse gas emissions. When you 

consider that Saskatchewan has about 300 years of inexpensive 

and easily accessible coal, it became even more evident and 

urgent that we find the place for coal-fired generation in 

Saskatchewan’s future. 

 

Given that challenge, a focused and dedicated group of 

SaskPower employees working alongside many of the world’s 

leading researchers and practitioners in power, electrification, 

and emissions technology have come up with the 

first-of-its-kind solution. By 2014 Boundary dam 3 at the 

Boundary dam power station will be rebuilt with a 

state-of-the-art turbine and a fully integrated carbon capture 

system, a system capable of reducing its greenhouse gas 

emissions by 1 million tonnes a year. That’s the equivalent of 

taking more than 250,000 vehicles off Saskatchewan roads, 

about 25 per cent of all vehicles now registered in the province. 

 

SaskPower will sell the captured carbon dioxide to oil 

companies to be used in enhanced oil recovery operations. The 

sulphur dioxide will also be captured and sold to companies 

who make sulphuric acid. These two income streams will help 

to offset the costs of the project, quite frankly help to pay for 

the project. With this project, Boundary dam will become the 

world’s first commercial-scale power plant with a fully 

integrated carbon capture system. 

 

This is a watershed moment in the history of SaskPower and in 

fact in the history of this province, one that holds the promise of 

securing a cleaner future for all of our coal-fired generating 

units and that has certainly captured attention of those from not 

just around North America, but in recent days we’ve been given 

full attention of the global interest that is being generated as a 

result of this announcement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to conclude I want to thank the many employees 

at SaskPower who have contributed thus far to the project as 

well as to the citizens of Estevan for their enthusiastic support. 

Although there’s a lot of hard work ahead and people are rolling 

up their sleeves, quite literally, within a couple of days the 

unwavering vision and unmistakable belief of everyone 

involved in this project has already proven that Saskatchewan 

can and is a world-class leader in excellence and innovation and 

that this government, in co-operation with the community and 

the private sector, has a bold plan to power a bright future for 

Saskatchewan today and for many decades to come, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d first 

like to thank the minister for providing me with a copy of the 

remarks previous to question period so as to better acquaint 

myself with what he has to say about this. Of course when the 

announcement was made to go forward, it’s a bit of a mixed bag 

is how I would characterize this announcement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Carbon capture and storage certainly is the technology where if 

that circle can be squared in terms of, you know, the needs of 

Saskatchewan around a 300-year supply of coal that is 

available, if you can square the environmental impact side of 

that equation, Mr. Speaker, then this is a tremendous 

technology and is something that was pioneered right here in 

terms of the work that’s been done over the past two decades, 

but on the one side, capturing and storing carbon, on the other 

side of the equation, using it in enhanced oil recovery and 

certainly work that was pioneered in the Apache Midale fields, 

Mr. Speaker, in the ’90s. 

 

I guess the concern part of the equation that we have here, Mr. 

Speaker, is the way that this government has had a habit of 

mismanaging or not being completely straight with the people 

when it comes to projects certainly related to carbon capture 

and storage. We saw the great fanfare and the shining of the belt 

buckles that took place when the Montana-Saskatchewan 

carbon capture and storage program was announced. The 

governor from the great state of Montana came to visit, and we 

had a great hoopla go on in the rotunda of this building, Mr. 

Speaker. But of course it came to pass that that announcement 

was all hat and no cattle, and all announcement and no action. 

And you know, it’s sort of interesting, Mr. Speaker, the way 

that this government likes to hype things up on the front end 

and then the way it plays out on the ground. 

 

So in terms of what’s happened on this file in a general sense, 

that gives us some pause for thought and some concern, Mr. 

Speaker. I guess the $240 million from the feds on a $1.2 

billion project, if this is indeed to be a world-leading project . . . 

And again this is in the context of a federal government that of 

course said to the people of Saskatchewan, when it comes to 

getting a fair deal on your natural resource revenues, Mr. 

Speaker, that they would sign a deal with the province of 

Saskatchewan worth at least $800 million. 

 

And of course when they reneged on that, the then government 

of the day launched into court action. And that court case was 

dropped by the current Sask Party government. And at the time 

the Premier said that, you know, this is not a problem. Such is 

our relationship with the Harper government that we’re going to 

do as good or better than the $800 million a year that that 



May 2, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7427 

commitment from the Harper government was supposed to be 

worth to the people of Saskatchewan. And we’ve seen how 

that’s worked out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So on the one hand you’ve got the reneging and the breaking of 

promises by the Harper government to their cousins here in 

Saskatchewan. But on the other hand, we see that a project that 

should be leading the world, and in many respects holds out that 

promise, Mr. Speaker, we see a project like that not getting the 

federal shoulder to the wheel, as should be the case. So that is 

something that we see as a concern. 

 

We see as a concern the fact that before Christmas, in 

announcing the staged go-ahead with SaskPower on this 

project, that the president of the corporation stated in December 

that it would be “irresponsible” to go ahead without greater 

clarity on the greenhouse gas regulations from the feds. And 

certainly the minister has echoed that sentiment in various 

ways, up to and including the announcement of the SaskPower 

annual report in terms of the need for that clarity on the 

greenhouse gas regulations from the feds. 

 

So what was deemed irresponsible by a very intelligent person, 

by a very knowledgeable person, by a very capable person 

before Christmas, Mr. Speaker, is apparently now just part of 

the cost of doing business. So that is something that we’re also 

concerned about in terms of what changed that before 

Christmas it was irresponsible; now, after Christmas, it is not. 

 

Something else that we’re very interested in, Mr. Speaker, is the 

fact that in previous discussions on this file there were great 

assurances made in terms of the markets available for sulphur 

dioxide and carbon dioxide. And certainly the pioneering work 

that was done in the Apache fields, Midale way, would 

certainly hold out some promise for that in terms of CO2 
[carbon dioxide]. But in terms of sulphur dioxide, Mr. Speaker, 

and in terms of what the business case for this is going forward, 

the answer from the government of course is, just trust us 

because they of course are such great managers. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of where we look at this from 

the opposition side, we have a lot of respect for the work of 

SaskPower, but when it comes to the political involvement of 

the members opposite and the way that they have oversight of 

these files, well we saw how that worked out on the 

Manitoba-Saskatchewan project being all announcement and no 

action. And then even the fact that that announcement wasn’t 

worth the paper it was written on had to be ferreted out of the 

minister without a proper informing of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So there are a number of problems that we foresee with this 

project, Mr. Speaker, not the least of which is that this was 

made on the eve of a federal election where it’d be hard not to 

think that this isn’t about helping out their federal cousins, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of having a good photo op. 

 

But carbon capture and storage is something that should hold a 

lot of promise in terms of meeting the world’s energy needs. 

We’re going to be watching this project very closely, Mr. 

Speaker, and we’ll see how the days unfold ahead. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Any further ministerial statements? I 

recognize the Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources. 

 

Reopening of Prince Albert Pulp Mill 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

my pleasure to rise and advise the House that the Prince Albert 

pulp mill is open and moving towards a full restart. Paper 

Excellence has finalized the company’s purchase of the Prince 

Albert pulp mill from Domtar. Paper Excellence will invest 

more than $200 million to reopen this facility, and it comes 

with over 200 direct jobs . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member from Regina 

Dewdney on his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has a 

point of order. I’d ask the member to state his point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wish to 

rise today on a point of order. This is a previously announced 

on March the 7th, Mr. Speaker. I have a number of newspaper 

articles, Mr. Speaker. And one of the advantages of having an 

advance copy, I went through the minister’s statement and 

checked off every single point that the minister’s making in his 

statement appears in newspaper articles dated March the 7th, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, a ministerial statement is to announce a new, 

Mr. Speaker — a new — a new idea, program, or public policy, 

Mr. Speaker, not something that’s been in the papers for more 

than two months. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 

response to the point of order to the Opposition House Leader, 

the Minister of Energy has not even had the opportunity to get 

to the point in his member’s statement where the announcement 

is going to be made. I believe it’s perfectly appropriate for the 

minister to be allowed to continue with the member’s statement 

and get to the new announcement before the Opposition House 

Leader is able to make his point. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’ve listened to the point of 

order by the Opposition House Leader. I’ve listened to the 

Government Deputy House Leader’s response. And I just 

remind the House that for the Speaker of the Assembly, it’s 

difficult to determine or try to presuppose what the ministerial 

statement is going to be to even make a ruling in favour of the 

point of order. And the rules are ministers may or may not 

submit a copy ahead of the response. And it’s been a 

long-standing practice that ministers have submitted a response. 

So before I could even make a qualified decision, I think it 

would be important for the minister to be allowed to make his 

response, and can certainly respond to the point of order after 



7428 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2011 

the fact, or at a later time, once I’ve heard the ministerial 

statement. I recognize the Minister of Energy and Resources. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Reopening of Prince Albert Pulp Mill 

(continuedd) 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to advise the Assembly 

that the government will be providing new funding of over 

$500,000 per year for the first two years to train new mill 

operators. Workers will be trained in the new processes before 

work begins at the facility. 

 

Paper Excellence has an excellent track record in Saskatchewan 

as the operators of the Meadow Lake mill. In addition the 

government has worked with the parties involved offering the 

following provisions: the provision of an adequate fibre supply; 

an agreement that will see SaskPower purchasing electricity 

from the biomass power facility to be incorporated into the mill. 

That agreement calls for the purchase of biomass power at a 

price consistent with rates charged for this kind of project. In 

addition to maintaining the existing environmental liability for a 

period of time when the mill operated as a Crown corporation 

prior to 1986, the government will also ensure that new pension 

plan agreements will be in place that respect the obligations to 

previous employees. 

 

Last week Paper Excellence announced they’re embarking on 

an accelerated restart program with the goal of becoming 

operational in the next 12 months. Paper Excellence has also 

started hiring employees in Prince Albert, and its offices will be 

fully operational within a week. Paper Excellence expects that 

the new timeline will require major — the new timeline will 

require major forest harvest activity no later than this fall, Mr. 

Speaker. The company’s discussions are advancing well within 

industry and First Nations partners, government, and a number 

of support operations. This is great news for the city of Prince 

Albert and the forestry sector here in Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like to congratulate all groups involved who have 

worked very hard for the success of the finalization of this deal, 

including the Communications, Energy and Paperworkers 

Union, the city of Prince Albert, and our First Nations partners 

from the Agency Chiefs Tribal Council and the Montreal Lake 

Cree Nation and industry partners. Without everyone’s 

involvement in this process, this important announcement could 

not be made possible. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Pleased to arise to 

respond to a point of order on the many points — in fact all of 

them — that were made on March 7th of 2011 . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. The 

member would be responding, I take it, to the ministerial 

statement, not to the point of order. And I ask the member just 

to go directly to the ministerial statement. The member for 

Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. Now I would 

like to congratulate groups involved, certainly the members of 

the CEP [Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union of 

Canada] in Prince Albert. They’ve been working very diligently 

on this project for a long, long time. The Agency Chiefs Tribal 

Council, I know they’ve done a lot of work on this. The 

Montreal Lake Cree Nation, the city of Prince Albert, and most 

of all, Mr. Speaker, additionally Paper Excellence because they 

are a major player in the province currently and have done some 

good work. And it’s my understanding, through talking with 

many of the prospective employees out there, that they’re happy 

to possibly be working again in Prince Albert in the industry. 

 

Now if you want to talk about some of the details, Mr. Speaker, 

it is interesting that what we’re talking about here now with this 

government is 28 per cent of the jobs that were existing 

previously at that pulp mill. And if you want to look outward 

into the rest of the forestry industry, Mr. Speaker, you don’t 

have to go much further than Central Avenue in Prince Albert 

where the Forestry Centre of excellence has been entirely 

demolished and moved to Saskatoon. 

 

So the people in the government here who are, and certainly the 

minister himself who is bragging about how he’s involved in 

the forestry industry and that this is a great announcement for 

their government, it’s absolutely false, Mr. Speaker. The credit 

is due to the people involved, as I’ve mentioned, certainly and 

to world global commodity prices of which the Saskatchewan 

Party has little control. 

 

Now I appreciate the heckling from the Premier on this, 

however it’s obvious that he had nothing to do with it either. So 

I’m not sure why, if he had a chance to say something today, he 

could’ve gotten on his feet and done that, but he’s chosen not 

to, unfortunately. 

 

So what happens, Mr. Speaker, is we are as a province blessed 

with an abundance of natural resources, and forestry is certainly 

one of them. But what’s highlighted today, I would argue, is the 

need for policies where the benefit of those resources is 

maximized for Saskatchewan people. And we would appreciate 

if the government would move forward to doing that in more 

than just this case. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Any further ministerial statements? 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 155 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 155 — The 

Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 



May 2, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7429 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 

pleasure to be able to get up and speak to Bill No. 155, The 

Natural Resources Amendment Act. There’s a very high value 

to hunting and fishing in this province, Mr. Speaker, and 

through outfitting and many wildlife and nature organizations 

that are active in the province, Mr. Speaker, hunting and fishing 

alone is estimated to have an impact of $100 million on 

Saskatchewan’s economy. So one can see the importance that it 

holds for the economy of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, at first glance and having done some work 

on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, it seems somewhat innocuous. And 

even having spoken to some of the stakeholders, they’re saying 

it seems somewhat innocuous when they first take a look at this 

Bill. So there are a number of questions that need to be asked 

about this Bill, Mr. Speaker, because there’s still an uneasy 

feeling in those stakeholder organizations, Mr. Speaker. And 

that uneasy feeling of course stems from the Sask Party 

government’s record on what it has done with respect to the 

preservation and continuation of wildlife in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we saw only last spring The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act, which was introduced under the Sask Party 

government last spring, Mr. Speaker. And what a colossal, 

colossal mess that was, Mr. Speaker, from everything from 

having introduced an Act which was absolutely unnecessary 

which pulled 3.5 million acres of wildlife habitat protected land 

out of legislation, Mr. Speaker, and put it into regulation. And 

for those that are watching and don’t understand what 

implications that has, Mr. Speaker, what it means, Mr. Speaker, 

is that anyone can make application to the Minister of 

Environment and ask to be able to purchase that land, Mr. 

Speaker. And essentially when that land is placed, is taken out 

of legislation and placed into regulation, it can be sold basically 

at the stroke of the minister’s pen, Mr. Speaker, without having 

any due scrutiny or due process of being questioned in the 

legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s interesting to note about The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act is that it was introduced under a 

Conservative government, Mr. Speaker, a Conservative 

government, a true Conservative government that was not shady 

about what it stood for, Mr. Speaker, but was very clear and 

very open about what it stood for, Mr. Speaker, and wanted to 

ensure that their agenda was well known, unlike the Sask Party 

government which has no history, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It was born out of the depth of the black of the night from a 

handful of Conservatives that knew that they would never be 

re-elected under that title again, Mr. Speaker, after the fiasco 

that happened in the ’80s with leaving this province in a debt 

situation — matter of fact, bankruptcy situation — of $15 

billion, Mr. Speaker. So they renamed these five MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] out of the Conservative 

government and they renamed their group the Sask Party, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s what they needed to do to try and brush 

away their history, Mr. Speaker, and try and become elected 

under a different title. So, Mr. Speaker, that’s what they did. 

 

So what’s interesting about that, Mr. Speaker, is that they 

changed their name. They have nothing that they stand for; they 

have no history. People have no idea what policies they have 

because there’s no policy discussion at their conventions, Mr. 

Speaker, absolutely zero at this year’s convention, I believe it 

was four at last year’s convention, and perhaps . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Government Deputy House 

Leader on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — State his point of order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, we are currently debating 

Bill 155, I believe, The Natural Resources Amendment Act. The 

member is clearly not speaking to the Bill, which is a 

long-standing rule of this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. There has 

been a long-standing tradition to allow a very wide-ranging 

debate on the Bills, Mr. Speaker. This Bill has only been before 

the House with this Speaker less than one and a half minutes, 

Mr. Speaker, and the opposition Deputy House Leader is 

already rising on a point of order. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if he would listen for a few minutes, just as in 

other debates, Mr. Speaker, other information, then you would 

hear the full entirety of the message that needs to be delivered 

to the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I have listened to the Government 

Deputy House Leader’s point of order and the response from 

the Opposition House Leader and just want to remind the House 

that, yes, it has been a long-standing tradition that when we’re 

debating Bills that the member that’s on their feet should be 

referring to, or tying their debate to the piece of . . . or the Bill 

or the debate that is currently before the Assembly. However 

the Speaker needs a bit of time to as well determine if the 

member, whichever member it is, is actually tying the 

information to the debate. 

 

So the point of order is well taken, but I would ask the members 

as well to also be mindful of the fact that in their debate to 

ensure that they are tying their comments to the specific piece 

of legislation. Currently we’re debating Bill No. 155, The 

Natural Resources Amendment Act. 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, as I 

was saying with respect to Bill 155, the Sask Party government 

doesn’t have a good history when it comes to protecting 

wildlife in this province, Mr. Speaker, as I was just citing from 

the example from The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people don’t trust the Sask 

Party government. And why is it that they don’t trust the Sask 

Party government? It’s because they have a bad record so far, in 

the three and a half years that they have been elected, on this 

particular issue, Mr. Speaker. And they have no history, as I 

was explaining, because they were born out of the black of 

night from five Conservatives who had to realize that they had 



7430 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2011 

to rename themselves the Sask Party in order to become elected, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what do we see with Bill 155? We see a 

potential repeat of what the people of Saskatchewan are weary 

of, and that is there are not enough details in this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, for people to honestly know what exactly is being 

done here. I mean there are a number of questions that have 

been asked by a number of colleagues as to what is being done 

here, Mr. Speaker, and unfortunately we have not received any 

answers to any of those questions that have been asked so far in 

any of the debate that’s taken place in the House on Bill 155. 

All we know, Mr. Speaker, is that, like I said, the Sask Party 

government doesn’t have a good history on protecting wildlife 

in this province, Mr. Speaker, and the habitat areas that are so 

important to them. 

 

In The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, Mr. Speaker, as I said, 

the lands can be applied for sale to the Minister of 

Environment. The Minister of Environment can simply sell 

those lands with a stroke of a pen. Now the Minister of 

Environment will currently tell you, or the Sask Party 

government will currently tell you that, Mr. Speaker, there are 

conservation easements that can be attached to those lands. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what’s interesting to note about that is last 

spring, in conjunction with The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, 

Mr. Speaker, that removed the 3.5 million acres out of 

legislation and put it into regulation, they also passed The 

Conservation Easements Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And what does that do, Mr. Speaker? That Bill allows someone 

to make application to the Minister of Environment to have a 

conservation easement removed from a piece of land, Mr. 

Speaker. And then guess what happens when the conservation 

easement is removed, Mr. Speaker? The Minister of 

Environment has free capability to simply sell the land because 

there is no conservation easement attached to that land, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now what’s interesting to note about that, Mr. Speaker, with 

respect to 155 is that again we see a Bill that’s being put 

forward to this legislature. The main stakeholder organizations 

that would be contacted with respect to Bill 155 aren’t really 

sure why Bill 155 is being put forward either, Mr. Speaker, 

except for a few small nuances, but have a lot more questions to 

ask. So again we see with Bill 155 and The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act, Mr. Speaker, there are many more questions 

than there are answers. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, because of the bad history of the 

Sask Party government when it comes to protecting wildlife and 

their habitat in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s an uneasy feeling and a feeling of mistrust. Now that 

feeling of mistrust of course extends far beyond The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act or Bill 155, Mr. Speaker. It extends to 

many and numerous other Bills, Mr. Speaker. Matter of fact 

almost every Bill that’s been brought forward in this legislature, 

Mr. Speaker, has some dubious aspects to it, Mr. Speaker, that 

the Sask Party government still has not been held to account 

for, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the interesting things about Bill 155, 

as well as many other Bills that are brought forward by the Sask 

Party government, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that they want to 

reduce the accountability of the government, Mr. Speaker. Now 

what’s interesting about this is — because they love to align 

themselves so closely with the Harper Conservatives so we 

know, Mr. Speaker, that there isn’t much distinction there, and 

the poor Liberals that got caught up in the name change of the 

Conservatives to a Sask Party government, they simply got 

caught up in that whole thing, Mr. Speaker — but Bill 155 

clearly delineates the fact that they want to have less 

accountability yet again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Despite the fact that it is a conservative mantra, whether it’s a 

Sask Party government, whether it’s the Harper Conservatives, 

that they claim — and I’ll use that word very clearly, Mr. 

Speaker, — that they claim that they are going to be more 

accountable. The irony is, Mr. Speaker, that it’s exactly the 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. The Harper Conservatives and the Sask 

Party government are yet one and the same when it comes to 

absolute complete lack of accountability, lack of transparency, 

and lack of lack of responsibility to the people that they 

represent, Mr. Speaker. That is what the irony is, Mr. Speaker, 

is that they say one thing and do completely the opposite, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that we’re having this 

discussion about 155 and the notion of accountability on today, 

May 2nd, which of course is the date of the federal election in 

Canada, Mr. Speaker. Because, Mr. Speaker, what are we 

seeing from Canadians all across the country, Mr. Speaker? 

We’re seeing that they are coming out in record numbers, Mr. 

Speaker. They are engaging themselves in the political process, 

Mr. Speaker, because they are tired. They’re tired of having a 

government that feels that it can simply snub the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, snub the people of the country of 

Canada, Mr. Speaker, and do whatever it wants despite the fact 

. . . the promises it makes to the people, Mr. Speaker. In this 

province alone, Mr. Speaker, Bill 155 has a huge reflection 

because, like I said, we’re talking about accountability. 

 

So let’s talk about the fact that this Harper government that is 

looking for re-election today, Mr. Speaker, promised the people 

of Saskatchewan $800 million in terms of equalization 

payments to the province of Saskatchewan. What that means, 

Mr. Speaker, is that the people of Saskatchewan should see 

some financial benefit from the resources it owns. And what did 

the Harper government do when it got elected, Mr. Speaker? It 

cancelled that promise, Mr. Speaker.  

 

So Bill 155 talks about being, again being less accountable, Mr. 

Speaker. It talks about being less accountable to the people of 

the province. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing that with other 

Bills that are brought forward by the Sask Party government. 

And just to name a few, Mr. Speaker, Bill 160 is going to 

dictate less accountability to the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. Bills 153, 154, Mr. Speaker, are going to be again 

delivering less accountability to the province of Saskatchewan. 

Through The Provincial Court Amendment Act, The Provincial 

Court Consequential Amendment Act, and The Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Code Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker, all of those 

Bills, Mr. Speaker, not to mention many, many others that I can 

name, Mr. Speaker . . . And it appears that the Minister for 



May 2, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7431 

Crown Investments Corporation I believe, Mr. Speaker, wants 

me to name all those Bills, Mr. Speaker. And so, Mr. Speaker, 

if I have the ability of time, I would be glad to do so, Mr. 

Speaker, because clearly they have forgotten that. They have 

forgotten which Bills are providing less accountability, Mr. 

Speaker, to the people of the province, Mr. Speaker. And Bill 

155 is yet another one of those Bills, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill 155 is talking about again changing the structure of how 

things are going to be evolved for the funds that are going to be 

administered under the Ministry of Environment, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are some good points that are being 

brought forward, Mr. Speaker, but like I said, there are many, 

many questions that still need to be answered. And the 

implications . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’ve been reading 

through the minister’s second reading speech, and I’m having a 

difficult time trying to determine where the member’s 

comments are leading to in regards to Bill 155. And I would ask 

the member to refer to the Bill directly and the intent of the Bill. 

I recognize the member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill is talking about changing 

the accountability structure under the Ministry of Environment. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that means that there is a change to the 

accountability of the Sask Party government as a whole when it 

comes to being accountable to the people of Saskatchewan. 

And, Mr. Speaker, when this Sask Party government talks about 

being less accountable to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s when the NDP opposition starts making sure 

that the people of Saskatchewan knows about the fact that this 

government is yet again putting forward legislation that is going 

to provide less accountability to the people of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. And that again is talking about less transparency, 

less accountability, and less, less respect, less respect, Mr. 

Speaker, for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And what I find interesting, Mr. Speaker, is that we have 

members opposite who think this is funny. They think it’s 

funny, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I find no comments in regards 

to accountability. I believe we’re talking Fish and Wildlife 

Development Fund and debate on that area. And I’d just ask the 

member to address the Bill, the specific arguments for the Bill. 

And so I’d recognize the member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this Bill No. 

155 is going to change how the fund is going to be 

administered. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re speaking directly about 

the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund and how those funds 

are going to be administered. Now that is a matter of 

accountability, Mr. Speaker, and accountability is not 

something that the Sask Party government has a strong 

reputation of doing, Mr. Speaker. And I said we can cite many 

examples. I can go through the number of Bills that this 

government, Sask Party government has put forward which is a 

clear record of lack of accountability. So, Mr. Speaker, when 

we look at Bill 155, we have many questions to ask. And one of 

those questions is, how accountable is this government going to 

be by changing the accountability structure of the fish and 

development wildlife fund, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So as I said, let’s look at a previous example. Well one of those 

examples, Mr. Speaker, is one of the first orders of government 

that the Sask Party government wanted to raise, was 

discretionary spending with respect to a longer reporting period 

for Executive Council. They wanted to multiply that by seven 

times the amount that the previous administration worked 

under, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they love to speak about the fact that the 

previous administration was there for 16 years. The NDP was in 

administration for 16 years, Mr. Speaker. But what they don’t 

like to talk about the fact is that the previous NDP 

administration was able to operate those 16 years in a very 

accountable fashion, Mr. Speaker, without having to decrease 

accountability, and was able to do so with a smaller amount of 

money in terms of discretionary funds, despite the fact that 

those funds do have to be reported in the long term. But in the 

short term, Mr. Speaker, those funds do not have to be reported. 

And that’s what they wanted to increase — not by doubling it, 

Mr. Speaker, not by tripling it, Mr. Speaker, but by increasing it 

by sevenfold, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to be complaining about the 

fact that they feel that I am not staying on topic. But the point 

is, Mr. Speaker, is that I’m exactly on topic. Because when Bill 

155 changes the accountability structure of that fund, Mr. 

Speaker, we have questions that have yet to be answered, and 

therefore these debates take place, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why 

so many of my colleagues have stood on their feet and asked 

the questions that they’ve asked about this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

Bill 155, which I seem to need to mention more often than not 

because my colleagues across the floor seem to forget which 

Bill we’re talking about because perhaps they’re doing other 

things or having conversations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the fish and development wildlife fund in 

particular is talking about, they’re talking about introducing an 

advisory council. And, Mr. Speaker, an advisory council is 

something that obviously we support and endorse, Mr. Speaker, 

because this Sask Party government’s record on consultations 

has been less, even more dismal, I should say, than its 

accountability in terms of how it’s going to report to the people 

of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They are not consulting with the 

people of Saskatchewan. They are not consulting with the 

stakeholders when it comes to bringing forward various Bills 

that have been brought forward in the legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And Bill 155 has been discussed . . . well I shouldn’t say Bill 

155. Aspects of Bill 155 have been discussed with some 

stakeholders, Mr. Speaker. But again when those stakeholders 

are contacted and consulted, even they’re not 100 per cent sure 

about whether they should have concerns about this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, because they too have questions. And as I said, Mr. 

Speaker, their concerns are raised and their — how should I 

say? — their level of anxiety is raised by the fact that the Sask 

Party government is deemed to be doing, and is not just deemed 

but is doing, less to protect the wildlife habitat in this province, 

Mr. Speaker, rather than protecting it. 

 

Interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, The Wildlife Habitat 



7432 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2011 

Protection Act was introduced under the Conservative Tories in 

the ’80s and then made stronger yet under the NDP 

administration from ’91 to 2007. So the first government we’re 

seeing now to dismantle The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 

from the protection that it enjoyed under legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, is the Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. And they 

had to shove that through, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that all 

the stakeholders, except with the exception of one, Mr. Speaker, 

that they named in their second reading with respect to The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, all said that they weren’t 

consulted and they weren’t in favour, Mr. Speaker. But they 

pushed through it; they pushed the Bill through regardless, Mr. 

Speaker, because that’s how the Sask Party government 

operates, Mr. Speaker. It’s move forward willy-nilly regardless 

of the stakeholder expertise, regardless of the stakeholder 

comments and concerns, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with Bill 155, as I said, Mr. Speaker, the stakeholders that 

have been contacted themselves aren’t sure if they’re 

comfortable with it, if there are alarm bells because there are 

many questions that have yet to be answered, Mr. Speaker, and 

those questions have not yet been answered. 

 

Now the organizations that receive support from the Fish and 

Wildlife Development Fund do very valuable work in the 

province, Mr. Speaker, in terms of retaining fish and wildlife 

habitat. They’ve done much of this work over many years, Mr. 

Speaker, and the opposition clearly supports that work, Mr. 

Speaker. We are very, very pleased that Saskatchewan is a 

province that is bountiful with respect to fish and wildlife 

habitat, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know, it’s interesting that the member from 

Cannington is commenting from his seat about something. I 

can’t even . . . I can’t quite hear what he’s saying, Mr. Speaker. 

But what’s interesting is that he seems very bitter about the 

notion of protecting fish and habitat, wildlife habitat in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And I don’t understand why he 

would feel that way, Mr. Speaker, because people are clearly 

outspoken on the topic, Mr. Speaker. Whether they belong to 

the stakeholder organizations or not, the people of this province 

want to see the natural wildlife and habitat of this province, Mr. 

Speaker, preserved and also enhanced, Mr. Speaker, because 

this is one of the great assets for the province of Saskatchewan. 

And if anyone speaks to the tourism industry, Mr. Speaker, they 

will tell you how important it is for the tourism industry of this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And most importantly, Mr. Speaker, most importantly, if they 

would take the time to have those discussions with the First 

Nations and Métis people of the province, Mr. Speaker, they 

would come to realize how important the fish and wildlife 

habitat protection of this province is, Mr. Speaker, for the 

natural way of life, the traditional way of life for the First 

Nations and Métis people in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is absolutely essential that we don’t just play lip service to it, 

Mr. Speaker, but that we actually do some concrete actions to 

ensure that that natural way of life, that traditional way of life, 

Mr. Speaker, is preserved for the First Nation and Métis people 

of this province who are needing that not only for their cultural 

practices and heritage, Mr. Speaker, but also as a means of 

making a living, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, this is 

something that is being ignored over and over again. Bill 155 is 

yet just one of those concerns again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I raised some questions in the House today with respect to 

pollution of the airshed, Mr. Speaker, and pollution of the 

waterways, Mr. Speaker, and how that’s going to affect 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I talked about how it’s going 

to affect, how it is affecting the environment, Mr. Speaker, how 

it’s affecting farm land, Mr. Speaker, how it’s affecting air 

quality and thereby health, Mr. Speaker, and thereby also 

affecting tourism industry, traditional ways of life, and 

ultimately the economy, Mr. Speaker. When things affect all of 

these different areas, Mr. Speaker, it affects the Saskatchewan 

pocketbook, Mr. Speaker. It affects the cost to the health care 

system. It affects the cost to the environment, Mr. Speaker, and 

it affects cost to the economy in general, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again, as I said, Bill 155, you know, initially appears 

somewhat innocuous. But there are so many questions that are 

left to be asked, Mr. Speaker, because of the mistrust that 

people of Saskatchewan and the stakeholders that are directly 

involved with protecting the fish and wildlife habitat in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, have regarding Bill 155. 

 

Now the government is talking about expanding the scope of 

activities that are going to be funded, Mr. Speaker, and this 

again raises some questions. Now the Fish and Wildlife 

Development Fund receives a portion of the proceeds from 

every fishing and hunting licence. The amount of money in the 

fund is dependent upon the level of angling and hunting activity 

in the province. So as long as the activity continues to grow, 

then the scope of activities funded can increase as well, Mr. 

Speaker. But what happens to the projects being funded if 

hunting and angling activities drop as it could potentially do, 

Mr. Speaker? What happens to the projects that are being 

funded currently, Mr. Speaker? What happens to the new 

funding that is being proposed under Bill 155, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 155 is now proposing to allow the minister to 

allot funding as he or she sees fit, Mr. Speaker, and that again 

causes concern with respect to Bill 155 because we don’t know 

what those variables are at this time, Mr. Speaker. Those 

variables, Mr. Speaker, could very well be the issue of a 

number of professionals, whether they’re biologists or water 

specialists or other people with broad experience who currently 

work within the department, Mr. Speaker, who provide these 

services and then also manage the contracts that a ministry 

might have with some of the outside agencies. 

 

Now with this amendment, Mr. Speaker, it appears that it could 

also allow for a number of these ministry jobs to be eliminated 

and transferred out to some of these agencies, and that those 

funds would then be allotted to pay for those positions within 

those agencies, Mr. Speaker. That’s a very real possibility, Mr. 

Speaker. And that again is where the opposition has concern 

with Bill 155. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I do believe that these concerns have already 

been echoed in some of the comments from my colleagues, Mr. 

Speaker. And as I said, unfortunately no answers to those 

questions have been provided by the Sask Party government or 



May 2, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7433 

by anyone else opposite. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Go into committee and ask a question. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Environment 

is yelling, well go to committee and ask the questions. And 

believe me, Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what is going to happen 

given that there have not been any voluntary answers given so 

far by the questions that have been raised in debate on Bill 155 

to date, Mr. Speaker. Those questions will come up in 

committee and they will be asked. And I’m hoping, Mr. 

Speaker, that the committee will be afforded the appropriate 

answers to those questions, Mr. Speaker, that need to be asked 

and that need to be answered on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan and the very interested stakeholder organizations 

who themselves have some questions with respect to Bill 155 

and the changes that the Sask Party government is proposing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate because, you know, it seems 

that the Sask Party government would like the people of 

Saskatchewan and the members of the NDP opposition caucus 

to simply allow this Bill to proceed, allow this Bill to pass, and 

they’re saying, trust us, Mr. Speaker. And it’s unfortunate, Mr. 

Speaker, that the NDP opposition can’t do that. We can’t 

simply trust them, Mr. Speaker. For one thing, we wouldn’t be 

fulfilling our duty as the NDP opposition or the official 

opposition in the House of the Saskatchewan legislature, Mr. 

Speaker, who is duly elected to scrutinize and consult with 

stakeholder organizations to ensure that their needs are being 

fulfilled and that there isn’t anything nefarious, shall we say, 

contained in the Bills that are being brought forward by the 

Sask Party government. 

 

But what’s even more disappointing, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

people of Saskatchewan simply can’t trust the Sask Party 

government when it comes to Bill 155 or many other Bills, Mr. 

Speaker, because that trust, Mr. Speaker, that trust has been 

broken on so many past occasions that the trust factor has been 

long gone, Mr. Speaker — long gone. 

 

Long gone is the trust factor with respect to further 

enhancement of protection of The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Long gone is the trust of the people of Saskatchewan that the 

Sask Party government would make voting processes more 

enhanced and simpler in this province, Mr. Speaker, rather than 

encumbering voters in this province in a further fashion from 

being able to exercise their democratic right, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Long gone is the notion that this is a government, a Sask Party 

government, that truly believes in democracy, Mr. Speaker. 

Because as I’ve said on many occasions before, there is a 

Conservative party that exists in the province of Saskatchewan 

that would like to be able to participate in democracy and in the 

fall election of November 2011, Mr. Speaker. But unfortunately 

the $3 million that they have in a trust fund is being held by . . . 

well there’s been an accusation of some Sask Party members 

including the Premier and Deputy Premier . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The Conservative trust 

fund has nothing to do with the current debate that is taking 

place in the Assembly, the Bill 155, The Natural Resources 

Amendment Act. I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, it goes to the issue of trust. It goes 

to the issue of trust that people in this province have about 

whether or not people can trust the Bills that are being 

forwarded by the Sask Party government, including Bill 155, 

Mr. Speaker. It goes to the issue of trust on so many occasions 

and on so many topics. And I know this is a topic, Mr. Speaker, 

that I get shut down on almost every time I rise to my feet, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would just ask the member to 

address the Bill that is currently before the Assembly, the 

wildlife natural resources amendment Act, 2010. I recognize the 

member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — So, Mr. Speaker, as I said, the people of 

Saskatchewan and the stakeholder organizations that are 

interested in Bill 155 have no reason to trust the Sask Party 

government on this Bill because of their past history, Mr. 

Speaker. Their past history speaks volumes, and therefore there 

is no element of trust that can be had with respect to Bill 155, 

The Natural Resources Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that’s why the scrutiny that needs to take place, has to take 

place, Mr. Speaker, in such a comprehensive way that we’ve 

had so many speakers on the NDP opposition side speaking to 

this Bill, Mr. Speaker, asking questions on this Bill, seeing 

various scenarios that could be created under Bill 155, Mr. 

Speaker, because there is an absolute lack of trust in the Sask 

Party government. A lack of trust with respect to the Bills that 

have been brought forward so far under the Sask Party 

government, and therefore there’s a lack of trust with respect to 

Bill 155 as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we are also, as I’d mentioned before, 

concerned about this government’s growing propensity to 

reduce accountability for how government funds are spent, Mr. 

Speaker. This Bill appears to give additional authority to the 

Fish and Wildlife Development Fund advisory council to decide 

how money in the fund is spent. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that council, advisory council, in making . . . 

in giving counsel, I should say, to the Ministry of Environment 

is something that we certainly encourage and would like to see 

the government to move forward on. But when that council has 

the ability to make decisions on how those monies are spent, 

Mr. Speaker, direct decisions, that is not accountability on 

behalf of the government, Mr. Speaker. That is them again 

wanting to shirk that responsibility. That is them again wanting 

to offset that responsibility of accountability, Mr. Speaker, and 

be able to say, it’s someone else’s doing; it’s not ours. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is a pattern that we’re seeing on a 

continual basis with the Sask Party government. It is their 

constant, constant, constant excuse for why decisions are being 

made in this province, Mr. Speaker. Whenever the decisions are 

good, they want to be able to claim responsibility for that, Mr. 

Speaker. But whenever there’s any criticism of those decisions, 

Mr. Speaker, whenever there is any lack of accountability on 

those decisions, Mr. Speaker, that’s when the Sask Party 

government says, well it was my deputy minister, Mr. Speaker, 



7434 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2011 

or it was people within my ministry, or it was a completely 

different agency that is making those decisions — despite the 

fact that those decisions are having direct impact on the 

financial numbers and the debt, or liability, shall I say, for the 

people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so once again we’re seeing an offsetting of accountability, 

Mr. Speaker, that raises some concerns. It raises many 

concerns, Mr. Speaker. Why are they wanting to, why is the 

Sask Party government wanting to offset accountability yet 

again? So what nefarious plans do they have in the future that 

will then be able to be claimed as not their decision-making 

processes, Mr. Speaker, but rather that of the advisory council? 

And so, Mr. Speaker, once again we have, we have some 

concerns and some questions about how all of this is going to 

transpire with respect to the proposed changes to The Natural 

Resources Amendment Act. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the members of the legislature were elected 

by the people of Saskatchewan to make decisions. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are always, are always 

hoping that those are good decisions on their behalf, on how 

taxpayers’ money is going to be spent, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

completely reasonable to seek advice and expertise from outside 

government to inform the decisions of the government with 

respect to spending taxpayer money, but the final responsibility 

rests with the elected members of the government, Mr. Speaker. 

And so, as I said, there are some serious concerns as to how the 

accountability and responsibility of the Sask Party government 

is going to move forward under Bill 155. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is a number of changes to Bill 155. 

And I just want to read some of what I’ve been researching 

here, Mr. Speaker. Again, as I said, there’s some changing of 

the language, even though I want to read what the present law 

states, Mr. Speaker. It states that the assets of the Fish and 

Wildlife Development Fund can be used for: 

 

the acquisition, by purchase, lease or otherwise, of any 

equipment or materials or the retention of any services that 

the minister considers necessary to restore degraded fish 

populations or fish habitat, to create new fishing 

opportunities or to manage fish habitat or wildlife habitat. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the assets can also be used for “the design, 

development and operation of facilities to enhance fish habitat 

and fishing opportunities.” It can also be used for “the 

acquisition of fish for fish stocking projects,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:15] 

 

And I know that that’s something, Mr. Speaker, that is of great 

interest to the fishermen in this province, especially, as I said, in 

the areas where the fishing industry is a traditional way of life, 

Mr. Speaker. Because obviously we want to see those fish 

stocks replenished and we want to see the various fish species 

maintained, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the fund can also be used for “the assessment or 

evaluation of any waters in Saskatchewan for their fish or fish 

habitat potential or any land for its wildlife or wildlife habitat 

potential.” Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s the law as it currently 

exists. And it’s work that’s being done through this particular 

fund, the Saskatchewan wildlife and habitat development fund, 

Mr. Speaker . . . Sorry, the fish and wildlife habitat 

development fund. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, and, you know, one would hope that a lot of 

that had been done over the years in conjunction and in 

partnership with other groups that have expertise in this area, 

Mr. Speaker, and that would be, for instance, the Saskatchewan 

Wildlife Federation, the Nature Conservancy of Canada, Ducks 

Unlimited, and many other groups, Mr. Speaker, as well as 

Saskatchewan Environmental Society. There is a wing, I 

understand, of that organization and many others, Mr. Speaker, 

that would have some expertise and direct knowledge about 

what should be done in these areas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what’s interesting is that that’s the way the law currently 

exists; that’s what it currently reads. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s 

a lot of good work that could be done under the law as it 

currently exists. So what we’re seeing now is that Bill 155 is 

changing the nature of what’s actually going to be done with 

these funds without necessarily explaining what’s going to 

happen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the blanket clause that I was talking about 

— and I want to quote that blanket clause, Mr. Speaker — 

which is the one that’s somewhat troubling, is the one that “the 

engagement of any other services that the minister considers 

necessary to manage the fund.” And then further, “the payment 

of the expenses of the council.” So, Mr. Speaker, it does change 

how the fund is going to be administered with respect to the 

advisory council. It does change the fund in terms of what the 

fund is going to be funding, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So currently, Mr. Speaker, the fund is addressing various 

projects and, as I stated, either the restocking of fish habitat or 

the preservation of fish habitat and species, Mr. Speaker. But 

this leaves it wide open to what I stated before, Mr. Speaker, the 

potential for taking expertise out of the ministry itself, assigning 

it to the agencies, Mr. Speaker, or having those individuals with 

that expertise picked up by the agencies, Mr. Speaker, and then 

having that funding allocated to the agencies. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if that takes place, Mr. Speaker, what in fact 

happens is that there will be less funding available for the 

projects that are currently being undertaken with these funds, 

Mr. Speaker, because these individuals that could end up having 

to be paid with respect to now having the expertise coming 

from the agencies are currently being paid out of the Ministry of 

Environment. So, Mr. Speaker, we can see how there’s going to 

be an offsetting, Mr. Speaker. And we can see how those funds 

could then be stretched yet even further in terms of that 

potential. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve not had anybody confirm or deny 

that, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that this point has been raised 

numerous times in debate on Bill 155 by various colleagues and 

there have been many, many questions asked. So, Mr. Speaker, 

all we can do at this point is speculate as to what’s going to be 

happening with that fund. And, Mr. Speaker, the sad part is, is 

even if there is reassurances given at this time that that may not 

be the case, that doesn’t mean that it won’t change into the 

future. 

 



May 2, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7435 

We know with The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, Mr. 

Speaker, that to date there hasn’t been any land sold. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, what we don’t know is what’s going to happen, let’s 

say, in the spring of 2012, Mr. Speaker, if the Sask Party gets 

re-elected. We don’t know what’s going to happen if the Sask 

Party is re-elected and decides to simply claim open season on 

the selling off of those wildlife habitat protected lands, Mr. 

Speaker. Because right now they’re keeping things very hushed, 

and I can understand why they would want to do that. If I was 

the Sask Party government, I wouldn’t want to be raising alarm 

bells on The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act given that it 

received the negative publicity it did for them, Mr. Speaker, in 

2010 and still is, Mr. Speaker. So I would want to keep a lid on 

that, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure that’s what the Sask Party 

government is thinking at this point too. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we don’t know what nefarious goings-on are 

going to happen if they see re-election as a government, Mr. 

Speaker. No different than even if they make promises, Mr. 

Speaker, because those promises are easily broken just within 

weeks, Mr. Speaker. We saw essential services legislation being 

passed two weeks after they got elected, Mr. Speaker, despite 

the fact that the Minister of Health said two weeks prior to the 

election date that they would not be passing essential services 

legislation. So really their word unfortunately doesn’t mean 

anything, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we don’t know what’s going to happen with Bill 155 even if 

promises are made or reassurances are given that the questions 

that we have about 155 with respect to how the funds are going 

to be altered, in terms of where they’re going to be allocated, 

would be made, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that unfortunately is now cold comfort because, as I said, it 

speaks to the trust factor, Mr. Speaker, and the trust factor with 

the Sask Party government has been lost. It has been lost for a 

significant period of time and, Mr. Speaker, it only grows worse 

with their ongoing policies and changes that they’re making to 

laws of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The people of 

Saskatchewan have many concerns and they seem to be falling 

on deaf ears because the Sask Party government simply seems 

to think that they can be dictatorial in that realm, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we also see that there is a concern about 

what’s going to happen with respect to the further acquisition of 

lands for wildlife habitat purposes with respect to this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, because if those funds are depleted . . . And like I said, 

if those funds are currently supporting various programs and the 

acquisition of protecting wildlife habitat, Mr. Speaker, those 

funds will be stretched to a point, Mr. Speaker, where there 

won’t be a lot of acquisition of further protecting the wildlife 

habitat, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as I said, there’s also the variable of hunting and angling 

activity potentially dropping in this province, Mr. Speaker, 

which is how those funds are derived, from those fishing and 

angling licences, Mr. Speaker. I mean hunting and angling 

licences, Mr. Speaker. So if that happens, that of course 

diminishes the capacity that the fund would then have because 

it would diminish the amount of funds that would be going into 

the fund, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the irony is that the minister on his second 

reading states: 

 

The Fish and Wildlife Development Fund provides the 

money necessary to secure habitats to support a diversity 

of fish and wildlife species. To date the fund has 

acquired, through purchase or donation, approximately 

212,000 acres of land for wildlife habitat purposes, with 

many acres under joint title with various partners. Aside 

from the obvious benefits to hunters, anglers, and outdoor 

enthusiasts, it is important to note that much of this land 

continues to be made available to local communities for 

haying and grazing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is ironically exactly the same thing that 

the Sask Party government was saying with respect to The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. It said, don’t worry, everyone; 

everything’s fine because a lot of those lands are currently 

being leased to individuals to use for haying and grazing, Mr. 

Speaker. And what’s interesting is that despite the fact that 

those lands were at that time available to lessees to be able to 

lease that land, Mr. Speaker, for those purposes, it still decided 

that it needed to rip that 3.5 million acres of protected lands out 

of legislation and put it into regulations so it can be sold at the 

stroke of a pen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what we’re seeing here is that we again see lands that are 

also currently being made available to local communities for 

haying and grazing, Mr. Speaker, and yet we’re seeing some 

significant changes as to how that fund is going to be 

administered, Mr. Speaker, and because of the significant 

changes to how that fund’s going to be administered, also how 

those funds then are going to be able to acquire more lands for 

protection of that habitat, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I said, there are many questions about 

further acquisition of habitat lands. There’s many questions 

about how the dollars are going to be stretched in the event 

there is going to be a lack of . . . a loss of expertise, I should 

say, in the Ministry of Environment that will then have to be 

picked up by stakeholder agencies, which can then look to have 

additional funds given to them to be able to pay for those 

positions, Mr. Speaker, because the minister will have 

discretion yet again. 

 

So what we see, Mr. Speaker, is that there’s a pattern. There’s a 

pattern between the wildlife habitat protection, the amendments 

to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, the amendments to, The 

Conservation Easements Amendment Act. Those two Acts were 

passed by the Sask Party last spring. We’re seeing the same 

connection or the same coincidence with Bill 155, the Act to 

amend The Natural Resources Act, Mr. Speaker, with respect to 

giving more authority and more discretionary authority to the 

Minister of Environment himself, Mr. Speaker, which again 

we’re talking about less accountability. 

 

So the lesser amount of accountability that one has with respect 

to any decision-making processes and the more power that is 

given to one individual, Mr. Speaker, being the Minister of 

Environment, that’s a decision that the Sask Party government 

has made with The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, with respect 

to The Conservation Easements Amendment Act, and with 

respect to The Natural Resources Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker. 

There’s a constant desire by the Sask Party government to allow 



7436 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2011 

more discretionary authority by the Minister of Environment to 

make very important decisions with respect to how monies will 

be dealt with within the ministry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that is of great concern because you’re reducing 

accountabilities, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party government is 

reducing accountability to the people of Saskatchewan. The 

Sask Party government is reducing accountability to the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And the Sask Party 

government is reducing accountability to those that have the 

greatest interest with respect to how these particular issues are 

being dealt with, Mr. Speaker. And I absolutely fail to see why 

a government thinks it’s okay, why the Sask Party government 

thinks it’s okay or all right to become less accountable to the 

people of Saskatchewan that it has promised that it would be 

more accountable to. 

 

So clearly, Mr. Speaker, what we’re seeing is lip service. We’re 

seeing lip service to the people of Saskatchewan with respect to 

accountability and transparency. And what we’re seeing is a 

constant change or constant changes to the laws and Bills that 

they’re bringing forward, Mr. Speaker, that will provide less 

accountability and less transparency to the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I mean as I stated before, I can go on and give examples, 

but apparently they don’t want to hear the examples. I’m sure 

that they know of them themselves. But I would be glad to 

provide those examples if someone would tell me that they’d 

like to hear them. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it’s no laughing matter. It really isn’t a 

laughing matter. The people of Saskatchewan want to see an 

increase in accountability. They want to see an increase in 

transparency. And what they’re getting from the Sask Party 

government is exactly the opposite. 

 

And Bill 155 allows itself to be open to that speculation as well, 

Mr. Speaker, because we are not seeing a Bill that is 

strengthening that accountability. We’re not seeing a Bill that is 

going to provide more transparency on these issues, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re seeing a Bill, yet again, that is going to be able 

to hide things behind the minister’s closed door or, you know, 

the Sask Party cabinet’s closed door or the Premier’s closed, the 

closed door of the Premier’s office. That’s where those 

decision-making processes lie now, Mr. Speaker, if Bill 155 

proceeds in the way that it does without answering some 

concrete questions. 

 

And as I stated, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately even if those 

reassurances are given, there is very little trust that the people of 

Saskatchewan can have in those reassurances because 

unfortunately those promises and reassurances have been 

offered and issued on so many topics before and have been 

broken, and the Sask Party government has proved themselves 

to do quite the opposite when it came to making those promises 

and reassurances to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to bring my remarks to a close 

because there are many more questions that have to be asked 

and will be asked in committee, Mr. Speaker. And so I’m going 

to allow those questions to be moved to committee, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I thank the House for their patience with the questions that 

I’ve brought forward today. I thank my colleagues for their 

support on this Bill and asking the many good questions that 

needed to be asked on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, because the 

scrutiny by the NDP opposition, Mr. Speaker, is something that 

I’m very proud of. I’m very proud of the dedicated and diligent 

work that the NDP opposition is putting into all of the Bills that 

are being brought forward in the House, Mr. Speaker, and I will 

close with my remarks. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is that the 

motion by the Minister of the Environment that Bill No. 155, 

The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee does this Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Minister Responsible for Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — To the Committee on the Economy, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Committee on 

the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 172 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 172 — The 

Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant 

la Loi de 1995 sur les victimes d’actes criminels be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

this afternoon to join in on the discussion on Bill No. 172, An 

Act to amend The Victims of Crime Act, 1995. And yes there is 

a French title, Mr. Speaker, but I will spare the listeners at home 

and members seated in the gallery my attempt at reading that at 

this time. But of course there is a French title as well. 

 

So Bill No. 172, Mr. Speaker, as I said, The Victims of Crime 

Amendment Act, this piece of legislation is an amendment to 

address how the release of information occurs in situations 

where there has been a crime, where there is a victim, and that 

the victim-based services are operating out of a police station or 



May 2, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7437 

a detachment. And this piece of legislation addresses how the 

information flow should be done, can be done, and ought to be 

done, Mr. Speaker. So it’s a piece of legislation that is seeking, 

as I understand it in reading the second reading speech by the 

minister, to address a certain situation. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, when we are talking to constituents, 

when we’re talking to people in the community, that crime is 

something that is on the minds of Saskatchewan people and of 

Canadians. It’s something that does affect many people in the 

province. We know, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s through door 

knocking we may do in our own constituencies or whether it’s 

through visits through our constituency office, whether it’s 

through run-ins that we may have with people at community 

events in our home communities or outside of our home 

communities, we know that the issue of crime is something that 

is brought up by individuals. 

 

And when we hear, Mr. Speaker, from victims of crime, we 

know in hearing those first-hand stories, we know how life 

altering and how significant the experience of being a victim of 

a crime can be for people. And that’s completely 

understandable, Mr. Speaker, when we think of the tragic and 

the life altering types of incidents that can occur with many 

people when they are a victim of a crime. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, of some incidents I’ve had with 

individuals in the community and talking with them about how 

crime affects them at the local level. I think of meeting an 

elderly woman who lives in my constituency in Westview, 

meeting her on the doorstep and talking about her perceptions 

of the neighbourhood safety, and hearing from her about how 

she doesn’t like opening her door at night because she’s 

concerned about who might be on the other side or what might 

be going on, concerned about her own safety and concerned 

about the safety of others in her neighbourhood. 

 

So instead of answering the door if there’s a knock or a doorbell 

that is rung late at night, she prefers to stay in her bedroom or 

her living room and simply let the situation pass. And I think, 

Mr. Speaker, that is a sad statement. I know it’s not an isolated 

incident for many people in the province when experiencing 

incidents where they’ve been a victim of crime. It certainly has 

a significant effect on individuals. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, even if the vast majority of people in society 

don’t experience the effects of a crime, Mr. Speaker, the fact 

that it does occur in certain instances, that feeds a larger 

perspective in our community that crime is a problem. And 

certainly crime is a problem for many parts of the province, in 

many cities, in many neighbourhoods, in many towns, and in 

rural areas. We know that crime is an issue. And how the 

government chooses to respond to crime is an important issue 

that certainly needs to be well-thought-out. And, Mr. Speaker, 

as I said, while not everyone may experience crime, if 

individuals are aware of or know of victims who have been 

wronged through a crime, that feeds a larger atmosphere or a 

larger attitude of mistrust with fellow citizens, and it feeds into 

the fears that people have. 

 

I can think, Mr. Speaker, a few months ago I was out in my own 

neighbourhood taking my dog for a bike ride late at night, Mr. 

Speaker. It was dark. It wasn’t super late at night. And there 

was a woman who had just had her front window smashed in 

her veranda in our neighbourhood. And while I believe our 

neighbourhood is safe and a very good neighbourhood, having 

that incident happen — she had just moved into the 

neighbourhood and was renting a house in the area — it altered 

her perception of the neighbourhood and of everyone in the 

community. And that was a problem because I think we have a 

strong community with many positive things occurring, with 

many good people living in it, and neighbours who truly do 

look out for one another. But when an individual experiences 

something like that, even if in this situation no one was injured, 

there was no long-term harm done to the property or to the 

person, but it still instilled an atmosphere of fear within the 

community. And I think that is, Mr. Speaker, a sad thing when 

it happens. 

 

Now the example I gave, Mr. Speaker, of a window being 

broken on a veranda by some young kids out in the 

neighbourhood, certainly that’s not insignificant. It’s a crime 

against property, and it instills fear within the broader 

community. When we look at Bill No. 172 and look at it’s An 

Act to amend The Victims of Crime Act, Mr. Speaker, we can 

think of many other crimes that would occur in the community 

that would have long-lasting effects on the people who are the 

victims. 

 

And in this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, it’s making some 

amendments to address how the information flow occurs 

between a law enforcement agency and the partners who may 

be providing services to the victims who are a victim of the 

crime. And we know, Mr. Speaker, that sometimes the crimes 

that occur in the province are very serious and are very 

significant and certainly change individuals and families and 

communities for a very, very long period of time, Mr. Speaker. 

If it’s a crime of a violent nature or a sexual nature, Mr. 

Speaker, we know that these types of crimes change a person’s 

view on life for many, many years. We know that they’re very 

significant and that they in some instances can really tear apart 

families and can cause a huge amount of personal turmoil for an 

individual. 

 

So when we know that there are these types of incidents that 

occur, Mr. Speaker, in the broader community and in society, 

it’s very important that we have a response as a collective, as 

the broader community we have a response that helps these 

victims of crime recover to the best possible ability that they 

can. It’s important that we have a response that allows these 

individuals to deal with the consequences of the crime in the 

best possible manner. I think it’s important that we have a 

response that allows us to help these individuals pursue justice 

in the best possible manner, that they can feel that justice has 

been served, that someone is held accountable for the crime that 

has been committed, and that the individual who has been 

wronged is able to bring some degree of closure and deal with 

the violation that has occurred and move forward in a positive 

way. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that type of change and that type of progress 

isn’t something that happens overnight. It’s something that 

takes a very long process. And it takes the help of professionals 

and it takes the help of volunteers, Mr. Speaker, in order to deal 

with the crime that someone may be, the results of crime that 

someone may be experiencing. 



7438 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2011 

So when we look at Bill No. 172, and we look at possible 

changes that could affect how services to victims of crime are 

delivered, it’s important to ensure that we have a thorough 

examination of the proposed changes. And it’s important that 

we ensure that the changes, Mr. Speaker, are in fact for the 

better, that they are constructive, and that they will help the 

individual move forward and have a better chance at recovering 

from the crime. And it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that the 

actions also support the collective recovery as a community, 

that individuals within the broader community know that 

positive steps are being taken in order to reduce the amount of 

crime and to deal with the effects of crime that may be 

experienced. 

 

In looking at the minister’s second reading speech, Mr. 

Speaker, the minister states that the Ministry of Justice provides 

funding for 18 police-based victim services programs. He goes 

on to state that the staff and workers in these programs work 

closely with the police and assist victims in the immediate 

aftermath of a crime or a tragedy and throughout the criminal 

justice process. So we can see, Mr. Speaker, that the services 

that are provided through the police-based victim services 

program, they are there, as I stated, to help individuals from the 

early stages to more of the midterm stages with dealing with the 

effects of being a victim of a crime, whether it’s the initial 

aftermath immediately following the incident or whether it’s 

some of the process that occurs in the days and weeks 

following, Mr. Speaker, or whether it’s the preparatory work 

and the assistance that is provided in going through the legal 

system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that can be a very trying and difficult time for 

families because often they’re reliving the incident of the crime, 

and the experience can still be very raw. And even, Mr. 

Speaker, if the healing process has started or some degree of 

closure has occurred, we know that going through the legal 

process, at times that can reopen the wounds of the experience 

and it can become very real once again for the victims. So it is, 

Mr. Speaker, in my opinion, appropriate that the police-based 

services that are provided throughout the province and that are 

funded through the Ministry of Justice, it’s important that those 

services are available through different steps of the process, 

different steps of the healing process and the judicial process 

that occurs following a crime, Mr. Speaker. And I think that’s a 

very positive thing. 

 

And once again, when we’re looking at how legislation may be 

changed which could affect this process, it’s important that we 

do so in a thorough manner because all members in the 

Assembly — I am sure, Mr. Speaker, there is no disagreement 

on this fact — want the best for Saskatchewan citizens, 

especially coming out of an experience where crime may have 

occurred and a victim may have been wronged in a very serious 

manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s other services that are provided through 

these police-based services. They include crisis intervention, 

information, support, and referrals to other specialized 

programs and services. And the services are provided by staff 

and a team of volunteer victim support workers. So once again, 

Mr. Speaker, we see the types of services that are provided 

through the police-based programs. 

 

But it’s not isolated simply to those programs. Through the 

volunteers and the professionals who may be working within 

those programs, they have the knowledge of other services and 

agencies in the community who can assist victims of crime in 

dealing with the results of being a victim. And we know, Mr. 

Speaker, that while there are 18 police-based programs, we 

know that in many circumstances in many communities the 

need may be greater. So it’s most certainly appropriate to rely 

on other agencies and other professionals who can provide 

assistance to the individuals who are victims, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister goes on to state that these 

amendments seek to address a disclosure issue that has arisen 

with the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] across 

Canada. And the minister goes on to state, despite the RCMP’s 

support of timely delivery of local victim services, they need 

greater local clarification that this information can legally be 

disclosed for this specific purpose. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the minister mentions that there is a disclosure 

issue that has arisen within the Canadian context that has 

provided a degree of uncertainty for law enforcement officials 

with respect to the provision of information to some of the 

individuals that are active within the police-based victim 

services programs. And this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, is 

seeking to provide a legislative framework or basis for the 

actions that I would assume, Mr. Speaker, are currently under 

way or have been under way for a period of time. 

 

I am curious, Mr. Speaker, the minister did not elaborate too 

much on this in his second reading speech, but I am curious 

about the disclosure issue. What is the root cause or what is the 

basis for this disclosure issue? I’m curious, Mr. Speaker, if 

individuals in Canadian jurisdictions have made a complaint 

that information has been shared in a way that they were not 

supportive of or were not aware of. That’s perhaps one 

possibility that I would be curious to have more information 

from the minister on, as I think that would be appropriate to see 

if this is complaint-based or complaint-driven. Perhaps, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s more substantial than that. I don’t know if there’s a 

lawsuit perhaps that has been initiated because of this sharing of 

information and if that’s occurred in a different jurisdiction or 

not.  

 

That’s another question I have, Mr. Speaker, and also, Mr. 

Speaker, if the complaint originates out of concerns about 

privacy. We certainly know that when dealing with personal 

information, it’s so very important to have the strictest 

guidelines around the control of that information because 

people are very protective, and rightfully so, of their personal 

details and their personal stories. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen in recent weeks, it’s a related 

issue certainly, Mr. Speaker, where we see the accidental or the 

negligent care of medical information that has been available in 

the broader public. And we know that when it comes to privacy 

and when it comes to individuals’ personal details, individuals 

are protective. They are concerned, and they want the highest 

standards in place in order to ensure that their information is 

protected, that their information is safeguarded, and that their 

information will not accidently fall into hands of individuals 



May 2, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7439 

who should not have access to that information. So, Mr. 

Speaker, we know, it’s commonly accepted and commonly 

known and believed, I think, by the public that when it comes to 

medical records, we want high standards and we want 

protection of personal information. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and people have that feeling because the nature of 

medical issues are very personal, are very at times sensitive. 

Individuals might not want that information broadcast. They 

might not want that information available to the broader 

community. And there can be a number of factors which would 

motivate an individual to take that position. Maybe it is fear of 

consequences from family members or other individuals in the 

community, or maybe it’s just a privacy issue. Some people are 

very private when it comes to their personal matters, and they 

don’t want information broadcast. Other individuals are more 

readily willing to put it up on Facebook or send it out on 

Twitter and have the world know about a personal situation. But 

for many people, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to personal 

information, they want to ensure that there is the highest level 

of control and the highest level of integrity of handling that 

information. 

 

We know, if that holds true for situations of a medical nature, 

we know most certainly, Mr. Speaker, that when it comes to 

details of a crime where a victim is involved, it’s maybe even a 

higher level of control that is needed and desired by 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to comes to 

crimes that individuals have experienced. And when they are 

truly a victim, there are so many emotions that are present 

through that process. Sometimes individuals will blame 

themselves. Sometimes members of the community will blame 

the victim and not cast the blame on the offender where it is 

most certainly deserved. So when we think of those situations, 

Mr. Speaker, if individuals want the information held with the 

highest level of privacy and if they want that information secure 

and protected, we can understand how, when we’re talking 

about the sharing of information as it relates to specific crimes, 

we can understand how they would be very concerned and 

would want the highest levels of protection of personal 

information. 

 

So when the minister in his second reading speech suggests that 

this piece of legislation, this amendment is seeking to address a 

disclosure issue that has arisen with the RCMP across Canada, 

it would be interesting, Mr. Speaker, to have a bit more context 

on that — if it was a specific case, if it is widespread. In what 

jurisdictions is this occurring? Is there a lawsuit involved, or is 

it simply a complaint based on one’s high desire to have the 

best levels of privacy possible? So I think that’s very important, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

As the minister suggests in his second reading speech, this piece 

of legislation applies to individuals who must be engaged in the 

delivery of police-based victim services. So this is addressing 

individuals who are working and active within the context of 

police-based victim services. So this piece of legislation as I 

understand it, Mr. Speaker, it’s not being applied to or being . . . 

it’s not suggested that it will be applied to the other community 

providers, whatever type of community-based organization that 

may be or what other types of professionals may be present and 

working in this field, Mr. Speaker. In my earlier remarks I 

talked about the very important role that other 

community-based organizations can play and serve with the 

delivery of services to victims of crime. That’s very important. 

But as I understand it, Mr. Speaker, through this piece of 

legislation, the minister says, “To be designated under this 

section, the person must be engaged in the delivery of 

police-based victims services.” So that is an important point to 

state for individuals listening at home who might have some 

potential concerns about this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What’s also important, Mr. Speaker, which I noted in the 

minister’s remarks is a following paragraph where the minister 

states: 

 

. . . the Act specifically limits the purposes for which the 

information may be used to firstly contacting the victim 

and secondly providing or facilitating victims services. If 

an individual declines these services, no further contact 

will be made. The designated victims services provider 

will be required to destroy the information that was 

required under this Act. 

 

So what we have, Mr. Speaker, is some clearer statements being 

made about how this information can be used, with two 

examples being provided in the proposed amendments through 

the minister’s second reading speech. And also the component, 

Mr. Speaker, where it says, “The designated victims services 

provider will be required to destroy the information that was 

required under this Act.” So what we have, Mr. Speaker, is the 

statement that information will also be destroyed and not be 

made available and that information will be handled properly or 

it ought to be handled properly, so that that’s the idea. I think 

that’s very important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that when victims are dealing with providers of care 

after they’ve been a victim of a crime — again these are very 

delicate and very concerning matters for the individual — and 

when they are dealing with those providers, when it’s in a 

professional relationship between the victim and whoever the 

professional provider may be, there’s certainly a high degree of 

trust there, Mr. Speaker, through that relationship where the 

victim is in a very vulnerable position. And the person 

providing the services is in a different position. They know 

detailed personal information. The victim may be opening up 

and sharing details and facts with the provider, so it’s important 

to have tight guidelines for how that information can and cannot 

be used. 

 

And I certainly see it as perhaps it could be a challenge, Mr. 

Speaker, in some victims’ minds if they’re dealing with a 

provider who’s providing services, since they are a victim, and 

then they’re also dealing with law enforcement agencies, as 

they ought to and should, how the different roles, Mr. Speaker 

. . . It’s important to clearly delineate the different roles and 

how the flow of information can and cannot occur in order that 

the victim can have the best possible relationship with the 

provider of the important services for the person. 

 

We know that, as I said, when dealing with crime, when 

someone is a victim of crime, it’s a feeling I would imagine, 

Mr. Speaker, that you sort of have to live through it in order to 

fully understand what the feelings are. I know I’ve 

communicated with a few people in my constituency who have 

been victims of very serious crimes and heard first-hand about 



7440 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2011 

how it’s affected their family. And I’ve seen first-hand the tears 

that are shed and the pain that is experienced and the different 

ways that that can manifest itself in a family relationship, going 

through a variety of emotions from rage to deep sorrow. 

 

So we know that when one is a victim of a crime, it can have a 

life-altering effect on the person. And it’s so very important that 

the services we’re providing through the state, through funding 

through the Ministry of Justice, and through the police-based 

victim services providers, Mr. Speaker, it’s so very important 

that we get it right and have the services that are available for 

the individuals so that they truly can, to the best of their ability, 

address the issues that come out of the experience, try to deal 

with them, handle them in the best possible manner, and, Mr. 

Speaker, seek to stop any sort of continuing cycle or 

magnification of the problem so that when there has been an 

issue, it can be addressed and it does not feed itself and it also 

does not feed other crimes and other incidences that have a 

negative affect on Saskatchewan people. And I know that’s 

certainly what all Saskatchewan people would want, and it’s 

what all members of the Assembly would certainly want, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We do see . . . So while, Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation, 

some might address it as housekeeping because it’s more or less 

providing some clarification, as with any piece of legislation 

while something may appear to be of a housekeeping nature, 

when we look at the issues that are involved and the 

implications or consequences of a particular piece of legislation, 

it’s important to remember that legislation affects people in 

their everyday lives. So when we’re as elected members 

discussing proposed amendments, it’s important to ensure that 

we do our job in examining all the intended consequences and 

perhaps some of the unintended consequences or implications 

that may come out of the proposed piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this piece of legislation, it addresses something 

very serious. It addresses how victims of crime are able to 

receive services from police-based victim services providers. I 

think, Mr. Speaker, that all members would recognize that when 

a crime occurs in a community, it’s horrible for the person who 

is a victim. But, Mr. Speaker, it also has broader implications. It 

has a broader rippling affect through the community. And 

whether that’s something minor, whether that’s an unwanted 

piece of graffiti on a garage in an alley, or whether that’s 

something very serious where an individual loses their life 

because of a violent crime or has to live with a disability, an 

acquired brain injury, for their entire life, Mr. Speaker, because 

of an incident, we know that the effects of crime are very real 

and are very important and that the fear that can be instilled in a 

community is a bad thing for our society. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, that as elected members and as a 

broader provincial government, it’s important that we take an 

approach that assists these individuals to the best possible level 

in addressing the pain that they have experienced and being able 

to move forward and move beyond the incident. We would ask, 

Mr. Speaker, that through the services provided that the incident 

of the crime would not define the individual, would not define 

the victim, Mr. Speaker, but that it would be one step or mark 

on a longer and a more positive life journey that individuals are 

on. 

 

[16:00] 

 

So we know, Mr. Speaker, that this piece of legislation is 

seeking to provide some clarification to the law based on some 

experiences that the Royal Canadian Mounted Police have had 

in different jurisdictions within the country, as it has been 

stated. In order for the police-based victim services providers 

who, as I understand, Mr. Speaker, would operate within a 

police station or a detachment in most instances in most 

communities, it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that the proper 

legislative framework and guidelines are in place in order to 

ensure the proper and the appropriate release of information but 

also the proper control of information as it is provided from law 

enforcement officials to care providers. And knowing that crime 

and that victims of crime have very real concerns, Mr. Speaker, 

there of course has to be the proper checks in place about the 

information flowing the other way, back to law enforcement 

officials, in order to maintain the appropriate level of trust 

between victims and care providers. I think all members would 

agree that that is an important consideration when looking at 

any piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this piece of legislation seeks to provide some greater clarity 

for the variety of service providers that are police-based within 

the province, Mr. Speaker. As the minister stated, there are 18 

police-based victims services programs that are funded by the 

Ministry of Justice in one way, shape, or form, where there may 

be employees or volunteers working and operating, helping 

victims of crime deal with the consequences that they have been 

subjected to by no choice of their own in most instances, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I have raised a few questions that I 

have had around the area of, what was the disclosure issue? 

What was the nature of that issue, and where was the location of 

it? And what was the extent of the concern? And it’d be 

interesting, Mr. Speaker, to see if other jurisdictions are having 

to pursue this type of legislation in order to address the 

problem. That is a question I have, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I am also, Mr. Speaker, pleased to see that there are guidelines 

in place that will require information to be destroyed. Because 

we know from the experience of medical records, we know that 

people closely guard their medical information and take great 

care in all types of personal information. So if we know the care 

that individuals have around their medical records, most 

certainly when it comes to the details associated with an 

incident of crime that they may have experienced, we know that 

they also hold that in a very high level of privacy and desire a 

great level of control over that information. I think that’s a very 

important thing to remember, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So those are many of my comments, Mr. Speaker, with respect 

to Bill No. 172, An Act to amend The Victims of Crime Act, 

1995. I know that there are other members on this side of the 

House who would like a chance to share some of their views 

and concerns and questions before this goes to committee. So at 

this time I will not be sending it to committee, but I will move 

that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 172. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 172, The Victims of 

Crime Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 



May 2, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7441 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 161 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 161 — The 

Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today of all 

days to be talking about an election Act. Isn’t it an amazing 

democracy that we live in? 

 

Of course everyone knows that we’ve seen some history 

happening. Yesterday Osama bin Laden was killed in a 

sanctioned death by the Government of the United States of 

America, and I think it’s safe to say that in most of North 

America, Americans and Canadians alike say that the world is a 

somewhat safer place today than it was yesterday. So we had 

that happen yesterday. Today we have a historic general 

election right across Canada. 

 

And this ties right in to Bill 161, An Act to amend The Election 

Act, 1996 because, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan election Act 

changes are mirrors. They reflect what the federal Conservative 

government put in place with its election Act. And the problem, 

if I can put it this way, Mr. Speaker, is this election Act is a 

solution to a problem that frankly doesn’t exist. It’s a way for 

government to do something. And let me say that if you went 

and talked to your neighbours and friends . . . And I know that 

you do. I know that, by its very nature, all of us in this 

Assembly talk to our neighbours, our friends, our families. And 

strangers, quite frankly, when they find out we’re elected, 

always or often have an opinion. And this is a good thing about 

our democracy. 

 

But in all of the people that I’ve ever talked to about elections, 

not once have people said, you know, you’ve got to fix it by 

making it more difficult for people to vote. Not once has 

anybody said that. I have had lots and lots of discussions with 

people about the voter turnout going down, and what do we do 

to encourage people to vote in elections? What do we do to get 

the participation up? Again I say, Mr. Speaker, not one time has 

anybody ever said, you know, to fix this imaginary problem, 

you got to make it more difficult for people to vote. You got to 

require two pieces of ID [identification]. You’ve got to take 

away from people that might have simply just moved and 

haven’t established their residence, no ability to prove their 

residence, you take away the right to vote from them. 

 

Nowhere has anybody suggested that that is in the interests of 

democracy. Nowhere but right here on the floor of the 

Saskatchewan legislature have I seen that. Nowhere have I seen 

that . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And the Premier says, what 

about NDP nominations? Well you know what? And the 

Premier will know this. New Democratic Party has nomination 

rules, and we’re pretty proud of the way we conduct our 

nominations. In a democracy, occasionally you may have some 

dispute, and we have always tried to handle the disputes to the 

best of our ability. Nowhere have we tried to make it impossible 

for people that are homeless to vote. It just is not on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill 161 actually attacks, I know I’m talking 

about people who have just moved, but it attacks a very 

significant portion of our population and that is people that not 

only have just recently moved but are moving and moving and 

moving. I’m talking about the more than 2,200 people in 

Regina alone that are couch surfing. Not all of them. In fact a 

fair number of them are too young to vote. But when they get to 

be voting age and otherwise qualified to vote, it doesn’t seem to 

me that the way to bring people into the mainstream of our 

society is to say, we don’t want your opinion. We don’t want 

you to participate. We don’t want you to be able to do the most 

fundamental thing in a democracy, and that is have a say in who 

is going to form your government and what your government is 

going to stand for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a democracy is far better served when we have 

politicians willing to stand up, as Jack Layton has federally, and 

said, this is what I believe in. Not saying that every one of us 

should, as Canadians, should follow blindly and believe in the 

things that Jack Layton or Mr. Ignatieff or Stephen Harper the 

Prime Minister believe in. But in our democracy . . . or 

Elizabeth May for that matter, the leader of the Green Party or 

any other leaders. 

 

But in our democracy we should have the opportunity to hear 

what they have to say and then to pass judgment on days like 

today where we have a federal election that is following, by and 

large, the rules that are being proposed right here. The shame of 

today nationally is going to be . . . If we pass this Bill here 

without amendment, the shame of our national government is 

that it’s going to disproportionately leave out homeless people 

or people that have either very recently moved and can’t 

establish a residence that they’re eligible to vote under the rules 

of this election Act. Or people who are even a step further or 

one or two steps further down the socio-economic ladder in our 

great nation, and can’t afford a home so they’re living with this 

relative this week, this friend next week, and somewhere else 

the week after that. And because they can’t afford to rent a 

place to live, to call home, they obviously can’t establish a 

permanent residence, and if you can’t establish a permanent 

residence under The Election Act, you can’t vote. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, just as sure as any of us in this Assembly are 

citizens of Canada, just as surely as any of us deserve the 

opportunities to try and help ourselves and improve our lot in 

life, these very people I’m describing need more of a hand up 

rather than to be pushed away and told that they’re totally 

without value. That’s a shame in 2011 in Canada. It’s a shame 

that we’re doing this. 

 

This election Act also of course is going to be disenfranchising 

some senior citizens, Mr. Speaker. I don’t want to overstate the 

importance or not of senior citizens, of one group versus 

another, but let me simply say that as we get longer in the tooth, 

as we age, we tend to have more reasons — I’ll put it that way 

— not to be in control, in care and control of an automobile. 

And once we’ve determined in our own right or someone has 

determined for us that we’re unfit to be in care and control of an 



7442 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2011 

automobile, there’s no reason to have a driver’s licence other 

than for the blessed photo ID that we need and will need in Bill 

161, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again this election Act amendment is a solution for the problem 

that never was. It’s a solution for a problem that doesn’t exist. 

And why would a government be so determined to fix 

something that isn’t broken? Why wouldn’t the government, 

instead of doing all kinds of training and public education on 

how it is that we can vote, why wouldn’t a government take the 

million or so dollars that it takes for that, why wouldn’t it put 

that into a ad like some young people have done nationwide that 

said things like I’ve heard in this election, you know, you don’t 

have . . . your opinion doesn’t count unless you vote; you don’t 

have a say unless you exercise it — things like that that are 

more encouraging of people to get out and vote. It seems to me 

that our democracy would be much, much, much better served. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, absolutely in a non-partisan way, I want to 

tell you that in every election that I have fought where my name 

has been on a ballot, I’ve run into people that say, well I don’t 

vote. And I’m always profoundly disappointed in that. And I 

won’t say invariably because I would be recounting every 

single conversation. But when I get the chance, I say to 

someone that says they’re not going to vote, I say look, I wish 

you would vote. Even if you’re voting for someone else, for one 

of the other parties or the other candidates, I wish you would 

vote. Because if you vote, you have a right to have some say in 

how our government operates. You have some right to 

complain to whoever becomes your MLA, in this case me. If 

you don’t vote, I don’t really want to hear from you if you just 

simply chose not to vote. I do say that. Of course, I can’t make 

that stick. If somebody doesn’t vote and then comes to me, of 

course I’ll try and help them. Through my constituency office, 

I’ll try and help sort out whatever their problem is. 

 

[16:15] 

 

But my theory has always been, Mr. Speaker, that if I can get 

someone to vote for the first time, they’re much more likely to 

vote a second time and a third time. And they don’t have to — 

again I say in a totally non-partisan way — they don’t have to 

vote for me; they just have to vote. And then in our democratic 

process, we have a chance to communicate with them. And 

once they’re tuned in to the fact that politics does make a 

difference in our daily lives, then you have an opportunity to 

encourage people to vote in subsequent elections. 

 

It is on that front very important that — just to finish with my 

seniors, I got sidetracked — it is very important just as we 

encourage young people to vote for the first time and get them 

into the loop of voting then, it is arguably even certainly as 

important that we would include seniors and their ability to 

vote. 

 

When I went and voted this morning, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell 

you there was a steady stream. This time of day, not 

surprisingly, it wasn’t people that are working at a grocery store 

or are, you know, running a 7 Eleven or running a service 

station. It was seniors, and you know some of them getting to 

that polling station with some physical difficulties. But I was 

filled with admiration for their determination to participate in 

the electoral process, the great thing in Canada we call a general 

election and the great thing that in Saskatchewan, when the time 

comes this November, we will call a general election in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I just want to tell you, I so admired the seniors that made 

the extra effort when it would have been so much easier just to 

watch it on TV and say, you know, I participated in these darn 

votes for 50 years or 60 years, in some instances even longer; 

it’s time for me to just take a pass. I’ll just watch the news 

tonight and find out who’s forming the next government. But 

these senior citizens remember what the two great wars were 

about, certainly the Second World War. What we’re told it was 

all about was our ability to have a democracy, our ability to 

have a say in our governments. These people take that really, 

really seriously. 

 

Many of them lost brothers, occasionally sisters, uncles, aunts, 

friends, lovers, in the war. Some of them said goodbye to a 

lover and the lover never came back from the war. How tragic. 

What missed opportunities that were. But these seniors are the 

people that have lived it and understand the importance of 

getting out to vote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then we have an election Act, Bill 161, An Act to amend 

The Election Act that says, but you’ve got to have photo ID. 

Never mind that you maybe can’t drive, as was the case with 

one out of three of the people that I saw voting this morning. 

One out of three were brought to the polls by typically a 

neighbour, another elderly person, but someone that was able to 

drive. 

 

I think of my late mother-in-law who never held a driver’s 

licence. You know, if she were alive, why, you know, she’d 

need to get a driver’s licence so she could have a photo ID so 

she could vote in a general election, something that she did all 

her adult life. I don’t think, I don’t believe that my 

mother-in-law ever missed a vote. Or my own mother, you 

could say the same thing, except my own mother had a driver’s 

licence. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the simple thing that the government should 

do is take out the parts of this election Act that make it more 

difficult for people to vote, the things that disenfranchise poor 

people, that disenfranchise homeless people, and that 

disenfranchise seniors. Take those offending parts out of this 

Bill 161, and you know what? We might have the nucleus of a 

decent election Act. And I say, might have. 

 

The caveat that I put on this, of course, is the little piece of 

history that, the simple fact that we have a system in 

Saskatchewan where we have an all-party committee that casts 

about for the next Chief Electoral Officer. And the all-party 

committee in Saskatchewan made a unanimous 

recommendation as to who that should be, and the government 

rejected it. The government rejected it, a unanimous 

recommendation, when the government had their person on the 

committee as well. Three out of four they had, and they took a 

recommendation for the Chief Electoral Officer forward, and it 

got rejected by the government, either cabinet or caucus. I’m 

not privy to who it was but the fact is, rejected. 

 

Now that leads to all kinds of questions, Mr. Speaker, as to the 

commitment of the Sask Party government to running a fair 



May 2, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7443 

election, to having an independent officer of the Legislative 

Assembly, which is what the Chief Electoral Officer is 

supposed to be, is an independent appointed by all parties. We 

had signed off on that Chief Electoral office nominee. We’d 

signed off with . . . If we’d had reservations, I can guarantee 

they were made at the committee level and once we said yes it 

was yes, and we wouldn’t be slip-sliding away, as the song 

goes, Mr. Speaker. We are good to our word and frankly we 

still think that the selection was a good one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve got an election Act that is being put 

forward by a Sask Party government, a government that quite 

frankly we had a . . . Recently we had a by-election in 

Saskatoon. We had a by-election there in which one of the Sask 

Party ads that was used had a clip out of this very legislature, 

used a clip in its partisan advertising from this very legislature, 

a clip that it should be known to everyone — it certainly should 

be known to the government — that’s not, not allowable 

without getting agreement from the people in the Chamber to 

use that clip. And that agreement was never granted, Mr. 

Speaker. And yet, and yet the government used it for their 

electoral purposes in the recent Saskatoon by-election. 

 

I’m saying this simply to set the gold standard, if you like, that 

we have a government that can’t be trusted with elections, and 

the reason is . . . I mean just take their actions, Mr. Speaker. 

Take what they did in the recent Saskatoon by-election. Take 

what they’re doing in this election amendment Act, Bill 161, 

where . . . And it’s not, just for the Minister of Advanced 

Education’s edification, it has nothing to do with whether I 

liked or didn’t like the election results out of Saskatoon. It has 

everything to do with following the law which the Government 

of Saskatchewan passes and is obligated to follow. It has 

everything to do with following the law, sir, and has nothing to 

do with the result. 

 

And I know that members opposite, I’ve hit a nerve here, Mr. 

Speaker. And you know what? If it feels like I hit a nerve, 

there’s a simple way to miss it. There’s a simple way. Just 

follow the bloody law. That’s all we ask. Just follow the law as 

it’s written, as you’re charged with upholding, Mr. Speaker. 

Follow the law and we’re a bunch of happy campers. 

 

We are the ones that say, let democracy rule. Let the electorate 

decide. Absolutely, at every turn, let the voters decide. But if 

you have a law, for heaven’s sakes, follow it. It just . . . 

Common sense dictates that you have to do that, or else why 

have a law? If it is just might is right, well then let’s have at it. 

Let’s take the gloves off and really go at it and see if anyone is 

left standing at the end of the day. 

 

It’s not a democracy that I would cherish or value and indeed I 

think it’s one that Canadians are rejecting today. I think 

Canadians are saying no. They want upbeat politicians. They 

want people that will put forward positive suggestions. And 

they’re letting the values dictate what’s going to, who we’re 

going to elect rather than anything else. 

 

So you know, we’re seeing a decline in votes, a decline in 

voters, and yet we see a government that’s trying to discourage 

people. I’ve talked about that. We see seniors being 

discouraged. We see young people and poor people being 

discouraged from voting. And you have to ask yourself, why is 

it that the government is so determined in Bill 161 to do that? 

We have a government that I’ve outlined bending the rules or 

disobeying the law — take your pick — but bending the rules 

when it comes to the selection of the Chief Electoral Officer, 

and even worse when it comes to the by-election recently in 

Saskatoon. 

 

I can’t be a whole lot clearer in my objections, Mr. Speaker. 

The problem with Bill 161, An Act to amend The Election Act, 

is the fact that it disenfranchises too many people. It’s a 

government solution to a problem that the electorate certainly 

doesn’t recognize. The problem that the government is trying to 

fix with this Bill 161 is, the problem is it’s trying to fix 

elections. It’s trying to disenfranchise people that historically 

have been more apt to vote New Democrat. And the 

government’s saying well okay, we’ve got a problem there. 

How do we resolve it? Well let us simply move out homeless 

people and say their opinion isn’t welcome; they can’t vote. 

 

Let’s disenfranchise renters. And rent . . . For heaven’s sakes, 

the Leader of the Opposition has proposed that we have rent 

control. The Premier has said no to rent control. Well guess 

what? Most renters are going to be taking the view that when 

rents are going up by a third in a year, that they’re going to take 

the view that the Leader of the Opposition has the more 

reasoned and reasonable approach to a problem with rising rents 

and all of the issues around there. Because the status quo isn’t 

working well for people that are having to move to lower and 

lower standard housing or apartments because they can’t afford 

the increased rents. So when you move and you haven’t got 

your photo ID updated or you haven’t got your electrical bills 

yet mailed to your new address but you have moved, you’re 

effectively disenfranchised in Bill 161, disenfranchised from 

voting. 

 

So renters, by the very nature of renting versus owning, whether 

it’s a house or a condo or, you know, whatever you own, 

duplex, whatever you happen to own, you tend to stay there a 

bit longer than if you’re renting. Rent is typically month to 

month, and renters, again by nature, move more often. So it’s 

just obvious from that very statistic that renters will get caught 

out when a general election is called, and more effectively 

disenfranchised. And I say shame on any government that has 

any concern at all respecting democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the second time I’ve spoken on this Bill, 

and I actually want to wind up my remarks. I want to wind up 

my remarks simply by making the plea to the government to 

take out the changes to what it takes to being able to vote. Take 

out those changes that make it more difficult for people to vote. 

Let people simply swear in. 

 

[16:30] 

 

In most polling stations across Saskatchewan, I can bet big 

dollars that people know who is coming to vote. They’ll 

recognize them. They’ve seen their neighbours; they’ve seen 

their friends. In many of the small communities in 

Saskatchewan, they know them. They greet them by first name 

on a daily basis. So don’t, don’t do Bill 161, which is the 

government’s solution to a problem that the voters don’t see or 

don’t believe exist. It’s a problem of how people vote. 

 



7444 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2011 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve spoken at some length on this Bill. I really do 

wish the government would reconsider just the parts that deal 

with how you qualify to vote. I’m urging that the government 

do that. But at the end of the day, all I can do is be a modest 

voice, and that’s the voice that I have tried to be. So with that, 

Mr. Speaker, I conclude my remarks and thank you for your 

attentiveness. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased this afternoon to enter into debate on Bill 161, The 

Election Amendment Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the most fundamental responsibilities we 

have as citizens is to vote and to choose a government, Mr. 

Speaker. And we have a long history in our province and in our 

country, Mr. Speaker, of electing governments and electing 

representatives of the people in an open and very forthright 

way, Mr. Speaker. We have a history also in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, that when Acts, or changes to The Election Act are 

made, Mr. Speaker, that it’s been done through consultation, it’s 

been done through working with the political parties, to ensure 

that any changes to The Election Act are fair. Fairness is one of 

the things that is absolutely fundamental in our system of 

government, Mr. Speaker, in our ability to elect a government 

that is seen by the people to be truly representative of the 

people. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have today before us amendments to The 

Election Act that we’re a little bit confused where the stimulus 

for the changes came from, Mr. Speaker. Because in the past 

when The Election Act was amended, Mr. Speaker, the political 

parties would have got together, they would have talked about 

the problem that the people of Saskatchewan had with the 

current electoral system, they would have sat down, and they 

would have talked about how you fix it. But, Mr. Speaker, that 

meeting didn’t occur. We didn’t have a meeting talking about 

what the problem was and what we needed to do to fix it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in the past I’ve participated in changes to 

The Election Act under previous governments, Mr. Speaker. 

There was consultation. There was the ability for all the 

political parties, those who are represented within the 

Legislative Assembly and the other political parties, to have 

input to those changes, Mr. Speaker, to bring forward concerns, 

rationale, needs that they felt were important in a change to The 

Election Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a fair and democratic society, something as 

fundamental as your electoral laws should have the support, 

should have the support, Mr. Speaker, of all the political parties. 

Changes to The Election Act should not be brought forward by a 

single political party without consultation of the population, Mr. 

Speaker. It should be done in consultation with the 

representatives of the other political parties, Mr. Speaker, and to 

solve an identifiable problem that the population sees as a 

problem, not a single political party in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t have 

that opportunity here for the first time that I can recall. 

 

And I had the opportunity to ask the Chief Electoral Officer 

about past processes, and in the past, yes, there was 

consultation. Yes, all political parties were involved in bringing 

forward the changes. And yes, there was meaningful dialogue 

before a Bill was entered into the House, and in fact the changes 

to the Bill had agreement of all the political parties. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, we don’t have that today. We have a change being 

proposed in our electoral Act, in our elections Act, that’s 

brought forward by a single political party without consultation 

of the others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that does raise serious concerns, and I think the 

people of Saskatchewan have a legitimate right to have those 

concerns, Mr. Speaker. Because when a change to the rights of 

your ability to elect your government are changed without the 

ability of the dialogue and consultation and co-operation of all 

the political parties, it looks like you’re doing it for your own 

self, for your own advantage, your own self interest. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, our election Act should represent fairness for 

all the people of the province of Saskatchewan, and it should be 

seen and viewed by all political parties and the people of 

Saskatchewan as being a legitimate and appropriate change that 

they in fact agree with. That is what a fair and democratic 

society would want. That’s what the people in a fair and 

democratic society would want. They would like to have an 

electoral Act that all the political parties agree with. 

 

To have changes made to the elections Act without consultation 

of the other political parties, Mr. Speaker, without the ability of 

those political parties to have input, means that there is not the 

support of the majority, Mr. Speaker. There isn’t the support of 

the majority of the political parties in the province of 

Saskatchewan because we have five or six political parties and 

only one agrees. Mr. Speaker, it may have the support of the 

majority of the members of the legislature, but that is then 

suggesting that other political parties don’t have a right to 

fairness. They don’t have a right to representation. They don’t 

have a right to a point of view and, Mr. Speaker, they don’t 

have a right to a say. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve long had a democratic process in our 

country that ensure that the political parties in our province had 

a right to a say. We’ve had a practice and process that ensured 

that political parties had a right and a say. Mr. Speaker, today 

we have before us a Bill that’s being put forward by one 

political party without the consultation of any of the other 

political parties and, Mr. Speaker, a Bill that could 

fundamentally affect the outcomes of a provincial election. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you put those two things together — a Bill 

being put forward by a single political party and a Bill that 

could affect the outcome of the electoral vote in our province, 

Mr. Speaker — and that does fundamentally question the 

fairness of such a piece of legislation to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan and to their representatives and the 

people who put their name forward on behalf of other political 

parties in our province. Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s a serious 

issue. When a government without consultation wants to change 

the electoral process of our province without consulting the 

other political parties, for that matter without consulting the 

other political party represented in the legislature, Mr. Speaker, 

and, Mr. Speaker, to disenfranchise people’s rights to vote, 

that’s a serious issue. And it is a Bill that really should be 



May 2, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7445 

withdrawn by the government. It’s a Bill that the government 

should be ashamed of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they should go back to the drawing board. They 

should consult with all the political parties in the province of 

Saskatchewan. They should consult with the official opposition, 

Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, before they make the changes, 

if they want to do it unilaterally, Mr. Speaker, before they make 

a change they should go back to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan if they’re going to do it unilaterally and have the 

electorate determine if they want their government to 

unilaterally change the electoral laws because, Mr. Speaker, 

they didn’t run on a platform that said they would change the 

rights of citizens to vote. They didn’t run on a platform that said 

they would disenfranchise the right of any citizen to vote, Mr. 

Speaker. Yet they’re doing it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they’re doing it without an identifiable 

problem to fix. Because if there was a legitimate identifiable 

problem, Mr. Speaker, they wouldn’t be afraid to bring it to the 

other political parties in our province, Mr. Speaker. They 

wouldn’t be afraid, Mr. Speaker, to have it as a process by 

which all the political parties had a say and agreed to, Mr. 

Speaker, because we’d all be able to see a problem. Mr. 

Speaker, we can’t see a problem. We don’t see a problem. 

 

And we’ve never had an opportunity to talk about it, Mr. 

Speaker, before the government introduced a Bill in the House 

that they’re going to ram through, which will change the 

outcome, which will change . . . I’m not going to say potentially 

change, Mr. Speaker. It will change the outcome in the next 

provincial election because if it disenfranchises one single 

individual or citizen of our province and takes away their right 

to vote, Mr. Speaker, that wanted to vote and intended to vote, 

Mr. Speaker, it has changed the outcome of an election. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that is inappropriate, Mr. Speaker. That’s not fair, 

Mr. Speaker, and it’s not what the people of Saskatchewan 

would want. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our fathers and grandfathers fought in the First 

and Second World War for the right to have a free and 

democratic society, for a democracy, Mr. Speaker, and to keep 

those fundamental values that we as Canadians have. But, Mr. 

Speaker, we are eroding that fundamental right today. Because, 

Mr. Speaker, when this legislation passes, if a single citizen 

doesn’t get the right to vote that wants to vote and is entitled to 

vote, Mr. Speaker, then we in fact have taken away a 

guaranteed right in our constitution, Mr. Speaker — the right to 

vote. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not right. And it’s being done 

without the appropriate consultations and agreements that the 

people of this province would want their elected government to 

undertake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is wrong with bringing forward an idea to an 

all-party committee on something as fundamental as our 

electoral process and looking for agreement, looking for a 

agreement to move forward? It’s worked in the past. It actually 

has worked in the past, Mr. Speaker. And when I questioned the 

Chief Electoral Officer, Mr. Speaker, during estimates about 

this very process, he acknowledged it has worked in the past, 

Mr. Speaker. So why aren’t we following a long-standing 

process that shows both fairness, it shows openness, it shows 

accountability, Mr. Speaker? Why are we not prepared to 

follow that process today? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m just going to — in the next few minutes if I 

may — talk about a few situations where individuals may be 

disenfranchised, where they may not be able to use their right as 

a Canadian citizen to vote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to start with those who don’t have any 

fixed address, Mr. Speaker, those who, although they are 

citizens of our province, cannot afford to rent an apartment 

because of cost today or rent accommodation, Mr. Speaker, 

those who have no home, don’t own a home, who — for lack of 

a better word — may have to live in a shelter or may have to 

live in a friend’s place for a short period of time, moving from 

friend to friend. Mr. Speaker, those are still citizens of our 

country. They still have the right, under our constitution, to 

vote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re taking away their right to vote. If I could 

just take a minute or two to explain how, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

taking away the right to vote because those very people don’t 

have photo identification with an address on, Mr. Speaker, 

because they don’t have a fixed address. Mr. Speaker, they 

don’t have a power bill or a utility bill to show they live at an 

address because they don’t have any utilities in their names, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So what we’ve done with those people, the least fortunate in our 

society, Mr. Speaker, is we’ve taken away the one thing they do 

have, one of the fundamental rights guaranteed in our 

constitution — the right to vote. Mr. Speaker, why would we 

want to do that? Why would we want to take away the right to 

vote of any Canadian citizen? Well, Mr. Speaker, if we had 

legitimate problems that needed to be fixed, we could have 

talked through them. We could have looked at those problems 

jointly, as we have in the past and looked for solutions that 

don’t disenfranchise citizens from the right to vote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about another group of people, a 

group of people who may, for health reasons, not have a 

driver’s licence photo identification in our province, Mr. 

Speaker, because they can no longer drive. If they have epilepsy 

or they have other medical conditions that they can no longer 

drive, Mr. Speaker, why would they pay for a driver’s licence? 

So they don’t have photo identification, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They may not have a bill in their name. They may not have a 

utility bill in their name because in many households one of the 

spouse or husband or wife have utilities in their names. Or, Mr. 

Speaker, lo and behold, if you had two or three families, six 

adults living in a house, you may have four or five people in 

that house that don’t have a utility bill in their name, Mr. 

Speaker. They can’t prove residence in that home. They don’t 

have picture identification, Mr. Speaker. But yet, as a 

neighbour, I would know they live there. Other people would 

know they live there. But, Mr. Speaker, without the proper 

identification, they can’t vote. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, under the federal system, you can vouch for 

one person. If you live in the same voting poll, you can vouch 

for a single person. But if there’s six people, six adults live in a 



7446 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2011 

home, Mr. Speaker, you can vouch for one. So we’re 

disenfranchising at least two or three people who live in that 

home, taking away the right to vote although you and I could 

easily prove, you or I can easily prove they live in that home. 

But the rules, as we have established, wouldn’t allow those 

individuals to vote. So why do we want to do that? Why would 

we construct rules to take away the right of a citizen to vote? 

 

Well we’d only do that if we wanted to marginalize people and 

take away a fundamental right guaranteed under our 

constitution, Mr. Speaker. My question is why would any 

government want to do that? Why would a government want to 

limit a citizen’s ability to exercise what is their most 

fundamental of all rights, the right to vote? 

 

Well I can tell you why, Mr. Speaker. It is because there are 

citizens within our society that are more likely not to have, not 

to have the identification required to vote, and those are those 

that are homeless, Mr. Speaker; those that are sick or ill, Mr. 

Speaker; those who can’t drive; the elderly, Mr. Speaker; First 

Nations individuals; people from the far north, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So why would we want to limit those people’s ability to vote? 

Mr. Speaker, if a single problem had come forward that was 

verifiable, that was proven, then we might have a situation to at 

least examine the various ways we could fix it. But we don’t 

have that before us. We never had that debate. We never had 

that discussion. We never had that opportunity to work 

collectively towards improving our electoral system if — if, Mr. 

Speaker — there is a need. 

 

Because this government chose to take a path not taken by other 

governments, Mr. Speaker. It chose to take a path of playing big 

brother, deciding what’s best for everybody without consulting 

anybody, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that’s 

what the people of this province want. I don’t think it’s what the 

people of Canada would want. Mr. Speaker, the people want a 

government that’s for the people. They want a government that 

believes including the people in their processes is more 

important than excluding them. Because the government is 

there for all the people, Mr. Speaker, not just those with photo 

identification. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I hope the government will reconsider this 

legislation, put it aside till after a provincial election, Mr. 

Speaker, and then start over with some meaningful consultation 

and dialogue between the political parties, Mr. Speaker. You 

know, Mr. Speaker, you know the members opposite are 

chirping about I’ll be starting over after the next provincial 

election. Mr. Speaker, if they’re trying to in some way 

intimidate that they’ll use this legislation to get people not to 

vote, well then they’re just proving why this isn’t good 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. They’re proving their case. And if the 

Minister of Health wants to chirp that, he can. But it’s highly 

inappropriate, Mr. Speaker, and it shows the nature of the intent 

of the government, Mr. Speaker. And it’s unfortunate because 

the people of this province deserve a government that cares 

more about its people and less about its own self-interest. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province should all have 

the right to vote, and any government should work to maximize 

the potential for every citizen to exercise their right to vote. 

whether you agree with any political party or not. The rights of 

our citizens should be the foremost in our desire to change 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. It’s not about those of us who are 

elected, Mr. Speaker; it is about the people. 

 

We as elected representatives are not here in our own 

self-interest. We’re here for the people, and we need to be here 

for the people. And only through working for the people do you 

get a government and do you get actions out of a government 

that reflect the true interest of the people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s reasonable that members of the 

legislature are not always going to agree on things. We all have 

a role and responsibility in our democratic system and that role 

though, in the end of the day, should be focused on one thing: 

that is delivering the best possible outcomes in each and every 

case for the people of the province of Saskatchewan. Now we 

can disagree what those are, but in some things as fundamental 

as the electoral laws and the rules in which allow us to elect a 

government, there should be agreement. 

 

We should never, never move forward on changing the election 

laws in our province without agreement of the political parties, 

Mr. Speaker, that those citizens represent. Because, Mr. 

Speaker, it doesn’t matter if you’ve got a 20-seat majority 

government or a two-seat majority government or you’re a 

minority government, Mr. Speaker, you should always act with 

the same interests of the people of Saskatchewan as your 

barometer to move forward. And, Mr. Speaker, on something 

like electoral laws, it is most appropriate that there be 

agreement; it’s most appropriate that we work together 

collectively in the interest of all the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no one political party is ever government for ever. 

No one political party has all the answers. But on some 

fundamental things . . . And that’s why we have a Chief 

Electoral Officer that’s independent and an office that’s 

independent of any one political party, so that our system is fair, 

so that our system is more difficult to be manipulated by a 

single political party, Mr. Speaker. And it’s constructed that 

way in the interest of a fair and democratic process, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And when we do anything, when we do anything in this 

legislature that in any way slants that fair and democratic 

process, Mr. Speaker, then we should be ashamed of ourselves, 

and we should do everything in our power as citizens of this 

province to prevent it from happening. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see today . . . It’s kind of ironic we’re talking 

about this Bill today, a day when we are seeing a federal 

election take place where we may see historic change in 

direction in our country, Mr. Speaker, where we may see 

significant changes because people want open and accountable 

government; they want transparency; they want government to 

work together with all of the opposition parties, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is more important than any one of 

us in this Assembly or more important than all of us combined 

as well. Mr. Speaker, our democracy, our system of government 

has to be for the people. It has to be fair, it has to be transparent, 

and it has to be accountable to the people. And, Mr. Speaker, 

unilateral changes to our electoral laws do little to promote that 

concept of fairness, openness, and accountability that I think the 



May 2, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7447 

people of Saskatchewan want us all to demonstrate day in and 

day out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish the government would reconsider and 

withdraw this Bill, bring it back after the next election, bring 

back the concepts they’d like to see changed for a meaningful 

dialogue and discussion, Mr. Speaker, done in the way it’s been 

done in the past, Mr. Speaker, respecting the rights of all the 

political parties and all the representatives. Because, Mr. 

Speaker, there are individuals who vote for parties that never 

get a representative in this House, but they still have a right to a 

say within our democratic process, Mr. Speaker. Whether 

you’re a member of the Green Party or the Liberal Party or the 

Conservative Party of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, you have 

rights. And our electoral laws must represent your interests as 

well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to have changes made that disenfranchise 

anybody and takes away the right of anybody to vote, Mr. 

Speaker, is not appropriate. It is shameful, Mr. Speaker. And 

it’s not in the best interest of our democracy, which are people, 

the people of Saskatchewan, my friends and neighbours and 

yours, the friends and neighbours of every member of this 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important to them. It’s important to have clear, 

open, transparent, democratic processes. It’s important to feel 

and know and understand that what changes may be proposed 

are in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, not in the best interest of a single political party, Mr. 

Speaker. Not in the best interest of a single member of the 

legislature, Mr. Speaker, but in the best interest of all the 

political parties in Saskatchewan. But most importantly, Mr. 

Speaker, in the best interest of the people of Saskatchewan 

because we’re not here for our own political parties’ interests. 

We’re not here for our own self-interest, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

here for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe what we have before us 

meets that test of fairness, Mr. Speaker, meets that test of 

impartiality that changes to The Election Act should meet. Mr. 

Speaker, if we believe in the institution in which we are a 

member of, this Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, if we 

believe in this institution, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how you 

can vote for this piece of legislation. If you truly believe in why 

we’re here and the institution in which we are part of and the 

fact that we represent all the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, I don’t know how you can vote for a piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, that’s been without consultation, that 

is clearly in the best interest of a single political party, Mr. 

Speaker, and, Mr. Speaker, is not, is not fixing any identifiable 

problem. 

 

Now members of the government say there’s been lots of 

consultation. With who? I’ve checked with the other political 

parties. The Conservatives weren’t consulted. The Liberals 

weren’t consulted. The Green Party wasn’t consulted. We 

certainly weren’t consulted. So who did they consult? Their 

own executives? The people who are supportive of them only, 

Mr. Speaker? That’s what it appears, and that’s exactly what the 

members opposite are saying if they say they consulted people 

because, Mr. Speaker, we can’t find anybody they consulted 

about changes to The Election Act. They didn’t consult the 

Chief Electoral Officer before they made the changes. They told 

him what changes they were making. They didn’t ask his 

opinion because I can tell you, from asking questions in this 

Assembly, his opinion doesn’t agree with this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, our democracy is fragile, Mr. Speaker, and 

we have a responsibility to uphold the best interests of all the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, this 

legislation doesn’t do that because there hasn’t been that 

meaningful consultation. There isn’t the perception of fairness. 

It’s perceived that a single political party wants to drive forward 

a self-interest agenda, Mr. Speaker. And how does that best 

serve the people of the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have several hours more of debate on this 

issue, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure over the next few days I will have 

the opportunity to speak at least once or twice more on this 

issue, Mr. Speaker, because this is a fundamental issue to our 

democracy, fundamental to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, and it is very, very important that there is a clear 

dialogue about the problems with this particular legislation that 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan have a right to 

examine. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that and knowing I will have additional 

time at other dates, Mr. Speaker, I would move adjournment of 

debate at this time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has 

moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To facilitate 

committees, I move to adjourn the House. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has moved 

adjournment of the Assembly to facilitate the work of 

committees. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 

until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:59.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7417 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7417 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7417 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7417 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7417 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7418 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7418 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Heroic Rescue Prevents Tragedy 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7418 

 Holocaust Memorial Day 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7418 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7419 

 Movement for May Day 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7419 

 Mosaic’s Donation to the Children’s Hospital Foundation 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7419 

 Remembering Nico Hawryliw 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7420 

 Emergency Preparedness Week 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7420 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Funding for KidsFirst Program 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7420 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7420 

 Collective Bargaining 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7421 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7421 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7422 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7422 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7422 

 Environmental Issues 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7423 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7423 

 Planned Highway Improvements 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7424 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7424 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Integrated Carbon Capture and Storage Demonstration Project 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7425 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7426 

 Reopening of Prince Albert Pulp Mill 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7427 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7428 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7427 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7427 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7427 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 155 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7429 

  Harrison (point of order) ....................................................................................................................................................... 7429 

  Yates (point of order) ............................................................................................................................................................. 7429 

  The Speaker (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................. 7429 

  Draude (referral to committee) .............................................................................................................................................. 7436 



 

 Bill No. 172 — The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les victimes d’actes criminels 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7436 

 Bill No. 161 — The Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7441 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7444 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


