




















































Hansard: March 26, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 21A  MONDAY, MARCH 26, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 713 

 March 26, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m very pleased today to introduce to you and through you to 

all members of the House, 25 grade 5 and grade 6 students from 

Canada’s hot spot, all the way from Yellow Grass, 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, these 25 students are here with 

their teachers, Jane Peters and Johanna Tiefenbach, and their 

bus driver is Brian Pederson and I believe he’s joined them as 

well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll have the opportunity after question period to 

meet with these students and maybe have a few minutes with 

them before they continue on with the rest of the day in the 

capital city, Mr. Speaker. But I’d ask all members to join with 

me in welcoming these 25 students from Yellow Grass. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of the House, I’d like to take a 

moment to introduce my legislative intern for 2012. It’s Jason 

Kiefer, up in the gallery — Jason, can you give a wave — from 

rural Saskatchewan and born and lived in Drake. 

 

He attended Lanigan Central High, where he’s done all sorts of 

things. In fact, he was the valedictorian of his class. So I’m sure 

he’s getting pointers from us on how to give a dynamite speech. 

But he’s travelled the world; he’s done a lot of different things. 

He’s convocated with a Bachelor of Arts degree, double 

majoring in political science and philosophy, and like so many 

of us, a diehard Riders fan. I’d like to ask all members here to 

give him a warm welcome to his legislature. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 

legislature, I’d like to introduce today Kaleb Weinheimer, and 

his mom, Terri, is up in your gallery with him this afternoon. 

Terri is also our executive manager of the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation in Melville, and a large part of their 

family actually comes from my constituency in the Langenburg 

area. So good to see Kaleb here today, and I also want to thank 

Terri for all the good work she does for us. So I ask all 

members to join with me in welcoming them to their legislature 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce Dr. Zisis Papendreou and Dr. George Lolos, both 

esteemed physicists from the University of Regina. Both of 

these individuals, as well as the university, are playing a key 

role in a major international subatomic physics project known 

as GlueX, which seeks to uncover how matter is held together 

in the universe. 

 

GlueX is run by the Jefferson Labs out of Virginia. It has a 

number of US [United States] and Canadian partners, including 

Illinois university, Carnegie Mellon University as well as 

NSERC [Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council 

of Canada] and the Canadian Foundation for Innovation. And 

it’s been classified by the United States Department of Energy 

as a discovery potential experiment, meaning that it has Nobel 

Prize winning potential. 

 

As a result of their work, these two esteemed physicists are not 

simply helping to unveil and discover fundamental truths of our 

universe, but they’re also working on key aspects of applied 

research in areas like medical imaging, Mr. Speaker. I’d ask all 

members to join me in welcoming these two esteemed 

physicists to their legislature. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for protection for late-night 

retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know in the 

early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray Wiebe was 

shot two times and died from his injuries. He was working at a 

gas station in Yorkton, Saskatchewan, alone and unprotected 

from intruders. 

 

But we know that positive stats show that convenience store and 

gas station robberies are down by one-third since 1999, largely 

due to increased safety practices, including two people working 

together on late-night shifts. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 

of Regina. I do so present. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of the trappers of 

Saskatchewan, the industry that founded our country, and the 

current regulations being enforced that are creating huge 

challenges that are a concern for all our traditional trappers. 

And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience has value, the trappers’ 



714 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

experience has value; and in so doing to cause the 

government to review the current legislation and 

regulations with respect to the trapping regulations and 

firearm use in consultation with the traditional resource 

users. 

 

And as in duty bound, [Mr. Speaker] your petitioners will 

ever pray. 

 

And the people that signed this petition, when I talk about the 

historical value of the trapping industry, are from the oldest 

community in Western Canada, and that is the beautiful 

community of Cumberland House. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the management of our finances 

and the accounting of our finances. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with a fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 

financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 

people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 

taxpayers, and businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Saskatoon and Prince Albert. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 

today concerning the issue of a new school in Hampton Village, 

and this is on behalf of my constituents who live in the 

neighbourhood of Hampton Village as well as Dundonald. And 

the prayer, the petition reads: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

children in Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend 

school in their own community instead of travelling to 

neighbouring communities to attend schools that are 

typically already reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today 

to present a petition on behalf of people who are concerned 

about this government’s decision to cut the film employment 

tax credit. I’d like to note that in just a few hours yesterday that 

there were more than 400 signatures on this petition, and it 

complements very nicely an online petition that has seen more 

than 5,000 people sign it since it’s been up on late Friday 

afternoon. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Government of Saskatchewan continue to 

provide a tax incentive for film, video, and television 

employment to leverage investment, employment, and 

growth in the province’s film, video, and television 

sector. 

 

This petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by people in Saskatoon 

and Regina. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Health Budget 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to take this opportunity to highlight the strong and 

sustainable health budget presented this year. This year’s health 

budget totalled $4.67 billion, an increase of over 4.9 per cent 

over the last year. 

 

There are several positives in this year’s health budget: for 

instance, $138.8 million for the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, 

an increase of $16.9 million over the last year. The work the 

Cancer Agency does is vitally important to Saskatchewan and 

we have invested substantially in the agency, increasing their 

funding by 76 per cent since 2007. These investments had paid 

off, Mr. Speaker. There are currently no patients waiting more 

than eight weeks for their first appointment, down from over 

150 waiting more than eight weeks in April of 2010. The 

increase in funding is improving funding to cancer screening, 

cancer drugs, and specialists such as hematologists and 

oncologists. 

 

Rosalee Longmoore, president of the Saskatchewan Union of 

Nurses, concurs with the direction of our government, stating 

the safety of our patients and their families is of paramount 

importance to registered nurses in Saskatchewan. SUN 

[Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] supports the government’s 

attention to this issue. 

 

Like the provincial budget as a whole, the 2012-13 health 

budget focuses on ensuring that the health system is sustainable 

in the future, while ensuring valuable agencies and programs 

like the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency and colorectal screening 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 715 

program gets the funding they require. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Spring Free From Racism 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to bring 

attention to a proud tradition in Regina, Spring Free From 

Racism. Held yesterday, it brought thousands of people together 

in our community. I was pleased to attend, along with other 

members of this Assembly. 

 

This event supports the International Day for the Elimination of 

Racial Discrimination, and does so by celebrating and sharing 

our cultural diversity. It is a day filled with cultural dance, 

festivities, food, and kinship. I look forward to it every year. 

 

Our province is built on a rich and proud history of thousands 

of years of First Nations people. Our modern story of 

immigration and multiculturalism builds on this foundation. 

Each of us have a story of how our family arrived to 

Saskatchewan and where we came from. My family from 

Scotland homesteaded near Melville in 1903. Just like the 

diverse weave of my Scottish tartan or the Métis sash, this is 

what makes us stronger. As our motto states, “from many 

peoples, strength.” 

 

Waves of immigration from all over the world continue to this 

day, enriching our province, evolving who we are, and making 

us stronger. We have more work to do. There’s more that we 

can be and it is through knowledge, sharing, learning, and 

celebration provided through events such as Spring Free that 

will enable this important progress. 

 

I ask all members to join with me in thanking the determined 

organizers and recognizing the importance of Spring Free From 

Racism. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Physicists Participate in International Project 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

Friday I, along with the Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration, the Minister for Government 

Services, and the member from Regina Walsh Acres, had the 

pleasure of celebrating a major milestone with our guest 

physicists today, Dr. Lolos and Papandreou from the University 

of Regina working on the GlueX project. 

 

As you heard, Mr. Speaker, GlueX is an international project 

with collaborators from the University of Regina, Indiana 

University, Carnegie Mellon University, and the Jefferson Lab 

in Virginia, researching how matter is held together at a 

subatomic level. Mr. Speaker, this truly is nuclear physics at the 

highest level. 

 

Here at the University of Regina, the construction of the barrel 

calorimeter has helped our physicists learn more about protons 

and neutrons and significantly contribute to the discussion of 

how matter is held together. Our government recognizes the 

value and importance of research and innovation and its impact 

on our province, Canada, and the world. The leading-edge work 

being done on the GlueX project supports our government’s 

vision for a research- and innovation-driven knowledge 

economy. This milestone for the University of Regina will build 

upon its reputation as a leading institution in research and 

innovation in Canada and abroad. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like all members to join me again in 

commending the research team at the University of Regina for 

their work on the GlueX project that will set new milestones in 

the area of international physics. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Tourism Saskatchewan Awards of Excellence 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan’s 

tourism sector honoured businesses and individuals at the 23rd 

annual Saskatchewan Tourism Awards of Excellence Gala on 

March 22nd right here in Regina. 

 

As Lynda Haverstock, president and CEO [chief executive 

officer] of Tourism Saskatchewan said, all of the nominees, 

finalists, and award recipients are exceptional ambassadors and 

deserve recognition of their accomplishments. The nominees 

represented all corners of the province — rural, urban, northern, 

southern — and all areas of the tourism industry: a playhouse, a 

large agricultural trade show, a rodeo, a fireworks festival, GPS 

[Global Positioning System] and QR [quick response] code 

technology, a resort lodge, an interpretive centre, an 

eco-adventure experience, western-themed farm experience, 

and a local hotel operated by the same family for over 60 years. 

 

Winners included tourism operators from Saskatoon, Regina, 

Consul, Yorkton, North Battleford, Herschel, Cypress Hills, 

Limerick, St. Denis, and Elbow. The passion and pride these 

entrepreneurs demonstrated when giving their acceptance 

speech tells a Saskatchewan story we can all be proud of. 

 

Tourism Saskatchewan was a public-private partnership that put 

industry people, not politicians, in charge of developing and 

marketing their industry. Now that this government is taking 

control of Tourism Saskatchewan without any consultation with 

the industry, this member-driven agency with its own elected 

board will be forced to take on an entirely different agenda — 

the government’s agenda — as indicated by the Minister of 

Finance when he said to the media that there will be greater 

influence by government. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Education and Employment Task Force 

for First Nations and Métis People 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

morning the ministers of Education; Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration; and First Nations and Métis 

Relations had the privilege of joining the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations and Vice-chief Simon Bird to 



716 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

introduce the panel members of the joint task force on 

improving education and employment outcomes for First 

Nations and Métis people in Saskatchewan. 

 

The members of the task force have a keen understanding of the 

power of education as they’ve lived and worked in communities 

all across this province. The members include panel Chair, Gary 

Merasty, vice-president corporate social responsibility of 

Cameco; Don Hoium, executive director, League of 

Educational Administrators, Directors and Superintendents of 

Saskatchewan; and Rita Bouvier, researcher, writer, and 

community learning facilitator. These esteemed panel members 

will soon begin a dialogue with people across Saskatchewan 

about what it’ll take to improve education and employment 

incomes for First Nations and Métis people. 

 

This task force will give First Nations and Métis people the 

opportunity to bring forward their own ideas and their 

experience of what success looks like and what the barriers to 

success are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government understands and takes seriously 

the shared responsibility we have to find innovative ways to 

improve outcomes, which represents a unique partnership for 

Saskatchewan, reflective of our willingness to come together to 

find solutions. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 

St. Isidore-de-Bellevue Team Wins Provincial Title 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

today to congratulate St. Isidore-de-Bellevue senior boys’ 

volleyball team on their SHSAA [Saskatchewan High Schools 

Athletic Association] provincial 1A title. Les Predateurs 

unveiled the provincial title banner at the school’s gymnasium 

with students, teachers, parents, and friends in attendance. 

Everyone was on hand to congratulate the team on a job well 

done. 

 

Each team member was presented with a personalized jersey to 

commemorate their achievement. A video was played for the 

assembly of the team winning the title. Predateurs’ coach, Terry 

Gaudet, spoke about each team member, explaining each 

player’s contribution to the team. The team members were then 

given an opportunity to recount their personal experiences on 

the road to the championship. One theme rang out consistently. 

The championship was won on account of each person giving 

100 per cent and always working as a team. 

 

Coach Gaudet quoted Babe Ruth by saying, “The way a team 

plays as a whole determines its success. You may have the 

greatest bunch of individual stars in the world, but if they don’t 

play together, the club won’t be worth a dime.” 

 

In business, sports, and life, the path to success is a lonely road 

to walk on your own. These young champions walk the road to 

success together, and we are proud of their achievement. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Spring Free From Racism 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to rise today to speak about the Spring Free From 

Racism family day celebration that I was able to attend this 

Sunday along with my colleagues from Regina Qu’Appelle 

Valley and Regina Dewdney. This year marked the 13th annual 

celebration of this event, developed to bring cultures together 

and celebrate the positive aspects of a diverse city. Mr. Speaker, 

this celebration brings attention to racial issues surrounding 

First Nations people, immigrants, and visual minorities. Today 

we continue to meet and develop respect for each other while 

recognizing the importance that each person brings to the 

growing cultural mosaic right here in our Queen City. 

 

The 2012 edition of Spring Free From Racism was the biggest 

family day program in its history. Attendees were treated to 

amazing food and over 40 different performances by groups 

representing Ireland, Chile, India, the Philippines, Scotland, 

Ethiopia, Greece, Germany, Ukraine, First Nations, African, 

Latino, and Caribbean people. This event is very important to 

our city. It recognizes that apartheid, slavery, and the Holocaust 

took place, but it also shines a light on racial gang-related 

crime; hate activities; government policies in education, justice, 

and immigration; the media; and our employment systems right 

here in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would encourage all Saskatchewan residents and 

the members of this Assembly to continue to shine that light on 

racism year-round. The Saskatchewan of our future is a 

province in which all people are treated equally and freely. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for Film Industry 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It seems like 

everyone except the Premier and his minister know tax credit 

support for the film and television industry costs nothing until a 

film crew brings a production here. For every dollar the 

government invests, the industry brings in $6 in return. It pays 

for itself many times over and just makes sense. 

 

This tax incentive is present in every province in the country. In 

fact when New Brunswick eliminated their tax credit, they 

witnessed an immediate downturn in the film industry and 

quickly reversed their decision. Even Hollywood has a tax 

credit, Mr. Speaker. My question to the minister: will he follow 

New Brunswick’s lead and reinstate this film and television 

incentive? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We 

welcome questions about our balanced budget. 

 

No one is denying the fact that the film industry creates 

economic activity. Every industry does that. And no one is 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 717 

denying the fact that the film industry creates employment 

either, because every industry does that too, Mr. Speaker. You 

know, the real question is how much public money should be 

invested in an industry in which economic activity has dropped 

almost 70 per cent and employment is down almost 55 per cent 

in the last five years. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, we have to say this: the sad but stark 

reality is that the sound stage has no productions booked for the 

coming year. None at all. Do we continue to put more dollars 

into this industry and subsidize it at an even higher rate when 

we are also being asked to address real issues like affordable 

housing, like child care spaces, autism funding, cancer 

treatment, surgical wait times, and building schools and 

hospitals and highways? Mr. Speaker, we determined that we 

just couldn’t do all of that within a balanced budget, and that’s 

why we’re winding the program down. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Real issues, Mr. Speaker? You tell that to the 

families who will be leaving the province because they can no 

longer make a living here. 

 

In 2010 the industry worked with the minister on a task force to 

come up with ways to ensure the film and television industry 

could thrive. For example, the task force came up with 

innovative ways to repackage the tax credit so it works better 

for both the industry and the province. Today in a news release, 

the Premier says the industry is simply asking for more money. 

That’s not the case. It’s asking for money to be spent more 

effectively. For over 18 months this government took no action 

on a report with important recommendations. It just doesn’t 

make sense. 

 

To the minister: instead on budget day, the government kicked 

the feet out from underneath an entire industry. Why has the 

government refused to implement a single recommendation of 

this task force report? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We 

welcome another question about our balanced budget that we 

were proud to deliver to the people of Saskatchewan just a few 

short days ago. 

 

You know, regarding working with the industry, Mr. Speaker, 

we were the group that decided that in order to try to address 

the challenges, the very significant challenges facing the film 

industry, we ought to get together with them. And we created 

the film industry task force. We worked collaboratively with 

that group to find ways to stabilize the industry and to increase 

its competitiveness. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, despite the efforts of these very 

hard-working people, the industry was not able to come forward 

with a plan that doesn’t require significant additional public 

resources. We need to be plain: they’re asking for $3.5 million 

in further subsidies this year alone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to the other recommendations of the 

task force, we took cost-effective measures to support the 

industry. But other jurisdictions, we understand, have 

significantly increased their support. They’re not tabling 

balanced budgets, Mr. Speaker. They’re tabling deficit budgets, 

and that’s something that they’ll have to answer their people 

for. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — I think, Mr. Speaker, the minister actually 

needs to read the report. There are many not just low-cost but 

no-cost items in this report, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Instead of agreeing to meet last week with the industry, the 

Premier went on Twitter to respond negatively to the 

outpouring of support for the film and television industry. He 

said, “If an industry cannot survive at all without a permanent 

taxpayer subsidy, should the taxpayers subsidize indefinitely?” 

We provide tax incentives to job creators and province builders. 

The film industry creates jobs with over 600 million in 

investment over the life of this tax credit. This doesn’t even 

cover all the spinoff benefits, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the Premier: can he explain his obvious contradiction where 

he questioned on Twitter the value of taxpayer incentives with 

the fact that his own government has been providing these very 

incentives to so many sectors? How can it be good for some job 

creators but not the film and television industry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Two quick 

points: first of all, the meeting requested with the Premier by 

the film industry is scheduled for 3:15 this afternoon right here 

in the Legislative Assembly building. Second of all, there has 

indeed been a lot of discussion about ROI, or return on 

investment, in the last few days. Mr. Speaker, this is an 

important point. In fact the film industry has mentioned 

calculations suggesting their ROI on public funding is about 6 

to 1. 

 

Through my ministry, the Government of Saskatchewan is in 

the business of attracting events in a very big way. We invest 

public funding each and every year to bring signature events to 

our province because of the economic activity they generate. 

The big difference between our investments in film and our 

investments in those events is return on investment. Here’s a 

few examples: 2010, the World Junior Hockey Championship, 

the net ROI, 30 to 1; 2009 Ford world curling for men, 40 to 1; 

2008 Scotties Tournament of Hearts for women, 50 to 1; and 

finally, Mr. Speaker, the 2011 Ford World Men’s Curling, 60 to 

1. And, Mr. Speaker, the last time we had a Grey Cup was in 

2003, and the return on investment was 100 to 1. If we’re 

talking return on investments, Mr. Speaker, these are the facts 

that we need to keep in mind. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased the 



718 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

Premier has finally announced today that he will meet with 

representatives of the industry, but it should not have come to 

this. The film and television industry thought they were 

working with this government. They invested time and effort 

into this task force, and its report sat on the shelf since October 

2010. 

 

To the Premier: those involved with the task force feel like they 

wasted their time. Is the Premier’s meeting today going to be 

yet another waste of time for those concerned about the film 

and video industry, or is he open to reversing his government’s 

decision to axe the tax incentive? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, part of the reason 

we’re having this meeting this afternoon, and we’re delighted to 

be able to do it, is to share information and talk about facts and 

figures. 

 

You’ve already mentioned for example the fact that $100 

million of public money has been provided to the film industry 

through the film employment tax credit program since its 

establishment in 1998. But we’re also going to mention that 

another $110 million has been provided in other subsidies, 

including a grant for the sound stage, a grant for SaskFilm, and 

grants for programs provided on the industry’s behalf by the 

Saskatchewan Arts Board and Saskatchewan Culture. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s a total of $210 million. And those facts will be 

discussed at today’s meeting. 

 

And as I’ve said, despite the very best interests of, the very best 

efforts of the industry, they haven’t been able to turn the 

industry around. And the only way to keep current values to 

production alive, they’re saying, is an immediate injection of 

three and a half million dollars of extra funding on top of the 

funding to date, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Tourism Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, just before the budget was 

released, Tourism Saskatchewan learned it was being turned 

into a Crown corporation. The industry was taken completely 

off guard. The CEO and president of Tourism Saskatchewan 

said, “We felt quite blindsided.” There was no notice given to 

the agency and no mention of changes in the Finance minister’s 

budget speech. 

 

This is just another example of secrecy and surprise from a 

government that doesn’t feel it needs to consult Saskatchewan 

people. My question to the minister: how can he make a 

decision that will dramatically impact the tourism agency 

without consulting the CEO, staff, and board members? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We 

welcome the member’s question. And first of all, who knew 

that the NDP [New Democratic Party] would be criticizing the 

creation of a Crown corporation in the province of 

Saskatchewan? Mr. Speaker, the fact is there was very, very 

extensive consultation with stakeholders and industry 

representatives through the tourism review. 

 

The review’s consultation summary is on the Tourism, Parks, 

Culture website. In fact, it’s been there for more than a year. It 

very plainly shows the number and the range of organizations 

which were involved in the consultation process. It even reveals 

the many comments that were gathered. This consultation was 

conducted by independent firms and it included amongst the 

following: key stakeholder interviews; meetings with Tourism 

Saskatchewan’s senior management team, all five regional 

tourism associations and TPCS [Tourism, Parks, Culture and 

Sport] senior management; four focus group sessions in Regina 

and Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, along with input from Tourism 

Saskatchewan’s president, task teams, and from the Tourism 

Saskatchewan board itself. Further information was also 

gathered from a web survey. Mr. Speaker, that’s a lot of 

consultation. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, Tourism Saskatchewan is a 

stand-alone, arm’s-length agency. For more than a decade, it 

has successfully promoted our province, and the industry has 

generated millions of dollars and thousands of jobs for 

Saskatchewan people. A 2009 review made it clear that 

Tourism Saskatchewan should remain an arm’s-length agency. 

According to the CEO, every dollar invested returns between 19 

and 35 times what is spent. 

 

My question to the minister: Tourism Saskatchewan has been so 

successful over the past 10 years. Why is he trying to fix 

something that isn’t broke? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We 

welcome the member’s question. We are indeed bringing 

Tourism Saskatchewan into the provincial government as a 

Crown corporation. Now, Mr. Speaker, we already fund close to 

100 per cent of its annual costs. So from a financial perspective, 

it almost already is a government entity. 

 

Tourism is a big industry in Saskatchewan and it plays a major 

role in our government’s growth agenda for this great province. 

The tourism review challenged us to take a greater leadership 

role — that’s very clear — to better position the industry for 

growth. The new Crown corporation will help us achieve that 

goal. 

 

We also see a need to better align all of our provincial 

marketing efforts, marketing to attract more business, more 

investment, and more tourism, so we can be more consistent 

with our message and more effective in marketing our province, 

both at home and around the world. The new Crown 

corporation will achieve that goal too, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And finally, we need to consider Tourism Saskatchewan’s 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 719 

structure. Our tourism agency is a membership-driven 

organization that already does a great job of looking after the 

interests of its members. It’s time to get to the next level and 

make sure that it’s looking after the interests of the whole 

province. As pointed out in the review, virtually every other 

province in the Dominion of Canada has achieved this goal by 

creating an agency of the Crown for tourism. We’re doing it 

too. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the minister doesn’t have a 

good answer why he is cutting the film tax credit. He can’t 

explain why he has taken over a successful tourism agency. The 

Finance minister says, “There will be greater influence by 

government in terms of ensuring that they co-ordinate 

everything that is going on in the province.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this message management is extreme. My 

question to the minister: is this the way the Sask Party is trying 

to play politics with tourism industry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, nothing could be 

further from the truth. We have been very carefully studying the 

tourism review and working with its recommendations since it 

was completed in 2010. The new corporation is a direct result 

of this good work. 

 

First and foremost, the review asks, is government in or out of 

the tourism industry? Well, Mr. Speaker, we are most assuredly 

in. Already we’re paying for 99 or so per cent of the revenues to 

the corporation. Out of a $12 million budget, they receive only 

$50,000 from memberships. We’re already in, this high. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want to take the challenge that is offered by 

the review to assume a greater leadership role by creating the 

new Crown corporation. The review also encourages, Mr. 

Speaker, to establish a single point of entry — something the 

members opposite should take note of — for tourism within 

government to develop a long-range strategy, to more closely 

align tourism initiatives with other economic development 

initiatives in government ministries, and to create a strategy for 

major events, something that we do very well in this province. 

Mr. Speaker, those are the compelling reasons. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Go Green Program 

 

Mr. Belanger: —Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Go green 

is a program that has given everyday Saskatchewan people and 

communities a chance to reduce energy usage and to be more 

environmentally friendly. However last week, the Sask Party 

government announced it is chopping $10.8 million out of the 

go green program, down to just 4.5 million left. 

 

And why is the government axing the vast majority of these 

funds, Mr. Speaker? The minister himself told the media it was 

because the program was very popular and there have been a lot 

of applicants. A lot of people wanting to be more 

environmentally friendly should be a good thing, Mr. Speaker. 

It should be a good thing, but not for this government. My 

question to the Minister of the Environment: why are you 

gutting this successful program that helps the environment 

because it’s popular? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the member should know that the large part of the 

reduction in this year’s budget for go green was because of a 

campaign commitment that was fulfilled in the last term of 

government. We said as a government we would put an 

additional $40 million over the last term of government, and we 

completed that commitment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I did indicate to the media, we have in the 

neighbourhood, in any given year, we will have 80 to 100 to 

120 applications, Mr. Speaker. Many of them, the vast majority 

of them will meet the criteria that we set out. But the fact is, is 

that through the grant program, we typically only have enough 

grant dollars for a handful, maybe up to 10 or 12 of the projects. 

 

So over the course of this year, Mr. Speaker, while maintaining 

the money that we do need in the grant program for existing 

commitments from previous years like the Aquistore, which I 

had the pleasure of announcing additional funding with the 

federal Minister of Natural Resources just last week, we’ll be 

exploring different options over this year while maintaining our 

commitments. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Before 

the election, it was go green. After the election, green’s gone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during an interview last week, the Premier had 

another reason to slash the Go Green Fund. He said that the 

government was shifting its focus onto research into coal 

energy. Why is this government gutting go green to concentrate 

on coal energy, something everyday Saskatchewan people want 

to reduce our dependency on? Can the minister answer that 

question, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I am quite surprised that 

the member would raise the issue of the substantial investment 

that this government is making in the largest reduction of 

greenhouse gas emissions project not only in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, but in this country, Mr. Speaker. It is a leading 

development all across the world to do the project at Boundary 

dam 3. Mr. Speaker, in light of the fact that under their watch, 

on this very important issue, emissions rose by 70 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, I’m just very surprised that the 

member would raise this considering that on their own website 

today, Mr. Speaker, they take credit on their website for a 

project, a clean coal project, Mr. Speaker, that they actually 

cancelled, Mr. Speaker. They take credit for projects that they 

actually don’t fulfill. 

 



720 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, in a time when more people of 

Saskatchewan want to do their share to protect the environment 

because it makes perfect sense to them, it makes none 

whatsoever, Mr. Speaker, for a government that makes it harder 

for the people to do their share. This government believes that 

more politicians and more statues are far more important for 

Saskatchewan than ensuring individuals and organizations can 

indeed go green. Why is this government putting all its 

anti-environment ideology ahead of the common sense of 

Saskatchewan people who believe that we should be doing 

much more to protect our environment, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, would that be the three 

new members of this Legislative Assembly that that member 

actually supported in this House, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are moving ahead on a number of initiatives 

that were neglected by the NDP government, Mr. Speaker, 

whether that be the boreal water project, Mr. Speaker, testing of 

our northern lakes to determine what effect the northern 

industrial development like the oil sands is having, Mr. 

Speaker, something that the members opposite, in terms of Lake 

Athabasca, stopped testing after 1997, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Whether we look at, Mr. Speaker, work that we’re doing 

through the environmental code that is going to look at a 

results-based regulatory system for industry and municipalities, 

individuals, Mr. Speaker, based on a risk assessment to 

environmental concerns, Mr. Speaker, something that is not 

done by any other province in this country. Mr. Speaker, 

groundbreaking work that we’re doing here right in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and work that we’re doing, Mr. 

Speaker, as it comes to the work that the federal government is 

doing on coal-fired regulations in ensuring that our industries 

are up to standard and that we still support the people that work 

in the coal industry in this province while making sure that we 

are . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Go 

green has become a casualty of this budget, and there’s no good 

reasons for its decimation. But the budget has not been passed 

yet. There’s still a chance for this minister to do the right thing 

for future generations by helping everyday Saskatchewan 

people protect the environment. There is still time, Mr. Speaker. 

Will the minister admit his mistake and immediately work with 

the Finance minister to completely restore the go green funding 

which the people of Saskatchewan want? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we are 

certainly fulfilling, have fulfilled our commitment on the Go 

Green Fund in the last term of government. We increased it by 

$40 million over that four-year term, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are also fulfilling our commitment on go green 

when it comes to the previous year’s budget announcement in 

terms of go green, those multi-year agreements, Mr. Speaker, 

that we are going to fulfill, Mr. Speaker — like the Aquistore 

project that is going to take place near Estevan which the 

national government has seen fit to invest an additional $14 

million on top of the $5 million that this government is 

investing, will invest over a five-year period. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we are going to work with the Ministry of 

Finance to determine, is there a better way to deliver a program 

like the go green? And that work will happen over this year. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Seniors’ Drug Plan 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Five months ago I 

can’t recall, Mr. Speaker, the Premier or the Minister of Health 

saying to seniors in Saskatchewan that if they are re-elected 

they were going to increase the cost of prescription drugs for 

seniors, they were going to charge more for seniors to have 

access to ambulance trips, Mr. Speaker, and they’re going to 

increase expenses for seniors in long-term care facilities for 

hygienic supplies. They didn’t say that in the election, Mr. 

Speaker, but that’s exactly what they rolled out in last week’s 

budget. 

 

My question to the minister: why is he making life less 

affordable for Saskatchewan seniors? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we saw on last Wednesday when the Minister of 

Finance rose to deliver the budget, a record amount of spending 

in health care, Mr. Speaker, $4.68 billion. That works out to just 

under $13 million a day each and every day of the year, Mr. 

Speaker, just on health care. 

 

There are some tough decisions that have to be made, Mr. 

Speaker, and I will say that the issue around the senior drug 

plan, raising it from $15 to $20 was a very, very difficult 

decision. But I will say that we made that decision so that we 

could sustain that program well into the future. We know it is a 

very well-utilized program, Mr. Speaker, much appreciated, and 

in order to make sure that that program was sustainable into 

years into the future, Mr. Speaker, adjustments had to have been 

made. 

 

That program had not seen an adjustment in the price for five 

years, Mr. Speaker. This year’s budget is about $97 million for 

that program alone. It’s a difficult decision, Mr. Speaker, but 

it’s a decision this government had to make. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s attempt to 

minimize these increases to Saskatchewan people simply 

doesn’t fly. Mr. Speaker, he’s making seniors in this province 

pay 33 per cent more per prescription. I know seniors, Mr. 

Speaker, who are on three, four, five prescriptions per month. 

 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 721 

An important article in the Canadian Medical Association 

Journal last month said that 10 per cent of Canadians already 

are not having access to the prescriptions that they need because 

of cost. Increased costs per prescriptions, Mr. Speaker, affects 

the health of seniors and it can cause more expenses down the 

road as time progresses, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s baffling. It’s baffling why, Mr. Speaker, members opposite 

would ask seniors to pay millions more for drugs that at an 

exact same time they’re happy to spend millions more for 

politicians in this province. It’s mixed-up priorities that does 

not fly with Saskatchewan people. To the minister: why are his 

priorities so mixed-up? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I will stand every day in 

this House and say that the sustainability of the drug plan is not 

mixed-up priorities, Mr. Speaker. Mixed-up priorities would be 

the opposite members that promised everything under the sun 

during the last general election: $550 million over four years, 

unsustainable, Mr. Speaker. If they ever would’ve formed 

government, which we knew that wasn’t going to happen, but if 

they ever would’ve formed government, programs after that 

amount of spending would’ve been cut and slashed, kind of like 

some hospitals that were cut and slashed in this province. I 

think there were some 52 of them under that government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has increased money in seniors’ 

pockets through the senior income plan, Mr. Speaker, by 

doubling it in the first four years and now tripling it as we move 

forward. A senior, Mr. Speaker — get this — a senior in 2007 

making $25,000 was paying over $1,000 of income tax. Under 

our government in 2012, only $363, Mr. Speaker. That’s a 

savings, money in seniors’ pockets, of over $700 annually, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[14:15] 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Expansion of Screening Program for Colorectal Cancer 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It certainly 

is a privilege to rise today, Mr. Speaker, and talk in the 

Assembly today about another step forward for Saskatchewan 

being proactive approach for cancer services. Today our 

government is providing $4 million to the Saskatchewan Cancer 

Agency for the provincial-wide expansion of the colorectal 

screening program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The screening program for colorectal cancer supports early 

detection to potential colorectal cancer through the use of a 

simple at-home test called the FIT [fecal immunochemical test] 

test, Mr. Speaker. This patient-first initiative will be offered in 

the Kelsey Trail, Regina Qu’Appelle, and north regions — 

Athabasca, Keewatin Yatthé, and Mamawetan Churchill. That’s 

where it’s already offered. The additional $4 million will see it 

expand to all the other health regions throughout the province. 

The additional $4 million in the 2012-13 budget for the 

screening program will immediately begin providing the FIT to 

residents in Prairie North, Cypress, and Heartland’s health 

regions. The remaining regions will come on board by the end 

of this fiscal year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, participants between the ages of 50 — which 

seems to be a magic number, I know — and 74 have the 

opportunity to take a simple at-home test that could make a 

world of difference to their health into the future. Colorectal 

cancer is the second most common diagnosed cancer and is the 

second leading cause of cancer deaths in both men and women. 

Unfortunately hundreds of Saskatchewan people are diagnosed 

each year and about 270 of them do not survive. That’s why our 

government has strongly supported the proactive screening tool. 

 

I am pleased to note that more than 52,000 people have been 

invited to take the FIT test so far. The results show that the 

program is effective in offering early diagnosis and more 

prompt treatment for Saskatchewan people. Caught early, 

colorectal cancer is very treatable. Early diagnosis and 

treatment means patients are able to avoid the stress and 

disruption in their lives caused by this disease. They can 

recover more quickly, avoid invasive cancer treatment in the 

future, and live better, longer lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, cancer care is a high priority for our government, 

and we have demonstrated our commitment to the Cancer 

Agency and to cancer patients across the province through a 76 

per cent increase in funding to the Cancer Agency over the past 

five years. Making state-of-the-art equipment, new cancer 

drugs, and new screening tools available to the people across 

Saskatchewan is another example of how we are putting 

patients first. 

 

Dedicated health professionals in physician offices and the 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency and in health regions across the 

province work very hard to ensure top quality care for cancer 

patients and improved quality of life for those diagnosed. Our 

government extends its sincere thanks to all those involved in 

this program for their leadership in advancing colorectal cancer 

screening across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we continue to expand this program, and I urge 

Saskatchewan people between the ages of 50 and 74 years of 

age to watch in their mailboxes and to participate in the 

program when the kit arrives. Prevention really is the best 

medicine. With your participation, this screening program will 

prevent cancer and save lives. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

chance to respond to the ministerial statement by the Minister 

of Health. Most certainly screening is absolutely important and 

vital to the province of Saskatchewan for the well-being of 

individuals. And any time that cancer can be detected early and 

steps can be taken, that’s a positive thing. So I most certainly 

welcome this news today that the minister has made. 

 

Treatment is definitely important, Mr. Speaker. That’s shared 

by people in Saskatchewan. And so too are the individuals, the 

health professionals, that deliver treatment, and we know that 

needs to be a top priority as well. I know we have a situation at 



722 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency where health care 

professionals have been without a contract for well over two 

years. And they’ve requested binding arbitration in order to 

address some of the issues around recruitment and retention, as 

the prolonged absence of a contract is affecting morale. And so 

I hope, Mr. Speaker, while we’ve seen some movement here 

with early detection and screening, that we would also see some 

steps from members opposite that could assist with the 

settlement of a contract through binding arbitration perhaps, as 

the health professionals have suggested. 

 

So I thank the minister for the remarks he made today, and I 

hope that we as a province can do everything when it comes to 

treatment, as well as . . . treatment part of screening and then 

also treatment as part of the delivery of care, Mr. Speaker. 

Thank you. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 225 through 248. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled written 

questions no. 225 to 248. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to weigh back in to debate as it relates to the budget 

that was tabled last Wednesday. Of course, I provided remarks 

that day as it related to this budget and, as we’ve had more time 

in the days to come and days to follow since the budget and 

through the weekend, we’ve had individuals and contacts from 

all across Saskatchewan and all regions of Saskatchewan, from 

Canora to North Battleford to Meadow Lake to Estevan, to 

share what’s been described as great disappointment with the 

budget that was brought down, great disappointment that we’re 

hearing from all across Saskatchewan as it relates to this 

budget. 

 

What’s the crux of that concern is the concern over a 

government that’s choosing to spend millions of dollars on 

politicians, Mr. Speaker, to increase the number of politicians 

here in Saskatchewan, and to do so at the same very time that 

they ask seniors in this province to dig deeper into their pockets 

to pay significant increases as it relates to their health care 

costs, specifically prescription drugs. And this is something I’m 

hearing from all across the province from seniors, from 

everyday families that are impacted by this budget — which are 

the people that are impacted, everyday families across 

Saskatchewan — that they’re greatly disappointed by a 

government that’s choosing to spend millions of dollars to 

increase the number of politicians, to build extravagant statues 

at the legislature, to keep a well-staffed Premier’s office, but 

asks Saskatchewan families to pay more and to get less, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s certainly a matter of misplaced priorities. On most 

of the items that we look at, it can’t be anything more than 

ideology trumping common sense, and the impacts are hard and 

real across the province. 

 

When we look at many of the reductions — and we’ll see many 

as we move forward here this year — reductions and cuts in 

health and in education and in post-secondary institutions, 

there’s a significant uneasy feeling by Saskatchewan people. 

The reason being that if they look at the allocation, the 

budgetary number which they have that the Sask Party’s 

bringing forward for health care and in education and in 

post-secondary, what they realize is that it doesn’t cover 

inflation and population growth, so inflationary pressures — 

which means cuts and reductions all across Saskatchewan that 

will be rolled out, Mr. Speaker, and sadly all throughout the 

next year. 

 

So it’s with a nervousness and with anxiety that we receive 

phone calls right now from people in the southeast corner of the 

province or people up in Nipawin or seniors up in Prince Albert 

that are looking across their neighbourhood and their 

community, wondering what the impacts will be. Because this 

is a government that’s cut the budgets for health delivery and 

for education in the classroom and for post-secondary right 

across the province, but they’ve punted those decisions to 

another level of government. And sadly those decisions are 

going to be made public in the days, weeks, and months to 

follow, leaving Saskatchewan people feeling vulnerable, feeling 

exposed, and certainly concerned about the programs and 

services that they value in their own community. 

 

When we think of what this means when we’re getting these 

phone calls, people are phoning and asking what does this mean 

for the school in their own community, schools that may be at 

risk of closure either this year or in years forward. They’re 

asking, what does this mean as it relates to supports in the 

classroom for their student or for their grandchildren’s 

education? They’re phoning and asking what this means for 

class size, Mr. Speaker, when you’re cutting education budgets 

for many across Saskatchewan. What does it mean for class 

size, Mr. Speaker? And certainly, as I’ve said, creates this 

challenge of school closure that far too many communities are 

stressed about as we speak, and so many more are going to be 

stressed about as we move forward as a result of this sort of 

management and this sort of budget. 

 

So it’s fair to say that from what I’ve heard throughout the 

weekend from literally hundreds if not thousands of messages 

that have been sent in from all across this province, is great 

disappointment with the budget that was put forward — a 

budget with misplaced priorities; a government that is choosing 

to spend millions of dollars on politicians and do so on the 

backs of seniors. And one of the members heckles across the 

floor here. It’s those misplaced priorities that are the concern, 

Mr. Speaker, by Saskatchewan people. Spending millions of 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 723 

dollars to increase the number of politicians, to build 

extravagant statues at the legislature, to make sure the Premier’s 

office and Executive Council offices are fully topped up while 

Saskatchewan people are asked to pay more and get less. 

 

We see it on so many levels. We see it, of course, where 

seniors, who have been hit so significantly in this budget, 

impacted so significantly, and they’re impacted by way of their 

pocketbooks, having to dig deeper, having to . . . In many cases 

when we’re thinking of who these seniors are — the pioneers of 

our province, Mr. Speaker — many on fixed incomes that are 

simply not in a position to be asked to pay for the misplaced 

priorities of this government. It’s wrong. Doesn’t make sense. 

It’s not fair. And we’re going to work hard, Mr. Speaker, to 

bring the rightful attention to these misplaced priorities and 

certainly be urging changes as it relates to those priorities. 

 

I know we had seniors that were contacting us from all across 

the province. Actually I was thinking of the one couple from 

Fort Qu’Appelle that had done the tally, and they had done the 

numbers on the prescription drug increases — hundreds and 

hundreds of dollars a year. In fact the better part of $1,000 a 

year is what that increase will cost this one senior couple in Fort 

Qu’Appelle, stating quite frankly that they simply don’t know 

where they’re going to get the money. And I think all of us, and 

I’d actually urge all of us sitting in this Assembly, to think of 

either family members or constituents that are in that similar 

position, or to think possibly of what that might mean if that 

was your mother or father or yourself, at some point in time, in 

that position. To be thinking about what’s being asked of 

Saskatchewan seniors in this budget, and everyday families, 

while this government proceeds with extravagance at the 

legislature, in the Premier’s office, and with funding — with the 

cost of millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker — the increase of the 

number of politicians in this province. 

 

The seniors I spoke with in Fort Qu’Appelle that were so 

disappointed had been talking with many of the individuals, 

their neighbours, that live in a condo unit. They’re in a newer 

building in Fort Qu’Appelle. They talked about their quality of 

life and how it’s going to be compromised. What they weren’t 

aware of, Mr. Speaker, was some of the other impacts that are 

in this budget for seniors as well. It’s not just through 

prescription drugs that seniors are going to be paying more in 

this province. Sadly, Mr. Speaker, the hits just keep coming in 

this budget. 

 

And we look at a circumstance where special care homes all 

across this province, in many cases, will be seeing a significant 

increase to their fees. If you can imagine, Mr. Speaker, the 

explanation offered up by the members opposite and 

government opposite is that they have to start charging them for 

hygiene fees, Mr. Speaker — well over $200 a year, Mr. 

Speaker, that seniors are going to be dinged with that item 

alone. And the seniors, the seniors that were calling into our 

office and making contact with us weren’t aware of that aspect, 

and that’s the unfortunate circumstance. 

 

[14:30] 

 

We see as well the Minister of Health is heckling across the 

Assembly here today, Mr. Speaker. And of course, he’s there as 

signator to changes that are increasing the cost for seniors here 

in this province. And he’s signator to bringing hundreds of 

dollars of extra costs onto the backs of seniors that simply 

aren’t in a position to do so. And I’m talking about a single 

senior that will be incurring in many cases hundreds of dollars a 

year. When you look at many of the senior couples, Mr. 

Speaker, many in his constituency, Mr. Speaker, whether in 

Fort Qu’Appelle or whether in Indian Head, Mr. Speaker, or in 

Milestone, seniors that I suspect, Mr. Speaker, deserve to be 

treated better. And they deserve better than a Minister of Health 

than to heckle across the floor when the real impacts are being 

described here in this Assembly — the real impacts. 

 

And this government is choosing to spend millions of dollars to 

increase the number of politicians, and they’re doing it on the 

backs of seniors — seniors in Milestone, seniors in Indian 

Head, seniors in Fort Qu’Appelle, seniors in Regina, seniors in 

Nipawin, seniors in Regina Northeast, Mr. Speaker. All across 

this province, the impact will be hard and heavy for 

Saskatchewan seniors. 

 

And we have to put this into a different context. Aren’t we 

doing well as a province, Mr. Speaker? Aren’t we prospering? 

Don’t we have significant economic growth for which we can 

be proud of? Don’t we have population growth for which we 

can be proud of, and identify some of the challenges and 

pressures? 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are asking that if it’s a time 

of economic growth and prosperity in Saskatchewan, shouldn’t 

their position be supported? Shouldn’t their position be 

improved? And at the very least, Mr. Speaker, hardship should 

not be brought upon the Saskatchewan families and seniors all 

across this province as we’re seeing with this budget and its 

misplaced priorities. 

 

Unfortunately the impacts are felt all across Saskatchewan and 

by families and seniors alike. I think of the young, the young 

students that are looking to possibly move to the city to try to 

study and to improve their circumstance by way of 

post-secondary. What does this government do, Mr. Speaker, at 

a time of prosperity and economic growth and a labour shortage 

in this province, Mr. Speaker? Well they send a terrible 

message to all those young students that are aspiring to study 

and be part of a vibrant economy. They hike up the fees, Mr. 

Speaker — 4 to 9 per cent, Mr. Speaker — for tuition in our 

universities all across Saskatchewan. Major increases, Mr. 

Speaker, in our apprentice and our trades programs all across 

Saskatchewan. And significant increases for students to contend 

with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wonder if maybe the side opposite just doesn’t 

get it. Do they just not understand what a student in Kelvington 

is going through in grade 11 and 12, and that family, looking at 

how they’re going to allocate the dollars, acquire the student 

loans that they’re going to need to be able to study? Because 

when you look at the massive increases that are being handed to 

them by this government as it relates to tuition and costs of 

post-secondary and trades and apprenticeship programs, Mr. 

Speaker, and then you couple that on top of a government that’s 

been completely inactive on the housing file, it makes for 

significant, real, and hard barriers to pursue post-secondary 

education in Saskatchewan. 

 



724 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

And I see one of the members in the back, Mr. Speaker, shaking 

their head and saying, well that’s not, that’s not right, Mr. 

Speaker. I think that’s the, you know, that’s the kind of 

approach that speaks to the lack of understanding that the 

members opposite in this, you know, a tad arrogant, Mr. 

Speaker, government that we’re seeing here with a large, large 

majority that seems to become, that seems to have become 

disconnected with Saskatchewan people. And to be shaking 

their heads saying, this is no big deal — the tuition increases, 

the increases to post-secondary or apprenticeship costs or trades 

programming costs, along with the massive increases to the cost 

of housing — for those members not to get it, to not realize that 

that’s a real and hard challenge for their constituents and for 

constituents all across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, for residents 

all across Saskatchewan, that’s unfortunate. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Speaker, again it speaks to priorities. This is a 

government that’s spending extravagantly to fly to Ireland and 

to attract workers. Well this may be part of the solution. We 

welcome all the new Canadians that are choosing to build their 

lives here in Saskatchewan, but it speaks to misplaced priorities 

when you have a government back at home that’s preaching of 

prosperity, spending millions on politicians and statues and on 

the Premier’s office, but then hiking the cost of post-secondary 

for students all across Saskatchewan. This is hard for families. 

It’s hard for young people. It’s the wrong direction to go . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . The member from Moose Jaw North 

shouts out across the floor. If you can believe, Mr. Speaker, he 

states, “What are you talking about?” 

 

Mr. Speaker, what am I talking about? I’m talking about all 

those young students, young families in Moose Jaw North and 

in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, that are planning for 

post-secondary education and are looking at the ever growing 

barriers before them — the stress of figuring out how they’re 

going to have the financial resources to pay for a tuition that’s 

continually being hiked or for the apprenticeship costs that are 

being hiked by this government, or for the cost of their trades 

program that’s being hiked by this government. And you set 

that against the cost, Mr. Speaker, of affordability of rent, or the 

lack of affordability of rent. That simply becomes such a 

challenge for so many in this province. It’s a real and hard 

challenge for members, as I say, and constituents in Moose Jaw 

and all across this province. 

 

So it’s simply a budget that misses the mark and really reflects 

a lack of understanding of the realities facing Saskatchewan 

people. It’s a budget that’s hard on everyday families across this 

province and a budget that fails to advance priorities. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I think, you know, we have the 

opportunity to do something different here. We have an 

economy that we can be proud of. We have a population that’s 

growing. This brings great pride, but it also brings resources. It 

brings challenges, and it brings opportunities. And we should be 

doing all we can from this Assembly as a government to be 

advancing and addressing those opportunities, making the 

meaningful improvements in the lives of Saskatchewan people, 

and certainly we should be reversing the priorities of this 

government. 

 

We see a budget that has impacts all across so many sectors, 

and questions remain as to what that will be in health care and 

in health services. But it’s a sad reality that so many people 

right now all across this province are left wondering, what does 

this mean for their health services. They’re left wondering in 

Canora what this means for doctor retention or recruitment, a 

problem that’s grown significantly under this government. 

They’re left thinking in La Ronge, what does this mean for 

access to long-term care that’s dignified, that’s the kind of 

space that you’d be proud to put your own mom or dad in, or to 

reside in yourself? They’re left in Nipawin trying to understand 

what this means for the great pressures that we see in 

emergency rooms all across Saskatchewan as it relates to 

overcrowding and pressure. 

 

What they know, Mr. Speaker, is that a budgetary cut that’s 

been handed down in health care all across Saskatchewan will 

have impacts. And it’s unfair, Mr. Speaker, that we leave 

individuals across this province with that sense of uneasiness. 

Whether you’re in Cupar wondering what those impacts are in 

your health services or whether you’re in Kelvington or whether 

you’re in Meadow Lake, the concerns are real. We sympathize 

with those concerns, and they’re a sad reality and a 

consequence of a government with its priorities misplaced, 

choosing to spend millions of dollars on politicians and yet cut 

health services for Saskatchewan people. 

 

We recognize that there’s other impacts in this budget as well. 

We see significantly many, many measures that challenge the 

affordability of life, the quality of life here in Saskatchewan. 

We see a significant increase, and actually have had many, 

many phone calls on this front as it relates to ending the early 

payment discount on property tax here in the province. Many 

individuals planning in their own prudent, responsible way, the 

way Saskatchewan people are — I always think it’s almost part 

of our DNA [deoxyribonucleic acid], Mr. Speaker, here in this 

province — but many people that plan to make sure they’ve 

made that payment for early payment of property tax and save 

some real dollars that fits into their budget. And they’ve taken 

that away, adding costs to Saskatchewan seniors, to 

Saskatchewan families all across the province. And, you know, 

it’s kind of interesting that the Minister of Finance would start 

to chime in and heckle. Obviously he supports adding these 

costs to residents all across Saskatchewan, taking away that 

early bird discount, adding costs to people all across this 

province, and in fact probably creating some challenges — I’m 

hearing from administrators and from councils — as it relates to 

the collection of those property tax dollars. 

 

This is a government that acts without any consultation and acts 

without reflecting the needs of Saskatchewan people and the 

real challenges that they’re facing, and it’s disappointing. In 

some households, they’re going to be doing the math. They’re 

going to be doing the math and looking at the increases to 

prescription drug costs. They’re going to be adding that on top 

of the increased costs to their property taxes under this 

government, and they’re going to be doing the math. And many 

are going to be saying, this puts them in a hard-pressed position, 

a hard-pressed position — these, many of them being seniors, 

the pioneers of our province who simply deserve better, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And it’s a time of prosperity that they hear about. They hear it 

touted by the Premier. They hear about population growth and 

economic growth, and they expected different. And none of 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 725 

these things were in the Sask Party platform, Mr. Speaker. So at 

some level, it comes down to integrity and about being straight 

with Saskatchewan people. In this case, it’s about a lack of 

integrity and not being straight with Saskatchewan people, 

sadly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is not the budget that Saskatchewan people voted for in the 

fall. It doesn’t reflect the priorities, needs, and challenges of 

Saskatchewan people, and it brings real hardship into the lives 

of many. And the members opposite can heckle and shout and 

say what they will, Mr. Speaker, but we’ll . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — And laugh. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — And laugh. The Minister of Finance 

offers up that, and they’ll also laugh. 

 

Well what we won’t be laughing at, Mr. Speaker, are the 

increases that Saskatchewan families across this province will 

be facing out of this budget, the undue hardship that they’re 

going to be facing. We’re not going to be laughing at the 

increases to seniors that we’re going to champion in this 

Assembly. We should be making life more affordable for 

seniors and everyday families, not walking it backwards, not 

asking them to dig deeper into their pockets, Mr. Speaker. And 

it reflects misplaced priorities, as I’ve highlighted. 

 

We have many different areas . . . I think what I wouldn’t mind 

touching on are just some of the constituency-specific concerns 

from this budget and some of the pieces that I’m hearing from 

our constituency. Certainly of all the pieces I’ve highlighted 

right now around the concern around cuts in health and in the 

classroom and in education, those are all real, and there’s 

certainly anxiety on that front. 

 

As it relates to affordability of life, certainly the extra burden on 

the backs of Saskatchewan people put on them by this 

government, that’s something that’s not helpful. It’s not 

welcomed. It’s not what they were . . . You know, they were 

sold a different bill of goods by this government, and they’re 

asking questions about that. 

 

So many constituents that are young, young constituents that 

are planning out the ability to purchase that first home, make 

sure that it’s not simply a dream but a reality, nothing in this 

budget goes any distance to address that challenge. Nothing in 

this budget goes any distance to address the affordability of 

rental circumstance for so many families within my 

constituency. 

 

This budget has certainly inadequate response to the pressures 

young families are facing as it relates to child care in this 

province. And certainly that’s been part of the concern, and 

nothing in this budget addresses that. 

 

And as I say, something that, something that individuals simply 

aren’t welcoming of are the major, major increases to 

post-secondary education in this province. Whether you’re in to 

take some skills training programs or planning for university or 

whether you’re going through some apprentice programs, Mr. 

Speaker, what we see are broad-based and real and significant 

increases that are all across this province that will impact 

certainly my constituents, but people all across this province. 

And this doesn’t help our economy, Mr. Speaker. What we 

should be doing is, we should be making it more accessible for 

young people to pursue the studies that they’re interested in and 

be able to pursue the quality of life and be involved in the 

economy in the ways that they choose. Instead we’re creating 

barriers and limitations to far too many in this province. 

 

When I look at some very specific pieces, sadly, Mr. Speaker, 

we have a school closing within my constituency, Dieppe 

School. A government that’s actually choosing to divert money 

out of the publicly funded education system, Mr. Speaker, away 

from the public systems, the associate schools, away from the 

historical schools, away from the Catholic system, away from 

the public systems — to inconsistently fund schools that, Mr. 

Speaker, if you can believe, may only have a handful of 

students in their classroom. At the same time, this is the same 

government that’s putting enrolment thresholds in place as to 

what constitutes a viable school. It’s hypocritical. It’s unfair. 

And they’re asking Saskatchewan people to accept that they 

should divert money to these new private, independent schools 

with possibly a handful of students, in locations throughout the 

city and all across the province, instead of properly resourcing 

the publicly funded education system that includes the Catholic 

school boards, the public boards, the associates, and the 

historical schools. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So now you’ve got a consequence where Dieppe School, in my 

constituency, and the constituents of Dieppe are left to ask, how 

is that fair? The frank answer is, it’s not. It’s not fair, Mr. 

Speaker. And it’s not right that this government is asking them 

to somehow accept that their school, with close to 100 students 

in it, Mr. Speaker, and some real opportunities for that 

community to grow, should close the doors to that school that’s 

a real pillar to a community. A community that’s in many ways 

rather isolated by way of geography within the city and also 

right on the doorstep of the Global Transportation Hub. Just 

think of that language — Global Transportation Hub. That’s 

pretty rich language for an important project, one that should be 

bringing real employment and economic opportunities certainly, 

as well, changing some of the demographics of that 

neighbourhood with young families choosing to reside there, 

but certainly raising some concerns if the school’s going to be 

closed. So it’s a very short-sighted decision of this government. 

 

I’ve been calling for the review of that decision by the 

provincial government, specifically in mind with the fact of 

how inconsistent and hypocritical it is for this government to 

divert millions of dollars to private, independent schools with 

possibly just a handful of students in their school as a whole, 

and then to close the doors to schools with 100 students, as in 

the case of Dieppe or more than that as is the case in Haultain 

or what we’re looking down in Pangman where we’re seeing 

grade discontinuance in a school that actually just had $1 

million of renovations done by here this fall, Mr. Speaker. And 

then of course we see the same in Nokomis and Bjorkdale, and 

the list goes on. 

 

So the closure of Dieppe School, the inaction of this 

government and the decisions of this government to not support 

the publicly funded education systems, not believe in the 

economic development that’s going on as it relates to the 



726 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

Global Transportation Hub and the importance of that school to 

a community, is disappointing and disheartening. 

 

Another item that we saw no mention of — and I’ve had many 

conversations this weekend as it related to this budget — was 

alleviation of heavy-haul traffic on Dewdney Avenue in Regina. 

Not a mention, not a program, and no support, Mr. Speaker, as 

it relates to this heavy-haul traffic that’s coming through a main 

and crucial artery here in Regina and causing significant 

damage to the infrastructure, but arguably more importantly, 

Mr. Speaker, and certainly more importantly, the risk to safety. 

Where we have children at play, activities, and sports, and 

students being transported to school and to daycare and to child 

care, where we have these heavy-haul trucks that have 

inundated Dewdney Avenue. So it is a real safety concern, big 

human risk that’s associated here. Further to that, we talk about 

the wear and tear on the infrastructure. We talk about the safety 

that’s there. It’s a matter of peace of mind. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been in literally hundreds of the homes 

along Dewdney Avenue to have shared with me the intervention 

or the attack on peace of mind that this heavy-haul truck traffic 

brings — houses shake, plates rattle, trying to have sit down to 

the dining room table, people can barely conduct a 

conversation. And quite simply, we can do better than this, Mr. 

Speaker. Saskatchewan people deserve better than this. 

 

We’re proud of the activity that we’re working towards out at 

the Global Transportation Hub and the economic development 

that we need to make real with real growth and jobs and 

opportunities, but we need to make sure that it’s not done in a 

manner that’s inundating and straining the quality of life of 

Saskatchewan people. Moreover we certainly need to make sure 

that undue risk and safety concerns aren’t brought on. This is a 

concern that the constituents of, my constituents, constituents 

that are of other members in this Assembly as well, have been 

incredibly patient on this matter. And we need to seek 

resolution on this. We need to see some improvements. We 

need to see some mitigation. 

 

And we know some of these plans and some of the mitigation 

are longer term strategies around bypasses and traffic flow, and 

we need to make sure we’re committed by way of resources and 

strategies to see that come to be. But in the short time — and 

that hasn’t been announced in this budget either, so we’re 

concerned with the long game, the long-term strategy to 

eliminate that undue hardship — but in the short term, in the 

meantime we need to have some strategies and some plans to 

mitigate and reduce and bring a level of safety and piece of 

mind that all Saskatchewan people deserve. It’s not in this 

budget, Mr. Speaker. I’m disappointed to say that. 

 

When I look at another aspect of this provincial budget that 

truly fails constituents of not only Regina Rosemont but of all 

of this province is, there’s not a dollar in it to improve Pioneer 

Village, and Pioneer Village special care home in my 

constituency is home to at many times over 500 seniors. I 

believe they have almost 400 special long-term care beds, and 

then they have 143 subsidized long-term care apartments, Mr. 

Speaker. And they provide incredibly important services to not 

only my constituents but to all of Saskatchewan. When I say 

that of course, if they’re there, they’re my constituents, but 

these constituents are coming from all over the province. Their 

families exist down in Eastend or in Indian Head or in 

Moosomin or in Nipawin. And they’re moving for the high 

level of care that they need, many of them at the latest stages of 

their life. 

 

And the kinds of specialized programming that are provided at 

Pioneer Village by an exceptional staff, staff that enrich and 

boost the lives of seniors . . . It’s really a special complement of 

staff that work over at the building, Mr. Speaker. But they’re 

providing some of the most sensitive and vulnerable care all 

across the province: specialized dementia care, adult day 

programming, respite services, supports for those with acquired 

brain injury, Mr. Speaker, support to those with mental illness 

and behavioural challenges that are preventing them from living 

a successful life in other parts of the province. Now if we can’t 

be supporting some of the most vulnerable from all of our 

constituencies . . . Because I know that many of the members in 

this Assembly will have constituents who they have family or 

it’s their mother or it’s their spouse that’s living in my 

constituency in Pioneer Village.  

 

What I can say and what I urge the Health minister to do is to 

please come for a tour. We need to go through this facility. We 

need to take a look at it because what we know, what we know, 

Mr. Speaker, is that the complement of care and the staff that 

are there are exceptional. They add to the lives of the seniors 

and the people that live at Pioneer Village. But the building 

itself, Mr. Speaker, quite simply, has seen a, has seen a better 

day, and we need to be making those kinds of improvements. 

 

And that’s what it’s about being a prosperous province, Mr. 

Speaker. Our economy’s growing. Our population’s growing. 

It’s about making those investments back into what impacts 

Saskatchewan people’s lives in a positive way. It’s time to 

advance some of those priorities. 

 

Instead we see a government that’s pushing forward, spending 

millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, if you can imagine, to increase 

the number of politicians in this province, to build grandiose 

statues here at the legislature, to make sure there’s a full 

complement in the Premier’s executive offices. But then to do it 

on the backs of Saskatchewan everyday families and 

Saskatchewan seniors, that’s wrong, Mr. Speaker. It reflects a 

government that’s lost their way. It’s certainly reflective of a 

government that hasn’t been straight with Saskatchewan people. 

It reflects a weakness of integrity of this government, when you 

look in the platform of this government and the Throne Speech, 

that not a mention of these hardships were in there, Mr. 

Speaker. Yet the first thing we see in the first budget after the 

election, we see a budget brought down that barely resembles 

what this government ran on, what this party ran on, and now 

what they’re delivering to Saskatchewan people. 

 

My good friend, the member from Cumberland, is highlighting 

that he’s hearing from people all throughout his constituency 

that none of them heard this through the brochures, the glossy 

brochures, the fancy brochures that we saw through the 

election, Mr. Speaker, from the Sask Party, the slick brochures, 

Mr. Speaker, slick brochures that we saw from this PR [public 

relations] machine opposite, Mr. Speaker. But what we, what 

the member from Cumberland points out is that those slick 

brochures from this PR machine of a government, Mr. Speaker, 

doesn’t match the reality that they’re facing. What they didn’t 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 727 

talk about was spending millions of dollars on politicians and 

extravagant statues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the member from Moose Jaw North is shouting out from 

his seat, Mr. Speaker, again, obviously . . . shouting something 

about millions of dollars on politicians. I can’t hear him exactly, 

Mr. Speaker. I don’t exactly know what he’s talking about, Mr. 

Speaker. But what I do know, Mr. Speaker, is that the member 

from Moose Jaw North, if he went and talked to his constituents 

and asked them, do you want us to be spending millions of 

dollars on increasing the number of politicians and putting 

fancy statues at the legislature or do you want us to invest in the 

priorities that make your life a little bit better, Mr. Speaker? I 

think I know what the answer to that is. So I’d urge the member 

from Moose Jaw, who maybe isn’t maybe spending enough 

time tapping himself into the conversations with his 

constituents, Mr. Speaker . . . Because I think those constituents 

will tell him what I’m talking about, Mr. Speaker. I suspect that 

would be the case. 

 

We’ve highlighted some of the different concerns out of this 

budget, and many of them are this concept of choosing 

politicians over people, Mr. Speaker. That’s the crux of this 

whole thing. This is the hypocrisy or the misplaced priorities, 

choosing politicians over people. I don’t know . . . I mean I 

think that we’re maybe liked by our constituents — I hope to 

some extent — but I’ve just never heard from my constituents 

or from those anywhere else in the province that what they were 

looking for was more politicians and to spend millions of 

dollars on more politicians. So it’s disappointing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is done at the same time, Mr. Speaker, that we see cuts to 

an industry in Saskatchewan, and to our economy, that is 

important to our economy. And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. 

Over the course of the weekend, I have heard from every region 

of this province that have been concerned with the cuts to the 

film industry and as it relates to our economy and to the futures 

of workers here in Saskatchewan. And I don’t know if members 

opposite understand this, but the film industry in fact is 

something in that the benefits of that economy are something 

that are cherished and held with pride by Saskatchewan people 

all across this province.  

 

I don’t know if the members opposite think that this is just 

cutting some NDP program in Regina that no one cares about. 

Because it’s certainly not the case, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly a 

circumstance of ideology trumping common sense. And it sends 

a terrible message, a terrible message to the people of this 

province, to the young, creative people working in the industry, 

to the young film students that are studying as we speak, Mr. 

Speaker, at the University of Regina’s film program or to all 

those students in high schools, Mr. Speaker, that study film and 

that are looking at building their lives. 

 

This is a government that’s in fact sending packing workers — 

meaning jobs, Mr. Speaker. They’re sending packing 

investment in this province, and they’re sending packing 

entrepreneurs in this province, Mr. Speaker. They’re saying, we 

don’t welcome your investment here. What it represents is an 

economic loss, Mr. Speaker, for the province as a whole.  

 

The industry drove significant economic activity whether 

you’re . . . The member from Moose Jaw North should care 

about it. I know that at many times those hotels and restaurants 

were jam-packed by members of the film industry. And this is 

the same kind of activity that we see generated in this province 

by way of the film industry in all parts of the province. This is 

why Saskatchewan people care about the film industry. This is a 

major economic hit to the province. It sends a terrible message 

to workers, to investment, and to entrepreneurs. Further to that, 

Mr. Speaker, it represents a significant cultural loss here in our 

city and in our province. What makes a province vibrant are 

some of these aspects within our community. When we look at 

the enriching aspects of culture and activity and the vibrancy 

that it brings, this is what makes a city and a province so 

liveable as well and brings about a quality of life.  

 

And this cut that just doesn’t make any sense, and when I call it 

a cut it’s not even, I mean it’s a . . . The fact is this program 

wasn’t costing the province anything. It shows an incredible 

understanding of the economic policy and fiscal policy of this 

province, has a direct impact on retailers all across this 

province, and it has a . . . actually loses revenues to the province 

by way of taxes paid back to the province out of that activity 

that’s generated. So it’s a major cut that hurts us economically 

but also culturally. And it prevents us from being more on some 

different fronts — to be stronger, to be more vibrant, and to 

provide the kind of quality of life that Saskatchewan people 

deserve. 

 

[15:00] 

 

In many ways, when I also think of the film industry, I think of 

its ability to create a sense of pride, a sense of identity in our 

province, sharing that story back with the world as well, Mr. 

Speaker. And all of that’s being lost by these decisions — a 

sense of pride, a sense of place, a sense of identity, a loss of 

cultural vibrancy in the communities, and certainly an economic 

loss sending workers packing, investment packing, and 

entrepreneurs packing. This is the wrong decision, Mr. Speaker, 

and we call for it to be reversed. We will continue that call for it 

to be reversed, and we will stand with Saskatchewan people in 

communities all across Saskatchewan in doing so. 

 

When we look as well, we have to be . . . You know, a budget is 

only as strong as its foundation. And when we look at the fiscal 

framework of this budget, we are concerned certainly on the 

front as this government chooses rather optimistic revenue 

projections as it relates to potash. And we would urge caution 

and prudence and responsibility on this front. And this is what 

Saskatchewan people desire. It very much reflects, as I say, the 

management of Saskatchewan people as it relates to their own 

household or their own business or their own farm. And when 

we look at volatility in resource revenues and specifically 

potash, this government seems to be forging ahead with a 

projection that’s far too optimistic. And again, a budget’s only 

as solid as its foundation, and we urge prudence on this front. 

 

We recognize in this budget, as a part of the fiscal framework 

analysis, that debt in fact is increasing this year by over $1 

billion — $1 billion of total debt increase in this province. Now 

that’s not consistent with the shiny, glossy, slick billboards that 

this government opposite runs, but it’s the fair and true story, 

the fair and true picture of our finances, Mr. Speaker. And we 

see pension debt that is skyrocketing in this province, not a 

mention of this. 



728 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

What I do note, Mr. Speaker, is that I noticed in the platform of 

the Sask Party they suggested they were going to pay down a 

little bit of debt. And this is what Saskatchewan people 

certainly expect a government to do when it’s experiencing 

prosperity and revenue opportunities, Mr. Speaker, to turn 

economic good fortune into a better position for Saskatchewan 

as a whole and for Saskatchewan people’s lives. 

 

On this front again we see failure. And I don’t know if this is 

just . . . Maybe this government forgot that they told the people 

of the province that they were going to reduce some debt, Mr. 

Speaker. Maybe they just forgot it, Mr. Speaker. But of course 

they’re doing something differently — increasing the provincial 

debt by over $1 billion in this budget alone. And when I look at 

the four-year charts that this government’s put out in their own 

budget documents, Mr. Speaker, we see that this government 

has not . . . is actually, as it stands, not going to be paying down 

a single cent of debt in this term, but in fact continuing to 

increase it. 

 

Now that’s me reading their budget documents, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s what they’re telling Saskatchewan people, but certainly 

that’s not what people voted for in the fall. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

about being straight with Saskatchewan people. So when you 

go to the doorsteps describing yourself as a Saskatchewan Party 

candidate, Mr. Speaker, as I’m sure these guys did in the fall, 

and they suggested they were going to pay down debt, Mr. 

Speaker, I think Saskatchewan people expect them, expect them 

to deliver on that, not to go the opposite direction. 

 

So here we have, Mr. Speaker, a time in Saskatchewan of 

arguably unprecedented economic activity and economic good 

fortune. What we need to do, Mr. Speaker, when we have a 

chance to, is to improve the financial position of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I’m having trouble, I’m having trouble 

speaking because the member from Lyle . . . the member from 

. . . I almost named the member, Mr. Speaker, and of course that 

would . . . The member from Thunder Creek is shouting from 

his seat. And it’s awfully interesting, you know, Mr. Speaker. 

Here’s the member from Thunder Creek who’s pushing big 

government in Saskatchewan — spend millions to increase the 

number of politicians in Saskatchewan — and doing so, Mr. 

Speaker, at the same time as he’s turning away investment in 

this province. 

 

That’s the record of not only that member, but all members now 

in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. Pushing for expanse at the level 

of politicians — three more MLAs [Members of the Legislative 

Assembly]. The member from Thunder Creek and all of his 

colleagues pushing for big government as it relates to the 

number of politicians and the millions spent on them. Prosperity 

for politicians is what the member from Thunder Creek is 

pushing for, at the same very time as he’s driving away 

investment in the province, at the same very time as he’s telling 

Saskatchewan entrepreneurs they can go packing. They can take 

their film investment somewhere else, is what he’s telling them, 

Mr. Speaker. And that’s a disappointing set of misplaced 

priorities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But getting back to the analysis of the fiscal framework that we 

see and the fiscal record of this government, as I’ve said, they 

suggested they were going to pay down debt. We haven’t see 

any. In fact what we’ve seen here is continued increase to debt 

to the tune of over $1 billion this year, Mr. Speaker, alone. And 

now it’s not unlike what we’ve heard in years past, Mr. 

Speaker. You know, every year we hear this government come 

forward on budget day, and on budget day they sing a song of 

budgetary balance, Mr. Speaker. And then their record has been 

something else, Mr. Speaker, of course. So each year, Mr. 

Speaker, when the Finance critic and the Premier get up and 

they talk about budgetary balance and they sing the song and 

it’s put out their slick brochures, Mr. Speaker, the record, of 

course, and the reality has been something different. 

 

And here we are at a time, Mr. Speaker, if you can imagine, of 

this great good fortune as it relates to the economy of 

Saskatchewan, but a government that sadly has tabled or run, I 

should say, run three consecutive deficit budgets. And this 

government’s suggesting singing their song again with their 

slick PR machine, Mr. Speaker, that again this year they’re 

going to somehow balance the budget. Well, Mr. Speaker, their 

record suggests something different, and unfortunately, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s sad to report that at a time of unprecedented 

financial and economic opportunity in this province, this 

government has failed to improve the financial position of 

Saskatchewan people. Instead of delivering what they said they 

would deliver, which was to decrease debt, they’re increasing 

debt, Mr. Speaker. Instead of addressing some of the other 

priorities that they mention, Mr. Speaker, they’re pushing ahead 

with spending millions on politicians and doing so on the backs 

of seniors and everyday families in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it doesn’t just stop there, Mr. Speaker. Every year we see 

some budgetary tricks of this government, and we see it again 

in this budget. We see a government that’s redefining and 

making changes as it relates to the accounting of how they’re 

doing their books simply for the convenient purpose of 

manufacturing on-paper outcomes, Mr. Speaker. We see this on 

a couple of different fronts. We see this where this 

government’s actually in the eleventh hour of budget 

considerations forced over $100 million onto the books of the 

universities in Saskatchewan simply to sort of cheat the balance 

sheet, Mr. Speaker, if you will, and to present a picture that’s 

less than fair, less than accurate, Mr. Speaker. And so we’ve 

seen this cheating of the balance sheet with shoving this $100 

million onto the books, in excess of $100 million onto the 

books of universities in this province to just sort of manufacture 

this phoney story we hear from government opposite, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But we also have to be aware that there’s consequences to doing 

so. And it’s not just the manipulation that we should be 

embarrassed of, of what’s being presented to Saskatchewan 

people, but further to that, they’re pushing it off onto 

institutions that have to borrow at a higher interest rate, Mr. 

Speaker. And that costs programs and that costs students, Mr. 

Speaker. Choosing to stick $100 million onto the books of 

universities at a higher interest cost than what government can 

source financing at, comes at the cost of students because it’s 

either program cuts or it’s hikes in tuitions or a bit of both, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s on top of what this government’s already 

doing. 

 

Further to the budgetary tricks that we see of this government 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 729 

trying to manufacture and manipulate the financial tools 

available to them, we see a government that’s in fact making 

changes to how they’re financing and accounting for health and 

education capital. So making accounting changes on the fly that 

serve one purpose — the ability for them to manufacture a 

desired outcome, Mr. Speaker, to try to tell a story, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s disappointing. 

 

So in fact what we see is sort of a switch to amortizing health 

and education capital in a different manner, sort of mortgaging 

that process out, Mr. Speaker. And they’re sort of conveniently 

grabbing aspects of what’s allowable in accounting from the 

summary financial perspective and then trying to place it into 

this GRF [General Revenue Fund] picture, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

convoluted. It’s complex. It’s improper. And Saskatchewan 

people deserve the fair and true state of their finances, and 

we’re going to continue to stand in calling for that. 

 

As we talk about proper reporting, or improper reporting as we 

see with the government opposite, inappropriate reporting as we 

see from this government opposite, Mr. Speaker, what we know 

is that this government is out of line with the rest of Canada. 

The rest of Canada, all other provinces, and the federal 

government report their finances in a proper, appropriate 

fashion. Saskatchewan, this government, chooses a different 

course. And that’s disappointing, denying Saskatchewan people 

the transparency and accountability that they deserve, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And this is a government that rejects not just my 

recommendations and my calls, Mr. Speaker, but rejecting that 

of the Provincial Auditor, the independent Provincial Auditor of 

Saskatchewan, and the calls for compliance with public sector 

accounting standards. And you know, Mr. Speaker, I pointed 

out on budget day when this room was filled with business and 

community leaders, Mr. Speaker, filled with business and 

community leaders across Saskatchewan, that not a single one 

of those businesses or organizations get to choose their own 

accounting policy. They comply with accounting standards. 

Why should this government be able to do something different? 

Why should this government be able to continue to be out of 

sync with the rest of Canada? Well it’s not fair to Saskatchewan 

people, and we call for changes on that front. 

 

The member from Wood River shouts out into the . . . Mr. 

Speaker, what I wonder about that member and . . . That 

member who, you know, has run on a platform that he never 

delivered. It’s about being straight with Saskatchewan people, 

Mr. Speaker. And we didn’t see that from the member from 

Wood River because he had those glossy, expensive brochures 

that went out to his constituents. And when he sent that out 

there, he told them that he was going to pay down debt. What 

he didn’t tell them, that he was actually going to increase debt 

by over a billion dollars, Mr. Speaker. He didn’t tell them that 

part. What he also didn’t tell them, Mr. Speaker, the member 

from Wood River, on those glossy, slick brochures, Mr. 

Speaker, is he didn’t tell them that he was going to start 

spending millions of dollars more to increase the number of 

politicians, if you can imagine. More for politicians, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And now the member from Wood River, you know . . . Of 

course, he ran on something different. But now he sits in this 

Assembly and supports prosperity for politicians, but more 

costs on the backs of seniors in his constituency and everyday 

families all across his constituency. It’s not fair, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s about being straight with Saskatchewan people and it’s 

about integrity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would like to remind the member to 

choose his words carefully, and not to impugn the honour of 

any member in the House. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. My pleasure to enter back into debate. 

 

It’s a difficult budget to analyze because, of course, it’s got 

misplaced priorities, Mr. Speaker. And it’s not consistent with 

what that party opposite ran on in the election. It’s doing things 

differently, Mr. Speaker, and it’s doing things that certainly 

aren’t in the best interests of Saskatchewan people. And it’s 

important that that be highlighted, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When I look at other aspects of this budget, we’re certainly 

concerned about, as I’ve said, the cuts and reductions in health 

care. And unfortunately that anxiety exists all across this 

province, wondering what those impacts will be, what the 

impact will be on health services in respective communities all 

across this province. And we hear that from people that have 

phoned all throughout this weekend. Now the sad reality on this 

is that anxiety, that concern, that vulnerability is going to exist 

throughout the year because we see a government that’s made 

these reductions, made these cuts, but now the introduction of 

what those impacts are in respective communities and 

neighbourhoods will continue throughout the year, Mr. Speaker. 

So that’s too bad. 

 

[15:15] 

 

In this budget, we saw absolutely nothing in this budget, as I 

highlighted on Wednesday, to address the Aboriginal 

employment gap, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely nothing to close the 

gap in educational outcomes in this province, something that 

provides us a generational opportunity, something 

transformational to our economy and to the lives of 

Saskatchewan people, and something that we should be much 

more strident on. 

 

Getting warm here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we look at this budget further, I think that it’s fair to say 

that if we look at anything that mentions First Nations or Métis 

in it seem to be reduced or cut, Mr. Speaker. Significantly 

impacts all through the North, Mr. Speaker, instead of 

addressing important priorities to all of Saskatchewan and 

northern Saskatchewan. And whether we see the Métis 

Development Fund that was cut by 5 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 

whether we see the cuts to conservation field offices in 

Moosomin, Mr. Speaker, but then also through the North, 

through Pelican Narrows and Cumberland House, and of course 

we have highlighted the concern over the reduction to northern 

fire crews. And what we see here is a concern over what’s 

purported as a very small savings but brings a very big human 

risk, Mr. Speaker, and something that we’re concerned about. 

 

And you know, this kind of highlights that contrast again, Mr. 



730 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

Speaker, a government that wants to spend all sorts of money 

for extravagant trips to Ireland but then isn’t willing to put the 

dollars into our own backyard here in Saskatchewan. And it 

should be a balanced approach, Mr. Speaker. It should be about 

addressing the opportunities and pressures and opportunities 

that exist in northern Saskatchewan with, in many ways, a 

resource, a human resource that’s waiting for the opportunities 

that we can provide out of this economy. 

 

I’ve highlighted all the impacts as we’ve gone through 

post-secondary education. Of course those are real. They’re 

significant and they’re hard on Saskatchewan people. They 

certainly, again, represent a government that’s choosing 

politicians over people and choosing impacts on the lives of 

Saskatchewan everyday families that aren’t acceptable and that 

are hard. 

 

We see changes that were highlighted very well here today by 

my good friend, the member from Cumberland, as it related to 

Enterprise Saskatchewan. A change that was taken over, that 

where we see a government choosing to take over something 

that’s been working, working very well, that’s been led and 

driven by industry, and taking complete control of this 

structure. And it’s sort of message management to the extreme, 

Mr. Speaker. We see a government that needs to have its hand 

on every single communications dollar that exists. And it’s not 

right that tourism be treated that way. Enterprise Saskatchewan 

had been functioning very well. It was something of pride, and 

it’s disappointing to see another decision of ideology trumping 

common sense and certainly not in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And you know, I think at the end of the day, when we think of 

the incredible entrepreneurs that make up our tourism industry 

and the incredible natural assets that we have in this province, 

let that, Mr. Speaker, be the face of tourism in Saskatchewan. 

Why does this government have to take over control of that 

message? Why do we need to see more incorporation of the 

government’s agenda to be interspersed in something that we 

can be so proud of, Mr. Speaker, and something that’s been so 

effective in attracting investment, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So we should be letting the spa in Moose Jaw and we should be 

letting the Cypress Hills Winery and we should be letting the 

Churchill River, Mr. Speaker, and all the entrepreneurs who 

congregate and work around these special natural assets, Mr. 

Speaker — and bring these to people of our province but also 

people all around the world — we should let them stand 

independently and tell that story, serving the industry’s best 

interests and certainly the best interests of Saskatchewan. So 

disappointing to see a government that controls all aspects of 

communications and needs to include itself into something 

that’s been working so well. 

 

Another aspect of this change that is representative of this 

government on so many other levels is no consultation. Here we 

have an organization that’s been hugely successful, that’s been 

driven by hard-working entrepreneurs from all across the 

province, and changes that have been made with not an ounce 

of consultation with the people that they impact or the 

organization that they impact. And there’s big questions, Mr. 

Speaker, big questions for the government opposite about the 

decisions that they’re making on this front, and we’re going to 

be expecting answers to those questions. Certainly we never 

heard that today when the member from Cumberland got up and 

asked the questions, the important questions of the minister. 

 

We see aspects where the government opposite, in the eleventh 

hour of the last fiscal year, went and stripped again more money 

from our Crown corporations. We saw them take a last-minute 

raid on SaskPower dividends, and this all comes at a 

consequence to Saskatchewan people. And we see the 

borrowing rates going up again in this Crown corporation and 

in many others. And the consequence will be felt by 

Saskatchewan people. So we see an eleventh-hour raid on one 

of our proud Crown corporations, SaskPower, and the impact is 

going to be felt by Saskatchewan people where we see 

increased borrowing right away and significant impacts on the 

pocketbooks of Saskatchewan people. 

 

And what’s disappointing as well in that very Crown 

corporation is that we see no long-term plan to provide safe, 

reliable, affordable, environmentally responsible and 

sustainable power, and instead simply serving this government 

as a cash cow and of course the consequences being felt by 

Saskatchewan people. And over the last few years, Mr. Speaker, 

with this government that can’t balance off its books or the 

responsibility that Saskatchewan people expect, we’ve seen 

over $2 billion stripped from our Crown corporations, Mr. 

Speaker, to balance off budgets that this government can’t 

balance. And of course that consequence is felt by 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

You see it directly through Crown borrowing, and it’s not good 

management, Mr. Speaker. What we . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . When I hear members heckling but I can’t hear what they’re 

saying exactly. But what I’d hope they’re talking about is 

recognizing the error in their ways on these fronts. 

 

What I hope they’re recognizing is that when they go to 

SaskPower at the eleventh hour, cap in hand begging for 

another or just simply taking another dividend from that 

corporation and then increasing borrowing immediately, two 

weeks later, in the budget, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people 

know what the impact of that is — reduced service, higher 

costs, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a disappointment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member from Prince Albert keeps heckling from his seat, 

Mr. Speaker. And I don’t know how thrilled his constituents 

were with this budget, Mr. Speaker, but those we heard from 

Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, were quite disappointed. They were 

disappointed with the increase to their cost of living, increased 

with significant increases to drug costs on the backs of seniors. 

And they’re disappointed with the priorities of that member and 

this government, spending millions on politicians instead of 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member from Prince Albert is shouting an awful lot about a 

bridge right now, Mr. Speaker. And I think that that’s an area 

that Prince Albert residents care about. It may be an area he’s 

feeling vulnerable, Mr. Speaker, but you have the first bridge 

that Saskatchewan people certainly deserve to have in 

appropriate condition, Mr. Speaker. And I know that there’s 

been discussion around a second bridge, Mr. Speaker. Not only 

does this budget not provide the resources to repair that first 

bridge, Mr. Speaker, but it certainly doesn’t put forward any 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 731 

sort of a plan towards achieving a second bridge for the region, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ve highlighted the concern around the film industry, Mr. 

Speaker. Just to recap on that, it’s a major economic and 

cultural loss. We’re sending packing investment. We’re sending 

packing workers and entrepreneurs from this province, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s a sad story of itself. Something that generated 

significant activity, economic activity back into this province, 

very disappointing from an economic perspective. But as I’ve 

highlighted as well, this is a major cultural loss to this province, 

something that adds community vibrancy and enriches our 

communities and brings around a larger quality of life. 

 

Now the strength in this argument, Mr. Speaker, is that came 

along as a bonus just with the activity of that industry. It didn’t 

cost us anything, Mr. Speaker. In fact what we got from the tax 

credit structure was a six time, sixfold return on that 

investment, Mr. Speaker. And we’re incredibly disappointed 

with those changes. We’re going to continue to fight on this 

front for the economy of our province, for the film industry, for 

the workers and families that are impacted, Mr. Speaker. We 

don’t need to accept what’s been put forward. 

 

We’ve seen significant changes, Mr. Speaker, in reductions in 

funding for our environment in Saskatchewan. Nothing in that 

budget to support the beautiful, natural environment that we 

have here in Saskatchewan, our beautiful assets that we have. 

And we see significant cuts as it relates to a program that was 

quite popular, Mr. Speaker, being the go green program. And 

this program, Mr. Speaker, allowed us to conserve power in 

Saskatchewan and for households and for families to have a bit 

of a savings or incentive to do so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And of course we know that when we’re saving power and 

conserving power, this is power that we don’t need to be 

generating at the high cost of new power consumption in the 

province or new power generation. So conservation should be a 

vital part of a long-term strategy. And it’s disappointing to see 

the cuts that we’ve seen in this budget to the go green program, 

something that’s important to Saskatchewan people, that’s 

popular with Saskatchewan people, and something that’s 

certainly in the best interest of both our Crown corporations but 

also the province as a whole, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see a government that’s stepped away from support for 

climate change initiatives in this budget, Mr. Speaker. We see 

in fact the Green Initiatives Fund has been cut 67 per cent. We 

see that the green initiatives of Sarcan have been cut 

completely, $1.8 million, Mr. Speaker, if you can believe it. 

The climate change program has been decreased by $96,000, 

and staff are taking an 18 per cent cut to salaries and positions. 

 

Other areas that we’ve also seen impacts and cuts are in fact the 

fish and wildlife program funding. Mr. Speaker, these are 

important programs to Saskatchewan people. Environmental 

protection at the municipal level, we see $67,000 being cut 

there, Mr. Speaker, and we see $8,000 less money to help 

protect the environment, Mr. Speaker. So we have concerns on 

this front. 

 

And again there’s the forest fire operations cut of $3 million, 

and then the other cut that was the reduction of boots on the 

ground in northern Saskatchewan to be bringing about 

community safety. And if you think about what’s going on here, 

Mr. Speaker, this represents a small savings but a big human 

risk, Mr. Speaker, not only for the boots that are going on the 

ground and the lives of those firefighters but the communities 

that they’re protecting, Mr. Speaker. So we’re disappointed on 

that front as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve done a little bit of, summarized some of my 

concerns. I’ve done so from the constituency-specific 

perspective. But the crux of the concern is this, Mr. Speaker, 

that this is a government that’s choosing politicians over 

people, that’s spending millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, to 

increase the number of politicians at a time where we should be 

advancing the position of Saskatchewan people. Instead this is a 

government that’s putting significant costs onto the backs of 

Saskatchewan’s seniors and everyday families, asking the 

pioneers of our province, Mr. Speaker, many on fixed incomes, 

to dig deeper and in many cases where those resources just 

simply aren’t there. And that’s wrong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And quite simply, it doesn’t need to be this way. We have an 

opportunity, as a province with economic activity and 

population growth, to be able to balance our financial position 

and improve our financial position but also to address the needs 

and priorities, challenges, and opportunities that are real and 

important in the lives of Saskatchewan families all across 

Saskatchewan. This government has failed to do this. And for 

those reasons, Mr. Speaker, and others, we won’t be supporting 

the budget. 

 

At this point in time, Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That all of the words after “that the Assembly” be deleted 

and the following be added: 

 

I quote, or this is my motion: 

 

disagrees with the budgetary policy of the Government of 

Saskatchewan because it fails to appropriately address the 

common sense priorities of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move, seconded by the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. Thank you. 

 

[15:30] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — We are waiting for a copy of the 

motion. I would ask that the members, they all will have an 

opportunity to debate both the main motion and the amended 

motion, and I would ask that they reserve their comments for 

that time. Also I would like to remind members when they are 

intending to move a motion that they have it in the proper 

format so that the House can deal with it in a timely manner. 

 

Order. The member from Regina Rosemont has moved the 

following motion: 

 

That all words after “the Assembly” be deleted and the 

following added: 

 

this Assembly agrees with the budgetary . . . 

 



732 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

Oh, disagrees. Sorry. It’s handwritten, so I’m having a bit of 

trouble here. 

 

. . . and the following added: 

 

disagrees with the budgetary policy of the Government of 

Saskatchewan because it fails to appropriately address the 

common sense priorities of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

An Hon. Member: — [Inaudible] . . . I second it. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Well okay. I’ll recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to stand and speak to the budget and 

to the amendment because I think it’s a very appropriate 

amendment that we do disagree with, we do disagree with the 

budgetary policy of the Government of Saskatchewan because 

it does fail to appropriately address the common sense priorities 

of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, we see a government over there that’s much better 

fitted, much better suited to be in opposition. They know the 

workings of opposition very well, and that’s how they tend to 

run things. And we have some real, real concerns with this 

budget, and I want to speak a few minutes on some of the 

concerns that are related to my city, to the people I represent for 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I do want to say a thank you to the member from 

Rosemont for putting forward that resolution. He has a very 

well-thought-out analysis of the budget that was brought 

forward last week, and I have to tell you that he captured really 

essentially the points that this budget fails people in 

Saskatchewan on. And primarily what it is, it’s missing the 

priorities of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan did not vote last fall for more 

politicians. Nobody campaigned on that. Nobody brought that 

up. And yet we’re seeing a government that’s bringing forward 

in this session a call for three more politicians. 

 

And what people want are services, services they can afford, 

services that are the right things. And what we’re seeing is 

we’re seeing in fact seniors paying more than ever for health 

care, a 33 per cent increase on their drug charges. I think this is 

completely unfair. Nobody campaigned on that, and that’s 

completely out of line. 

 

And I think that in terms of accountability, this government 

goes a long way to say, we will deliver on the promises that we 

made; we do that. And then they also do things like on other 

things that they never have talked about. They didn’t campaign 

on the fact that seniors will be paying $5 more for their drugs or 

33 per cent more. Nobody campaigned on that, and here they 

are and they’re talking about it and they’re heckling and 

defending it, and that’s completely outrageous, completely 

outrageous. 

 

And I think that when we talk about a province that’s growing 

and we’re doing well and it’s an exciting time to be here in 

Saskatchewan for many, many people, we want to make sure 

everybody is included in the advantage here in Saskatchewan. 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s only incumbent that in this 

debate we really talk about the things that are important for 

people. And so here we have an attack on seniors, attack on 

young people, on families that are trying to make things better 

for themselves here in Saskatchewan. And this government has 

really missed the mark. 

 

There are some things that I want to raise in this budget debate 

in the next few minutes, and I will raise them. But you know, 

often the members across the way will heckle and say, you 

know, you guys are just talking about things that you always 

talk about. But I think if we take a look at what the newspapers 

have been saying over the last few days, we really have to listen 

to them, because they do give us the common sense answers 

that many people on the street are raising. They get the letters to 

the newspapers. And their editorial boards really I think have an 

awful lot to offer. 

 

And so here I want to take a minute and share with the House 

today the editorial from the Leader-Post on March 22nd, the 

day after the budget. The headline read, and I quote, “Editorial: 

Budget managerial, not visionary.” And I will quote, and I will 

provide this for Hansard. “For a government . . .” and I quote: 

 

For a government sitting pretty with a huge majority and 

the hottest economy in the nation, Wednesday’s budget 

showed more signs of being crafted by accountants than 

visionaries. 

 

And I think that’s so true. Here we see that if there was 

anything that epitomizes this spirit of meanness is really the tax 

cut that the . . . for the film industry and what that means, and 

what that means for us. And here we take so much pride in 

Saskatchewan for Corner Gas and the different films that have 

been made here, and I think that this is a bit of pettiness. And I 

will talk more about this. But I think this budget really sets the 

stage. It’s more about crafted by accountants than visionaries. 

And I want to quote. I want to read this part. I quote: 

 

Parts of yesterday’s budget will leave a sour taste for 

some. For example, the government can expect a backlash 

over the new $20-per-item cap for prescription drugs (up 

by $5) for seniors and children, and a $25 increase per trip 

. . . [that’s $275] for the Senior Citizen’s Ambulance 

Assistance Plan. 

 

We also believe [and I’m quoting here] Krawetz missed an 

opportunity to sweeten the pot by providing some modest 

tax relief, particularly to those on lower incomes who [are] 

increasingly complain they see no personal benefit from 

the “boom” given rising rent and other cost of living 

increases. 

 

On the cost-cutting side, the elimination of the 

$8-million-a-year film employment tax credit will have a 

negative impact. Other provinces use similar credits to 

compete for film and TV projects and if that work is lost, 

the viability of the provincial film industry in general — 

and the Canada Saskatchewan Production Studios in 

Regina in particular — will be in doubt. 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 733 

So we see what the spirit of this budget is and what this will 

mean to people, and yet this government is insisting that we 

have three more politicians, where children and seniors will 

have to pay more for their drugs. But we see this kind of thing. 

 

I want to end up this quote, this part, by reading the end of the 

editorial: 

 

But government is more than a matter of simply balancing 

books. 

 

This time of explosive growth in our province is 

accompanied by issues that require a government whose 

plan extends farther than the end of the next fiscal year. 

 

Those seeking signals about how the Wall government 

intends to chart a course that takes full advantage of our 

current strong economic tailwinds will page through the 

budget in vain. 

 

The numbers all add up. 

 

But the hidden deficit in this document is its troubling lack 

of vision. 

 

And I couldn’t agree more. I couldn’t agree more that there’s 

not the spirit to motivate. There’s nothing visionary. There’s no 

common sense, no responsible planning here. It’s just a matter 

of cutting, all in this interesting . . . You know, our government 

has balanced budgets — many, many budgets — but this 

government here, in its quest . . . And it repeats the word over 

and over again, but hasn’t taken into account some of the 

challenges we know, particularly coming from the federal 

government around the prisons, for example, and this quest for 

this. But they’ve cut some programs and increased costs that I 

think are going to be really hard on people, and they should’ve 

taken another look at this budget. And that’s why I’m 

supporting the amendment. 

 

I want to talk about this column that came out on Saturday. It 

was entitled “Penny wise, pound foolish” by Bruce Johnstone. 

I’m going to quote a bit from that because I think it’s really 

indicative of the mean-spiritedness of this government. I quote: 

 

There’s a troubling trend in the recent budget that should 

concern anyone who cares about how this province is 

governed. 

 

What I’m talking about is the systemic dismantling and 

destruction of any program or policy of the former NDP 

government by the Saskatchewan Party government. 

 

Of course, every government will put its own stamp on the 

jurisdiction it governs and quite rightly will change, 

reform or revoke policies and programs that do not 

conform with its political philosophy or objectives. 

 

[But what he’s] . . . talking about is destroying perfectly 

good programs like the Film Employment Tax Credit, 

regional economic development authorities, or Tourism 

Saskatchewan, because the NDP, not the Sask. Party, 

came up with the idea. 

 

Now that’s not how we’re supposed to govern — that’s the 

end of the quote there — that’s not how we’re supposed to 

govern. That’s not how we’re supposed to do things. When 

there’s a good idea, you keep it going. You keep it going, and 

you consult and you try to improve on those things. If there’s 

issues with it, then you take the time to improve it. But to cut 

them is just not, not the way to do it. I want to continue. I’ll 

read. I quote: 

 

Axing the program will save the government $3 million 

this year and $8 million [next year] a year after that. 

 

But the industry says the . . . [government] has generated 

$623 million in production work since 1998 — a more 

than six-fold return on the government’s investment . . . 

 

So why can’t we be more responsible to this? Why we can’t 

take a responsible, a common sense look at this? This is really 

something we should be taking a deeper look at. 

 

But you know, last week the Premier sent out a tweet. And he 

said, and I quote: “If an industry cannot survive at all without a 

permanent taxpayer subsidy, should the taxpayers subsidize 

indefinitely?” And this is what Bruce Johnstone wrote in 

response, and I think this is a fair question. It’s not a winner or 

a loser. We know in this economy, in this worldwide 

competitive times we have to have support. But this is what 

Bruce Johnstone wrote. I quote: 

 

The premier might well put the same question to his 

agriculture minister whose ministry received $430 million 

in this year’s budget. This is not a knock on farmers or 

agricultural subsidies. The fact of the matter is the 

agriculture subsidies are necessary because every other 

jurisdiction has them. [And] the same is true of the film 

and video industry. 

 

[15:45] 

 

It’s just — end of quote — just the same. It’s just a fact of life. 

And so this is something that we need to take into account when 

we’re trying to develop a whole range of sectors to make our 

Saskatchewan the special place that it is. And you can’t be 

doing this or picking in winners and losers. And we heard this 

when this government was in opposition about picking winners 

and losers, and clearly they are here. And they’re telling the 

film industry their time is over. This time is over. And this is 

wrong. 

 

I want to continue when he talks about the enterprise zone. And 

I quote: 

 

Similarly, the Sask. Party government doesn’t want 

regional economic development authorities to control how 

economic development happens in the regions. 

 

After failing miserably with its wasteful Enterprise 

Regions, which overlayed and duplicated the existing 

network of economic development authorities formed by 

the — you guessed it — previous NDP government, the 

Saskies have decided to scrap the whole thing, saving $4 

million a year, plus another $2 million a year by closing 

parallel regional offices. 



734 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

[But] where does this leave the regional economic 

development authorities? Well, if you’re the Regina 

Regional Opportunities Commission, you’re scrambling 

to find $400,000 or a third of your budget. [And] if you’re 

the Saskatchewan East Enterprise Region in Melville, 

you’re looking for a new job because your core funding of 

$258,000 have been pulled out from you. 

 

Here’s another thing. Whatever happened to consultation or full 

disclosure, or is that another obsolete NDP idea too? So we ask 

some very legitimate questions, I think. 

 

And these are columnists. This isn’t the opposition raising this. 

These are newspaper columnists whose job is to reflect society 

and say, so what are they talking about there on the street? And 

I think he has some very legitimate questions about . . . We 

have to be the best government possible, and I think the 

government over there has missed its mark. 

 

Now I want to talk about a couple of specific points to the critic 

roles that I have. And I think that . . . We’ll of course be raising 

these over the next weeks in estimates, but I’ll put these out, 

and I hope the minister’s listening right now because I think 

that . . . Well we’ll talk more about it. 

 

But I think that in terms of housing, I find the initiatives very 

interesting. And I find particularly . . . I just want to talk about 

the corporate tax exemptions. I think that’s very interesting. I 

have two questions. One relates to the fact when it talks about 

the rebate eligibility period — and I’m quoting from page 68 of 

the budget summary — that it talks about the fact that . . . And 

I’ll read it: 

 

Property owners will be permitted to register titles during 

the development phase or at any time during the rebate 

period, enabling them to convert to condominium units at 

a later date. Conversion will result in the housing unit no 

longer being considered eligible rental housing for the 

purposes of the tax rebate. 

 

So in effect, you’re an apartment for 10 years or less. You can 

be a condo registered at any time. And I can understand the 

need for this to draw the investment, and that’s not a bad thing. 

But the question is, at the end of 10 years, how many of these 

10,000 units will remain rental properties and how many will 

become condos? I have some questions about that because we 

know what was happening four, five, six years ago. The 

challenge was that all of a sudden we had all these apartment 

blocks being converted to condos. 

 

Now what’s going to happen to the cities is they’re going to 

have a challenging time, because usually what happens is 

somebody builds an apartment block. We all know it’s an 

apartment block. That’s what they are. They’re apartments. And 

then the City Planning will plan accordingly. And then what 

happens now is it looks like an apartment block. It’s being 

treated like an apartment block. But it’s actually a set of condos 

that are being rented out to get the tax exemption. I think this is 

going to be a challenge for planning and I will want to know, 

how does this work? 

 

I’m totally for more rental properties — that’s good. But the 

other question I have, and I’ll be asking the minister about it, is 

that none of these, when we have and especially when this 

government is so fixated on cutting costs, i.e., the film tax credit 

program and all of that, here we see a new program being 

introduced, but it’s not focused on the issue at hand which is 

affordable rent. 

 

Now I know what this government’s stand is on rent control or 

any kind of meaningful regulations to control the high cost to 

rent. But here you have an opportunity through tax incentives to 

say, we want a certain portion of these 10,000 units to be made 

affordable because the rent is geared to income. But there is no 

rent geared to income. They could be, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all 

luxury apartments. Now the argument may be, well even if you 

had 10,000 luxury apartments, it increases the marketplace with 

new apartments and therefore the rent’s going to be driven 

down. That’s fair enough, and I hope that’s what happens. But, 

you know, many tenants these days are feeling they need more 

than just hope. They need something in black and white. And so 

when you have this hope of 10,000 new apartments and not a 

word that any of them are going to be affordable rent, I think 

that’s a real shortcoming. 

 

So we have a problem: only 10 years, are they going to be 

condos? We don’t know. How does it affect planning, 

community planning? That’s a real issue. And of course, Mr. 

Speaker, I think it’s a noteworthy ambition to use the corporate 

tax planning because we did hear that too, that people were 

hoping that that would help create more apartments. But the 

question is, they have to be affordable, and this misses the mark 

completely on that. And so, Mr. Speaker, we’ll have many 

questions about that. 

 

And the second question I have about that for the minister is not 

anywhere in the budget. Was there anything about Housing 

First? And we know this government’s very good at doing 

one-off announcements and announcing one housing project 

here or one housing project there, but no comprehensive plan, 

no comprehensive plan. And we’re obviously supportive of 

anything that can be done is better than nothing, but really at 

some point after five years, you’d think you would get together 

a plan. You’d get a plan together around Housing First for those 

who are vulnerable, for all those who are vulnerable. And I 

think this is really critical that this government takes some time 

to do this. 

 

I want to also talk about there are . . . I see my time is running 

quickly. And I have to say, with the former, my colleague, he 

gave such a great analysis that I was hoping I might do, I have 

to say, and I’ll just draw attention to another editorial, I think, 

around municipal affairs. I think this government as well misses 

the point. And The StarPhoenix had an editorial, and I’ll quote 

the headline: “Hickie ignores big city needs.” 

 

But I just want to read the first line, and I quote, “One suspects 

Municipal Affairs Minister Darryl Hickie didn’t get the memo 

[this year] that this year’s provincial budget was about keeping 

the Saskatchewan advantage.” It goes on to talk about how we 

have to make sure that municipal funding is fair, is fair. Now 

we know the minister always trots out his stats about how 

increased funding, and you know, we started that; we had 

challenges left from the government in the ’80s. Had to deal 

with that. 

 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 735 

But we need to support our cities and our communities, and 

they all have to be treated fairly. But right now our two largest 

cities have some real challenges. All cities actually have 

challenges in terms of their infrastructure. In fact we know that 

the minister himself, in his own city, people are calling for a 

second bridge and this government’s turned that down, has 

turned it down. And that’s completely missing the point of, if 

you’re going to keep an advantage in Saskatchewan, 

particularly with the Northern Gateway, we need that second 

bridge. And in Saskatoon, we need more support. Our cities, 

our two big cities are growing, the population is expanding and 

we need that support, and it should have been in this budget. So 

I am deeply, deeply concerned. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you know, I read with interest the Moose 

Jaw Times-Herald the day after the budget and the headline 

here, “Budget 2012” but the big headline was . . . And I hope 

the members from Moose Jaw, hope they saw the headline on 

the Thursday paper. It said, “Say goodbye to south central 

enterprise region” and, you know, went on quite a long . . . This 

is pretty meaningful to our medium-sized cities like Moose Jaw, 

Prince Albert, Melville, Yorkton. These regional economic 

areas are the real drivers for economic development. 

 

And you know, as the mayor of Moose Jaw, I’ll just quote him. 

He said, “Moose Jaw is not a city on an island.” They depend 

on the communities around. And they have developed these 

zones and these regions in good faith, and then you have this 

government cutting the legs out from under them. And so it 

really was a hit in Moose Jaw. It’s a hit all around. And not a 

good hit, not a good hit, but a bad hit because people don’t 

know, and they’re saying, well we’d like to . . . And one of the 

members from Moose Jaw said, well we hope the municipality 

steps up and funds the rest of it. 

 

Well you know, they have their challenges. And I’ve just talked 

about whether it’s the roads, the sidewalks. And every day 

people in those cities and those communities are saying, we 

need our infrastructure fixed. And this government’s saying, no, 

you need to make sure you fund something that we did. So here 

you have this downloading, and nobody asked the cities. The 

enterprise zones did not ask for that to be shifted down to them. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I could go on about some of the 

challenges here, but I really have to say that I am very 

disappointed in this budget. I think they missed the mark. And, 

you know, we see people are meeting today in the Legislative 

Building. The filmmakers have come here to meet with the 

Premier to say, give this another think. And we hope that they 

do give it another think, because I think that we need things like 

the Enterprise Zone, Tourism Saskatchewan, people who are 

involved on the ground with those industries making the 

decisions and making things go forward. 

 

And we need a re-think on this housing so that, if we have 

money targeted at apartments, that it is meeting the needs of 

families and seniors here in Saskatchewan. We know we need 

more apartments. And as the minister said, it may impact on the 

vacancy rate, but it won’t, probably won’t impact on the 

affordability. And that’s a real, a real shame that the minister 

has given up so easily on this challenge. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, with that I’ll take my seat, but I will say 

that I am proud to second the amendment to the motion that we 

do disagree with the budgetary policy of the government of 

Saskatchewan because it does fail to appropriately address the 

common sense priorities of the people of Saskatchewan. Thank 

you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena and the Social Services minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 

very pleased to rise in my place today to second the motion of 

the Minister of Finance for the budget that we know is going to 

keep the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Before I get into the debate, I’d like to mention people that are 

important to me. And I’m going to start by talking to my 

family, about my family. I’d like to thank them for their support 

and their patience and their sense of humour and, most 

importantly, for the love as we work through this to work here 

in the legislature. 

 

I’d like to thank my constituency assistants, Linda and Rhonda, 

who work very hard and do their job caring about the people 

that we represent. The staff here in the legislature — Shelley 

and Sherry and Theo, Amanda, Kirsten, Kim — I know that 

they work with dedication. And they work with the most 

vulnerable citizens that we have in the province that phone the 

office and ask for help, and I know that they care, and they’re 

very considerate and patient and I can’t thank them enough. 

 

And the people from Kelvington-Wadena, Mr. Speaker, they 

are hospitable and they’re warm and they’re very frank. And 

I’m very pleased to say that this weekend when I had a chance 

to meet with some of them on coffee row, they had lots to say 

about the budget. And nothing that they said about the budget 

had anything to do with what the members opposite said today 

in the House. They talked about the $581 million or the 4.5 per 

cent increase in Highways. They talked about the investment in 

agricultural research. They talked about the agricultural budget, 

the second largest budget that was ever announced for 

Agriculture. They talked about doubling their crop insurance 

levels that was offered in 2007, and they talked about record 

revenue sharing with municipalities. 

 

And you know what else they talked about in 

Kelvington-Wadena was our commitment to the long-term care 

facilities in both of those towns, something that had been 

ignored by the members opposite. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a cabinet minister and a member of 

Treasury Board, I am very pleased with the package that we 

brought together. I want to thank the Minister of Finance for his 

long hours in the development of this budget. I want to thank 

him for his attention to details and his patience and more 

patience and more patience as we reviewed and we discussed 

and we collaborated over the money that’s entrusted to us by 

the people of the province to spend on the people of the 

province. 

 

I’d also like to thank the Premier for his leadership and his 

vision for our province. I believe that the Saskatchewan people 

know that they are fortunate to have a Premier who can put a 

global perspective on the work that we’re doing here in the 



736 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

province and that he also has a perspective on the most 

vulnerable people in our province. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I second this budget brought forward by the 

Minister of Finance, I believe it’s an honour, because this 

budget will keep Saskatchewan moving forward and will be 

building on the advantage of living in our beautiful province. 

 

Putting the budget together could have been a challenge, but we 

did it by thinking outside the box. We managed to balance the 

priorities in a way that provides better government to the people 

of this province. Through this budget, we’re going to have 

better access to health care by investing in hospitals in Moose 

Jaw and North Battleford. We’re going to be improving the 

quality life for people with disabilities and for seniors, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

We’re making life more affordable by investing over $344 

million into 12,600 new housing units by 2012, and we’re doing 

this while still lowering the debt and providing historic tax 

reductions. 

 

This leadership from this side of the House is in stark contrast 

to the budget that I witnessed when I was on the other side of 

the House. It’s not just numbers that are different; it’s the 

priorities that are different. Mr. Speaker, our government and 

our priorities reflect a different mentality than the members 

opposite. We prize leadership and we prize growth and fiscal 

responsibility, and we put results before ideology. 

 

Unlike the opposition, our expectation is Saskatchewan can and 

should be a leader. For too many years I listened to the 

members opposite talking about managing decline. We’re not 

declining in this province, Mr. Speaker. We’re a leader and 

we’re proud to be so. We’re leading the nation in GDP [gross 

domestic product] growth. We had the lowest unemployment in 

Canada. We had the second lowest GDP ratio. And in 2011 we 

had the biggest single-year population increase since 1953. And 

these figures, Mr. Speaker, aren’t an accident. They’re a 

product of working together for the people of the province. Mr. 

Speaker, as I said, we did this by thinking outside the box. 

 

One of the issues that hasn’t been mentioned, and I think is 

important, is the commitment that we made to reducing our 

workforce by 15 per cent. That commitment was made three 

years ago. And five months ago our party ran on that part of our 

budget and people voted in historic numbers for our platform 

that included our adjustment target. 

 

This budget is going to put us two-thirds of the way to our 

commitment and two-thirds of the way to keeping the promise 

to the people of the province. The majority of the FTE 

[full-time equivalent] reductions have been achieved through 

vacancy management. And by the fiscal year end, workforce 

adjustment will have yielded $129 million in savings. Part of 

the work that we’re doing, and part of the example of how 

we’re actually achieving this, is things like the lean project. 

 

Lean helped employees find ways to streamline work without 

having a negative effect on the people of the province. An 

example of that is farmers used to have to wait for up to a year 

to have crop insurance claims be processed. Now it takes two to 

three weeks. Campers who wanted a campsite at one of our 

provincial parks could wait up to three weeks to get a spot. Now 

it takes seven days. Vendors and caregivers working with 

Social Services had to complete up to 45 forms to receive 

payments and we’ve reduced the number of forms to seven. 

 

Saskatchewan is leading that lean process, and we’ve been 

getting calls from Alberta, the city of Oshawa, the city of 

Thunder Bay, even the state of Maine and the state of 

Minnesota to look at the initiative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a minute ago the member from Saskatoon Centre 

talked about what he was going to . . . He was talking about 

things that are important. And when he spoke for a few minutes, 

I noticed there were some things that he did not think was 

important. The most important thing for me is the whole idea of 

people with vulnerabilities. Never once did members opposite, 

in their speeches, talk about the people with disabilities. They 

didn’t talk about our initiative, our commitment to people with 

disabilities, and that it was also part of our platform 

commitment. Twenty-five per cent of the platform commitment 

included spending on promises in the budget for people with 

disabilities. 

 

We campaigned on the promise to make Saskatchewan the best 

place in Canada for people to live with a disability. We’ve 

already taken a very significant step in that prior to the election 

by introducing SAID, the Saskatchewan assured income for 

disabilities. The previous government had ignored calls for this 

program. In fact in 2007, I’m sure the members opposite will 

remember that the Disability Income Support Coalition was so 

disgruntled with the lack of action from the NDP that they 

issued a news release. In the press release, they stated some of 

their members were going to boycott further discussions. 

Things have changed because on budget day this year, the same 

organization issued a news release that heralded our 

government’s efforts for people with disabilities. They were 

celebrating the expansion and enhancement of the SAID 

program that was announced in the budget. 

 

We promised in the election that we would expand SAID up to 

10,000 people in 2012. With this budget, we are keeping the 

promise. The expansion will be completed by this summer. And 

we promised during the election that during the four years of 

our mandate we would increase payments to SAID recipients of 

up to $400 a month. We are keeping that promise with an initial 

$200 increase starting this summer and further increases in each 

of the next three years. And these aren’t the only initiatives 

we’re taking for people with disabilities. At the end of this 

fiscal year, we’ll hit another milestone. Thanks to the 

investment in this budget, we will have completely eliminated 

the 440 wait-list for people with intellectual disabilities. This 

will allow us to finally close the chapter on the 16 years of NDP 

neglect that have caused this wait-list to happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to talk a minute about housing and how 

we, our government has been thinking outside the box when it 

comes to innovation in housing. By 2016 we’re going to be 

adding 12,600 housing units. Mr. Speaker, under the old model 

of delivering housing, the NDP used to dribble out a handful of 

units every year at a very high cost to the taxpayers. But this 

government by leveraging partnerships with municipalities, the 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 737 

private sector, and CBOs [community-based organizations], 

we’ve managed to drastically cut that cost. 

 

In fact the plan in this budget, we can deliver 32 rental units for 

every one that could be delivered under the old NDP model. I 

know the members opposite don’t want to hear that, and it 

never mattered to them because all they talked about was a 

declining population. But now with the population increasing, 

65,000 people in the last year, we know that we need more 

units. Mr. Speaker, 32 rental units for every one that was 

developed under the NDP is quite a milestone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, according to RBC [Royal Bank of Canada] 

reports, housing affordability was under most stress in the year 

2007-2008. That was 16 years of NDP inaction. The NDP never 

thought to have policy tools in order to react to growth, and 

they never planned on it. Mr. Speaker, the average yearly 

housing starts under the Saskatchewan Party are double what 

they were during the NDP’s 16 years in government. There are 

more multi-unit rental starts in 2011 alone than in the last seven 

years of NDP government combined. Vacancy rates are up 

province-wide from what they were under the NDP, and the 

RBC report shows housing affordability as slowly but surely 

improved since 2007 and 2008. 

 

We know there’s more work to do and we plan to do more. And 

that’s why I’m proud of the income tax reduction on the new 

rental development that was announced in this budget. It 

reflects our desire to keep growing and keep innovating to 

foster that growth. 

 

In combination with the rental construction incentive we 

announced last year, we expect to deliver 10,000 new rental 

units by the year 2016. That’s a 29 per cent increase to the 

rental market in our province. The tax incentive was widely 

acclaimed right across the province. Mayor Dan Atchison called 

it wonderful. Moose Jaw Mayor Glenn Hagel celebrated the 

initiative as the biggest deterrent to building new rental units by 

removing this tax. Prince Albert mayor Jim Scarrow said the 

province is clearly listening to its stakeholders and taking action 

to lead the nation and provincial approaches to housing 

incentives. Bill Madder from the Association of Saskatchewan 

Realtors noted on budget day that it lowers the key barriers that 

have kept private dollars from flowing into the rental market. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also have a . . . [inaudible] . . . with our 

seniors, the people that grew our province, the people that are 

important to all of us as we move forward. The NDP help for 

disabilities or lack of help for disability wasn’t the only area 

that they neglected in their 16 years. Mr. Speaker, for 16 years, 

the NDP failed to increase benefits under the seniors’ income 

plan. For 16 years, seniors were left to cope with rising costs. 

 

In our first term of government, we doubled the benefits and 

nearly doubled the number of seniors eligible for seniors’ 

income plan. This initiative put $1,200 per year into the pockets 

of low-income seniors and made thousands more eligible for 

extended health benefits like eye examinations, chiropractor 

services, and home care subsidies. With this budget, we’re 

putting an additional $600 per year into their pockets, and 

we’ve committed to increasing it further over the next four 

years. 

 

When all is said and done, in the next four years, low-income 

seniors will be getting $2,100 more per year than they did under 

the NDP. Benefits will have tripled from what they were under 

the NDP. That’s a $2,100 increase for every senior versus the 

NDP’s increase of exactly zero dollars for 16 years. In fact 

because of tax changes, seniors have even more money in their 

pockets. For example, a single senior with a $25,000 annual 

income saves over $700 per year compared to 2007. This is in 

addition to the personal care home benefit. Starting July the 1st, 

about 1,500 low-income seniors will receive the new personal 

care home benefit. This initiative will give eligible seniors up to 

$3,336 per year to assist with the costs of personal care homes. 

Over the next four years, that commitment will benefit further 

to 4,428. These initiatives are making life more affordable for 

our seniors. 

 

And although we know seniors still have challenges, according 

to Stats Canada, Saskatchewan has the lowest percentage of 

seniors living in low income in Canada. We know we need to 

continue to enhance benefits for our seniors, but we know 

we’ve made progress. 

 

Another area that we made progress in is the welfare of our 

children and youth. Since becoming government, we’ve 

invested heavily in the youngest people in our province. The 

latest budget funding for family services is up 133 per cent 

since we became government. Over the first two years, $74 

million has been invested across government in things like 

transforming the child welfare system, First Nations and Métis 

education and employment, FASD [fetal alcohol spectrum 

disorder], and on. These investments are a result of a new way 

of looking at the welfare of our children. 

 

The child and youth agenda put seven cabinet ministers in the 

same room to determine how to best serve children. We 

discussed what factors are having an impact on the welfare of 

our children and tried to put in place the initiatives necessary to 

address them. We are breaking down the silos of government to 

serve our children better, and we’re getting better at it. 

Government has operated so long in its own silos, it takes time 

to overcome this way of looking at the world. 

 

But one of the reasons you can count on change from this 

budget and the future one is the impressive records we’ve 

shown. Child welfare caseloads grew by 53 per cent between 

the years 2000 and 2007. The number of children in care now is 

down for the first time in a decade. There’s been a 48 per cent 

reduction in children living in foster homes of more than four 

children. Forty new pre-kindergarten programs have been 

supported in 23 communities. There’s a 750 per cent increase in 

direct client services for children with autism, and we’ve 

increased an FASD family support pilot program in Saskatoon 

that’s drastically improved school attendance among the 

children of 26 participating families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased that we’re working with the Hub, 

the Community Mobilization Prince Albert initiative, that 

we’ve seen some encouraging and very impressive results: 14 

per cent reduction in crime and reported crime; 15 per cent 

reduction in crimes against persons; 10 per cent reduction in 

emergency room visits; 10 per cent reduction in public 

prosecutions; and 32 families diverted from social services. 

 



738 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

Mr. Speaker, there is more work to do and I know that the 

members, that we will be doing it especially with things like our 

new tracking system for children in care. The NDP in 2004 

talked about a new tracking system so they no longer had 

children that were on paper only, but they were not working on 

it. The member from Saskatoon Centre said many initiatives 

were started but unfortunately they weren’t sustained. Clearly 

more needed to be done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are moving ahead. And as I said, we are 

investing in CBOs [community-based organization] like SIGN 

[The Society for the Involvement of Good Neighbours] in 

Yorkton, FoxValley in Regina, the 601 Outreach in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I talked earlier about the differences between our 

approach to the budget and the NDP’s, and I want to conclude 

on that note. I believe, of course, that we have better leadership 

on this side of the House. I believe we have better priorities in 

putting together a budget — priorities that better reflect the 

people of Saskatchewan; priorities like a strong and growing 

economy; better, more innovative public services; effective and 

efficient use of taxpayers’ dollars. But I think there’s one thing 

that really sets us apart, and that’s where the NDP or the 

members opposite prize ideology, and we look at results. 

 

In 2001 the NDP promised to put lower income people in a 

better financial position. But what happened? Between the 

budget and the time the NDP left office in 2007, food bank 

usage rose in Saskatchewan by 94 per cent. What’s happened 

since? Food bank usage has declined under our watch by 17 per 

cent. Personal disposable income has gone from 93 per cent of 

the national average under the NDP to 103 per cent under our 

government. 

 

[16:15] 

 

In 1990 the NDP developed an action plan for children. What 

happened? Between 2000 and 2007 under the NDP, child 

caseloads grew by 53 per cent. Under the NDP, foster homes 

had, there was foster homes with as many as 21 children staying 

in operation. And what’s happened since? The number of 

children in foster homes with more than four children is down 

by 48 per cent. The number of children placed permanently 

with extended families has increased by 44 per cent. 

 

These are just some examples of the results right across 

government. That’s why we are celebrating record job growth. 

That’s why we are celebrating this budget, its investments like 

this and things like the Saskatchewan surgical initiative — 

which also has been mentioned by the members opposite — and 

long-term care facilities. This budget is providing better health 

care, better services to the people of the province. Through 

efficiencies like the workforce adjustment strategy which has 

delivered $129 million in savings, we’re ensuring that the 

public service is fiscally sustainable for the next generation. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is lots of work that was undertaken 

in this budget. There’s lots of comments that have been made 

by the members opposite, but I think what the members 

opposite aren’t seeing is the effect it has on the real lives of the 

people of the province. When I go back to Kelvington-Wadena 

and talk about the children that are in care, talk about what’s 

happening in agriculture, talking about what’s happening with 

our health care system, they know that we’re on the right track. 

They encourage us to continue to do our work. They encourage 

us to continue to be a model in Canada right across the nation 

and make sure that people know that Saskatchewan is the best 

place to live. And, Mr. Speaker, for that reason, I’ll be, I’m 

pleased to second the motion brought forward by the Minister 

of Finance. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood 

River, the Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Well I’m very pleased to rise today and talk about the budget, 

enter the debate on the budget. Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, 

this budget is one that we’re keeping balanced. This is a 

balanced budget on the general revenue and the summary 

financial side. We’re keeping spending sustainable, and that’s a 

key word. It’s sustainable spending. We’re keeping the 

economy growing, and we’re keeping our election promises. 

 

But before I get into the debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also 

would like to thank a few people. One is my family for being 

supportive and allowing me to be here. I know it’s a great 

hardship on families sometimes when we travel the distance 

that a lot of us travel to be here, and one doesn’t get an awful 

lot of time at home anymore. 

 

I’d also like to thank my constituency assistants Sandy and 

Charlene because they do an awful lot of work at the home 

front when I’m spending my time up here. And I really could 

not get along if it wasn’t for my office staff in the building here 

with Drew, Bonnie, Sarah, Tammy, and Wendy. But also, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I think a great big thank you goes out to all of 

my colleagues here in the legislature. We work very well 

together, and it’s very noticeable when we can come up with a 

budget like this, a great budget for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, and that is a result of every one of us on this side 

of the House working very closely together. 

 

In discussing the budget and what we’ve heard from the other 

side, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s an awful lot of pathological 

inexactitudes that I hear from the other side, and I think I’d like 

to address just a few of those. The member from Rosemont 

actually talked about hardships. He talked about hardships, 

people’s hardships with this budget. He’s very short-sighted. 

Talk about hardships with out-migration that we experienced 

for 16 years, total out-migration. How about 52 hospitals closed 

in the rural area — 52. Is that hardships? What did the people 

do that worked there? This was a total, total move to damage 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

How about the roads in rural Saskatchewan? And I’m going to 

speak more of the roads when we come to the Minister of 

Highways’s budget. But the highways were just totally 

neglected. And I said this before, and I’m glad to say it again: 

we have 16-year-old students in my constituency that have 

never seen a paving machine until we formed government — 

sixteen years of total and utter neglect for rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Schools — and it makes sense if you’re kicking people out of 

the province because you’re not doing anything for them — 

schools were closed. We had a downward spiral for years of 

everything in this province. And it was a typical NDP move to 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 739 

try and centralize everything and get rid of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Rosemont also talked about 

cuts. Well the people of Saskatchewan had one of the best, saw 

one of the best cuts that this province has ever seen, and that 

was on November 7th last year. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to talk to the 

budget. This budget is about keeping the Saskatchewan 

advantage — balanced budgets, growing economy, government 

services that are affordable and sustainable. We see the chaos 

that’s going on around the world and in other jurisdictions in 

North America because they don’t have balanced budgets or 

won’t have balanced budgets. And here we are here, a balanced 

budget on the summary financial basis as well as GRF, and 

we’re living within our means. This really gives us a 

Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

We have overall spending will be 4.7 per cent increase, so when 

they talk about cuts from the other side, let’s put that all into 

perspective. 3.9 per cent of that increase is in operating 

spending, and the remainder is in capital investments. 

 

And I spoke a little bit about highways, but I want to also talk 

about capital investments. That was totally ignored for so many 

years. We talk about schools closed, but how about those that 

stayed open? There was very little infrastructure money. They 

totally ignored infrastructure for so many years. And it’s taking 

us a long time, and it’ll take us a long time further to address all 

of the problems that were left by them. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, with our budget, it allows us to meet our 

priorities and it allows us to keep our election promises. Yes, 

there’s some spending choices and some of them are tough 

choices, but we’re very happy to make those. 

 

For an example, Mr. Speaker, for buying homes, first-time 

homebuyers, we’re keeping our promise by introducing the new 

Saskatchewan first-time homebuyer’s tax credit, a $1,100 

non-refundable tax credit. PST [provincial sales tax] exemption 

on children’s clothing to age 17. Students, we’re keeping our 

promise of a new Saskatchewan advantage scholarship which 

will provide all new high school graduates with up to $2,000 

over four years to be applied to tuition fees at any 

Saskatchewan post-secondary institutions. And my colleague 

talked about persons with disabilities. And we have done more 

for people with disabilities in our first four years and into this 

year than have probably ever been done in this province before. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d now like to talk a little bit about what 

this budget means for my constituency. When we look at what 

revenue sharing has done and the amount of money we put into 

revenue sharing, it was toyed with by the opposition — then 

government — for years, and we established a revenue-sharing 

program that is predictable. This year $237 million will be 

going to revenue sharing, so that’s helped every one of our 

municipalities, and they know what kind of money is coming 

and when they’re going to get it. 

 

With highways, we’ve got a budget of $581 million this year 

for highways, one of the highest highway budgets we’ve seen, 

and that goes to our promise of $2.2 billion over the four years 

of our mandate. And that’s what we did in the last four years, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. We kept our promise of $2.2 billion for 

highways. There’s a lot more that needs to be done, but we can 

see the fruits of our investment already. In my constituency, we 

have a road now that we can travel on which for 16 years we 

didn’t. And so we can see the fruits of that coming already, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

In agriculture, agriculture that was ignored for all of that time 

frame under the NDP, and now we see agriculture getting some 

of the highest funding that they’ve ever seen. I remember 

having to wait till the end of year before we’d even know if 

crop insurance was going to be fully funded by the NDP. Now 

it’s funded in advance. We’re putting money into market 

development. We’re putting money into irrigation. All of these 

things is having the province move forward. It’s being proactive 

in the ag industry, and the people in the ag industry really 

respect and understand that. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d also like to talk a little bit about my 

ministry and what this budget has done. This budget commits 

$2.8 million, some of it’s for, 1.2 for the implementation of 

high-risk violent offenders crime reduction. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know that in 1991 the crime rate 

in Saskatchewan was about equal to the national crime rate. 

Under 16 years of socialist government, that crime rate rose and 

it rose exponentially. Now we’re trying to get it back into order, 

so putting money into it is very much essential. 

 

1.1 million in this for the completion of 120 additional police 

officers over our 4-year commitment. When I talk about police 

officers and how we’ve met our commitment, we have to again 

look back to what the socialists did, promised 200 — good 

public relations event — promised 200 police officers. That 

happened in 1999, again in 2003. And how did they make out? 

They never did complete that, so it’s no wonder that the crime 

rate was going up during that time frame. We promised 120 

police officers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and actually provided 162. 

We provided 111 new RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police] positions and 51 municipal police positions. So we take 

crime very seriously. 

 

Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have gone through a period of 

time from the mid-’80s until 2008 where there was not a single 

additional bed added to our corrections system. People on the 

other side will say, well we built a new facility. That was 

strictly a replacement facility replacing the 1913 jail. Since we 

have formed government, we have added a 90-bed facility in 

Saskatoon. Last year’s budget we had a 30-cell, 60-bed facility 

at Pine Grove, the only women’s correctional centre in the 

province. And in this year’s budget, we’ve got money for a 

72-cell, 144-bed facility in Prince Albert. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we were very much left with 

overcrowding that you, really, it’s hard to believe how the 

overcrowding was building. And it sure didn’t happen just since 

2007. It’s been building since the late-’80s and all through the 

’90s. There’s a big deficit in corrections facilities still. But at 

least we’re working toward fulfilling some of those deficiencies 

and adding some beds, which is greatly going to help in our 

facilities. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve heard from members opposite in 



740 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

some of their talks, some of their wording of the past week or 

so, about how this province is going forward and how they wish 

to lay claim to how they got started. They got it started. And we 

hear different members get up and say, oh, we started the 

population boom; we started the economic boom. And every 

time I hear that from the other side, I think it’s only worthwhile 

to remind the people of the province what their ideology really 

is. 

 

And I just happen to have dug out a copy of something called 

the Regina Manifesto. And I think it’s very worthwhile for the 

people of the province to understand what their bible says. And 

this is their bible. This is what they actually believe in. And I 

want to use a few words out of this. I want to use a few words 

out of this. It says, you know, we want to replace the capitalist 

system. They talk about economic planning that will supersede 

private enterprise and competition. They talk about the evils of 

capitalism and even to the point where it says, make possible a 

much greater degree of leisure. Well, we see the leisure over 

there. Everything in this document leads to that magical word of 

socialism. And . . . 

 

[16:30] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I believe previous Speakers 

have ruled that that term is not appropriate for the Assembly, 

and I would advise the member to discontinue with that term. I 

recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m quoting 

that they want to . . . It’s quote, “socialization of finance.” And 

throughout, I’m quoting, “banks must be socialized; insurance 

companies must be socialized.” That’s in their manifesto. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to just run through the end of this, 

because in the end of this is very key. And when they talk about 

they had the plan, and they were doing stuff to actually make 

this province grow, if you were a company from outside of the 

province and wanted to do due diligence, and you did your due 

diligence, and you saw one of the top items on their website 

was the Regina Manifesto, and along with a Bill that 

nationalized, had the ability for the government to nationalize a 

company, would you move into this province? But in the final 

chapter of this manifesto it says, will not rest content until it has 

eradicated capitalism and put into the full program of socialized 

planning. Now if you were a business and you wanted to move 

into this province, would you at all want to move here if you 

had a government with an ideology such as that? Not a chance. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that was their view. That was their 

view of how to do business. Well let’s have a look at how it 

worked. How about some of their business acumen when we 

start looking at dot-coms. And I’m going to tell you how their 

business acumen really worked: tappedinto.com lost 6.7 

million; Persona lost 9.4 million. Navigata — who really 

knows? — probably up to $100 million; Retx, 26 million; Craig 

Wireless, 10 million; Clickabid, 1.9. And it goes on with the 

dot-coms. 

 

But now we get to the fun one. Here is a government at the time 

that wants to socialize even the potato industry with SPUDCO 

[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company]. Now 

this may be the first time I’ve mentioned SPUDCO this week, 

but $35 million for them to invest in potatoes, $35 million 

because they thought they could do better than industry. How 

wrong could they be? 

 

We look at some of the investments like Channel Lake in 

Guyana. They lost a paltry $17 million. Now, now we get into 

the fun one. They wanted to take over bingo for the province of 

Saskatchewan. A loss of 8 million bucks to try and take over 

bingo because they thought they could do it better. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and then there’s the one where they 

invested in the pulp mill at Meadow Lake. Now they used it, 

they used it to prop up a seat possibly. But $800 million to prop 

up a seat? Now members opposite will say, well it was started 

under the previous administration. And you’ve used my analogy 

before — like a horse race. Somebody buys a horse, and you 

bet on it and lose, so you keep betting on it and losing, but you 

blame the guy that bought the horse. It just doesn’t make sense. 

Well that’s what they did with the Meadow Lake pulp mill. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know there’s an awful lot of our 

members that want to speak, so I’m going to close my remarks 

by saying I will be supporting this budget. It’s probably the best 

budget that has been brought forward in . . . Well there’s five of 

them that have been really, really good. But in closing I want to 

make a comment that I think is going to be appropriate for the 

almanac, and my closing comment is going to be, March comes 

in like a lion, goes out like a Lingenfelter. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. From the joy 

of birth to the wisdom of seniors, from the job seekers to the job 

creators, from our first residents to our new residents, from 

north to south, from rural to urban, all of us want our provincial 

government to be fiscally responsible. 

 

Last fall we went to the doorsteps of the people of 

Saskatchewan and we listened, listened as you shared your 

hopes and your fears, your concerns and your dreams, for a 

better tomorrow for our children and our children’s children. 

The people of this province told us that fiscal prudence is top of 

mind, especially when looking at other economies in our 

country, on our continent, and around the world. We listened 

and we are delivering. 

 

Last Wednesday, March 21st, the Finance minister presented 

our budget, our Saskatchewan advantage. Our Saskatchewan 

advantage budget is all about being fiscally responsible so that 

our Saskatchewan Party government can continue to support 

and sustain programs Saskatchewan people value, programs 

such as health, education, and support for those needing a hand 

up, all the while creating a strong, business-friendly climate so 

that entrepreneurs and corporations can create jobs, jobs that 

help people to enjoy life and to raise a family, jobs that provide 

an income so we can contribute to our communities. 

 

We, as a Saskatchewan Party government, are committed to 

keeping the Saskatchewan advantage. This budget does that and 

it does more. It keeps the campaign promises we made in the 

2011 election. Our government has delivered a balanced 

budget. It is balanced in the General Revenue Fund, and it is 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 741 

balanced in the summary financial statement, plus the Growth 

and Financial Security Fund will maintain a balance of $756 

million. Mr. Deputy Speaker, please tell the people of this 

province that they are the reason we have a combo of balanced 

budgets, reduced debts, lower taxes, a growing economy, and a 

tremendous quality of life. Saskatchewan people have helped us 

to create the Saskatchewan advantage. Saskatchewan people 

share our vision that Saskatchewan is the best place in Canada 

to live, to work, to start a business, to get an education, to raise 

a family, and to build a life. 

 

To do this, our Saskatchewan Party government identified four 

goals: (1) sustaining growth and opportunities for Saskatchewan 

people, (2) improving the quality of life, (3) making life more 

affordable, and (4) delivering responsive and responsible 

government. 

 

Sustaining growth and opportunities is supported when our 

municipalities are provided with a full percentage point of the 

PST as promised. This means that our municipality of Prince 

Albert is participating in revenue sharing to the tune of 

$6,661,992 in this budget of 2012-13. This revenue sharing is a 

122 per cent increase since ’07, ’08. This revenue sharing 

eliminates the guessing games of the past. P.A. [Prince Albert] 

can now plan for and support the needs, growth, and 

opportunities of our citizens. I support this, unlike the NDP. 

Obviously the NDP want us to go back to the guessing games 

of the past when municipalities never quite knew what their 

budget would be. 

 

Education is another tenet for sustaining growth and 

opportunities. This budget introduces a new education funding 

formula and increases K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] 

funding to help with the transition to the new formula. As a 

result of the new funding formula and education funding 

increase, all school divisions will see a funding increase ranging 

anywhere from 1.7 to 14.4 per cent. School divisions will 

continue to have the autonomy to fund community schools, and 

existing community school designations will remain. Under our 

new formula, funding formula, the component that supports 

community schools has increased by over 4 per cent, and now 

stands at over $258 million. This vulnerability portion of the 

funding formula will use the same kind of socio-economic 

indicators as before such as low-income, single parent families, 

and now immigration, to estimate the level of student 

vulnerability within each school division. The model provides 

this funding in an unconditional way. 

 

My constituency of Prince Albert Northcote has an abundance 

of post-secondary institutions — from GDI [Gabriel Dumont 

Institute] to SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 

Technologies] to SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology], from U of R [University of Regina] 

classes to first and second years from U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] to the northern campus of the First Nations 

University. Prince Albert Northcote welcomes this 

Saskatchewan advantage budget. 

 

Our government is providing an increase of 2 per cent for a 

total of $12 million on top of the ’10-11 budget amount to 

support operating costs at post-secondary institutions across 

Saskatchewan. Sustaining growth and opportunities will 

continue via our graduate retention program that provides a 

combination of non-refundable and refundable tax credits to 

post-secondary graduates up to $20,000 in tuition rebates over 

seven years. There is a $172.4 million of targeted funding for 

First Nations and Métis peoples. This is a 4.7 million increase 

from last year’s budget. Our Saskatchewan advantage budget is 

committed to improving quality of life. 

 

The patient-first initiative will continue. This budget provides 

$98.2 million more to the regional health authorities. This is a 

3.5 per cent increase over last year. Those that need to deal with 

cancer will be supported via a 138.8 million to the 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. This includes an increase of 

$16.9 million in funding so that the Cancer Agency can 

continue to provide a high quality service that includes drugs, 

operational, and medical costs. In addition, $4 million has been 

committed to expand the colorectal screening program 

province-wide. 

 

Pineview Terrace, located in P.A. Northcote, is one of the seven 

previously announced long-term care facilities that will be built 

using a portion of the $42.7 million for construction of these 

facilities. These long-term care facilities are using the new 

shared ownership model in which government pays 80 per cent, 

and the remaining 20 per cent is the local cost share. 

 

Since last year, there are 5,900 more First Nations and Métis 

peoples with an increased quality of life because they are 

employed in family sustaining jobs. Quality of life has 

increased for 123 First Nations and Métis journeypersons. This 

is double the number of First Nations and Métis journeypersons 

that there were in ’06-07. My friend Florence told me just 

yesterday that her son, a First Nations man, will be added to 

that growing list of journeypersons later this year. 

 

The 2011 election platform resonated with Saskatchewan 

people. That platform identified one of our government’s 

priorities, to improve the quality of life for residents with 

disabilities. This 2012-13 budget increased funding for 

disabilities programming by another $26.4 million. This is part 

of the 308.8 million more dollars that this government has 

provided since taking office in ’07. The Saskatchewan assured 

income for disability or SAID program will receive an increase 

of $17.8 million so that up to 10,000 adults with disabilities will 

have an improved quality of life through access to this program. 

Many people have shared with me how this program has 

improved the dignity and quality of life for their loved ones. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, last fall, if I heard it once I heard it a thousand 

times — the people of Northcote want a safer community. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, we have the Community Mobilization Partnership, 

the first of its kind in Canada. This innovative, multi-agency 

partnership of community agencies, schools, health care and 

social service agencies, First Nations workers, and police is 

creating a new way to make our community safer. This 

Community Mobilization Partnership is getting at the root 

causes of crime and helping to prevent so many young people 

from going down that dangerous path. It is helping our youth to 

be part of the thriving, safe community we all so much want. 

 

Our Saskatchewan Party government’s 2011 election platform 

committed to supporting the expansion of this Community 



742 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

Mobilization Partnership. Last week, Mr. Speaker, on 

Wednesday, our Saskatchewan advantage budget fulfilled this 

commitment of $450,000. 

 

To advance the commitment to improving safety and security in 

Saskatchewan, secure correctional facilities, this budget 

provides funding for a number of capital construction projects: 

24 million over three years to build a two-storey, 72-cell secure 

living unit on the grounds of the Prince Albert Provincial 

Correctional Centre; 9.6 million to complete the construction of 

a 30-cell living unit addition to the Pine Grove Correctional 

Centre for women. The Pine Grove women’s correctional centre 

is the only women’s correctional centre in the province and is 

located in my constituency of Prince Albert Northcote. Earlier 

this spring, I toured both of these facilities. I am very impressed 

at the progress on the Pine Grove expansion and how 

effectively the space is used in both facilities. 

 

This government is delivering on its commitment to improve 

quality of life in Saskatchewan through significant increases in 

programs and services for the province’s most vulnerable 

people. Making life more affordable is another goal that this 

Saskatchewan advantage budget addresses. With the tax 

changes from past budgets that the Saskatchewan Party 

government delivered, a family of four with 50,000 in annual 

income pays less than a quarter of the taxes that the NDP 

charged them. This means that family of four now has a tax 

savings of $2,638 each year. 

 

Child care spaces in Saskatchewan will increase in this next 

term of office. There are $46 million for child care operating, 

which includes a $2 million increase, a $4 million child care 

capital to create 500 new child care spaces. Three hundred of 

these spaces will be located in schools or post-secondary 

institutions. 

 

We are committed to make life more affordable for low-income 

seniors. To help seniors keep pace with the cost of living, this 

budget provides $3.3 million, 24.2 million in total, to increase 

the senior income plan for singles and couples. 

 

Let’s compare the first four years of Saskatchewan Party 

government to the last 16 years of NDP. The seniors’ income 

plan benefit was doubled in our first term of office. In 16 years 

under the NDP, there was no change to the $90 per month 

seniors received. In 2012, under the Saskatchewan Party 

government, the senior income plan benefit will increase to 

$240 per month. That’s $2,880 per year. It will triple by the end 

of this term to $270 per month, compared to the $90 per month 

the NDP provided to seniors. 

 

In a growing economy and with the largest increase in 

population since 1956, there are 65,000 more people now than 

in ’06. Rental housing continues to be in demand. The 

Saskatchewan Party recognizes this need and introduced the 

Saskatchewan advantage housing plan in the 2011-12 budget. 

This budget supports that plan with a further $3.7 million for 

the rental construction incentive and affordable home 

ownership programs. With these programs and other initiatives, 

the province could add up to 10,000 rentals to the market, 2,200 

new entry-level homes, and 650 student residences. 

 

To help people with the cost of a new home, the Saskatchewan 

advantage budget is introducing the first-time homebuyers tax 

credit, which will provide up to $1,100 in non-refundable tax 

credits. In addition the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation will 

provide $1 million to Habitat for Humanity to help an 

additional 20 low-income families achieve home ownership. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Saskatchewan advantage budget continues to 

deliver responsive and responsible government. At a time when 

many governments elsewhere are being forced to slash 

programs and funding, our government has worked hard to 

ensure this does not happen. Last year, our province earned for 

the first time ever, a AAA credit rating. This year, we see 

Saskatchewan’s debt-to-GDP ratio steadily improving. 

Financial decisions were scrutinized to ensure they did not 

increase government debt. Overall spending will be $11.2 

billion, virtually identical to the spending level we promised in 

the election campaign. 

 

Our government has delivered a balanced budget. Saskatchewan 

is the first province to table a balanced budget this year. It is 

balanced in the General Revenue Fund; it is balanced in the 

summary financial statements; plus the Growth and Financial 

Security Fund will maintain a balance of $756 million. All of 

these factors show how this budget is all about keeping the 

Saskatchewan advantage, keeping our election promises, 

keeping our budget balanced, keeping our spending sustainable, 

and keeping our economy strong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure and privilege to support this 

budget. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave for an 

introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you to 

all members of the Assembly, I introduced my intern last week 

or week and a half ago. Now his father, Lud Gieni, and his 

grandmother, Sophie Gieni, have joined us in the gallery. And 

they came down today to make sure that Cody is learning 

something, so I’m going to be interested in hearing his answer. 

And with that, I would like you to make them welcome please. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

SPECIAL ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 743 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s my honour tonight to, or this afternoon to enter into the 

budget debate that was tabled by the Finance minister. It seems 

to be a tradition that you thank a few people that have got you 

here and supported you here, so I’d like to take the initiative to 

do that right now. Of course, right at the top of that is my lovely 

wife, Tami. And she is . . . Of course, we can’t, we couldn’t do 

this job without great support at home, and she does a great job 

being the CEO of the Makowsky family. So I certainly thank 

you very much for that. 

 

I’m sure I’m like a lot of the members here, and certainly the 

rookie members, if you’re in my boat, constituency assistants 

are very important; they’re very nice to have. So I have one of 

the best certainly in Kristen. Thank you so much for all the 

work you’re doing in the office while I’m away, and even when 

I’m there, and for all the people of Regina Dewdney. You’re 

doing a great job, and thanks for coming to work for the people. 

 

Thanks to the members of the Treasury Board. I know they put 

a lot of time in and they do a lot of hard work to put this 

excellent budget forward. I’m not sure they had a lot of choice 

in the matter, but they did a good job. And certainly the 

member from Canora-Pelly, I know he’s put a lot of years in 

this government, in opposition, 17 years I believe. So that’s 

certainly something to be proud of. And I think I have a bit of 

connection with him; we’re both of Ukrainian heritage, Mr. 

Speaker, and he represents the constituency where the 

Makowsky homestead is, and they’re proud to have him as their 

MLA. So thank you to that member. 

 

I’d also like to thank all the people in the building. They’ve 

been a great help, especially to a rookie guy like myself. 

They’ve been very helpful. The only people that really haven’t 

been too helpful, actually, are the people in the cafeteria, and 

they haven’t helped me very much with my diet, Mr. Speaker. 

I’m trying to lose weight. They cook such good food down 

there, it’s a problem. I guess that’s a little bit of my fault. So 

thanks to people at the Legislative Assembly, the staff here. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, with 48 MLAs to speak, I thought I’d talk 

just about the particulars as it pertains to Regina Dewdney, you 

know, and I guess my young family, some of the things that, the 

needs that those folks have. And you know, as I go on my 

journey as an MLA, as I listen to my constituents, one of the big 

issues in Dewdney and certainly probably across the province, 

but particularly in larger centres, is housing. And certainly it’s a 

challenge, Mr. Speaker, when you have more people moving 

here, a growing economy. But as we said on this side of the 

aisle many times, Mr. Speaker, we’d much rather deal with the 

issues with growth, than . . . the challenges with growth, rather 

than managing decline as we saw too much in our past, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Minister of Social Services has done a great job and the 

Saskatchewan housing advantage plan — sorry, Sask advantage 

housing plan rather . . . And I see it right now happening in 

Regina Dewdney, Mr. Speaker, in the Parkview Village. It’s 

being rehabbed with a grant from our government, $8 million, 

and that’s going to bring 71 homes online. If it wasn’t for that 

investment, Mr. Speaker, those homes would have been lost. 

They had problems with moisture. They had problems with 

their basements. And they’re three-bedroom units too, Mr. 

Speaker, so that’s going to be a lot of people off the Regina 

housing authority’s wait-list. Since ’07, Sask Housing Corp has 

partnered with the city and non-profits to develop or renovate 

over 1,300 units here in Regina, and much more to come, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re making good progress. 

 

Another sort of program that came in by this government is the 

first-time homebuyers tax credit. We know on this side of the 

aisle, Mr. Speaker, that increasing the supply is the answer. 

We’re working on the supply side, Mr. Speaker. And moving 

people into their own homes with the first-time homebuyers tax 

credit from rentals, free up those rentals. And I’ve heard many 

times people in our community that they pay higher rents, but if 

they could get into a house, they could probably make those 

mortgage payments. So this might give them a little bit of help, 

and so that’s some good work there. 

 

Working with Habitat for Humanity, I was able to be at a key 

ceremony on Friday morning, Mr. Speaker. And they were able 

to hand over keys to folks that have their own home now, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s just a great program. We have $1 million 

available for that program, which we’ve given several years 

now. So you know, that’s really sort of an anchor now for that 

community. It’s an older area, and to get a new home and a new 

family in there is certainly going to help that neighbourhood. 

 

Another incentive we moved on, Mr. Speaker, was a 10 per cent 

tax rebate on multi-unit starts in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 

Stakeholders have been asking the feds to move on this tax. It’s 

a tax on rental income, and it really does . . . 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 5 p.m., this 

House stands recessed to 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 713 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 713 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 713 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 713 

  Phillips ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 742 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 713 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 713 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 714 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 714 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 714 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Health Budget 

  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 714 

 Spring Free From Racism 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 715 

  Steinley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 716 

 Physicists Participate in International Project 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................... 715 

 Tourism Saskatchewan Awards of Excellence 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 715 

 Education and Employment Task Force for First Nations and Métis People 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................... 715 

 St. Isidore-de-Bellevue Team Wins Provincial Title 

  Kirsch ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 716 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Film Industry 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 716 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 716 

 Tourism Saskatchewan 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 718 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 718 

 Go Green Program 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 719 

  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 719 

 Seniors’ Drug Plan 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 720 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 720 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Expansion of Screening Program for Colorectal Cancer 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 721 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 721 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 722 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 722 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 732 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 735 

  Huyghebaert .............................................................................................................................................................................. 738 

  Jurgens ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 740 

  Makowsky.................................................................................................................................................................................. 743 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


