




















































Hansard: May 07, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 41A  MONDAY, MAY 7, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1427 

 May 7, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 

terms of introduction of guests, it’s a pleasure for me to 

introduce some guests that have joined us in your gallery. I 

have had the chance to introduce some of this delegation before, 

but there’s somebody brand new to the province visiting the 

province that I also want to draw the members’ attention to 

today, if I can. 

 

Mr. Speaker, joining us again today are two of Saskatchewan’s 

greatest ambassadors. They recently moved from Ireland to the 

province of Saskatchewan; it was about a year and a half ago. 

Sinead Tierney and her husband, Howard Morrisey, are both 

here — maybe give us a wave. They, I think, have recently 

purchased a house in Lumsden. In addition to enjoying life in 

the province with their daughter Cara, they have helped us 

mightily in terms of our effort to offer opportunities to the 

people of Ireland who are looking for employment at a time 

when we are looking for skilled labourers from across the 

country and right around the world. 

 

Joining them today, first let me introduce to the Assembly John 

Hopkins who is the CEO [chief executive officer] of the Regina 

Chamber of Commerce. John and the chamber of commerce 

were instrumental in terms of advancing some resources so 

Howard and Sinead could join us on the trade mission, at the 

job fair. And we just want to say to John, we want to thank him 

and his president and his board, his members, for their help. 

 

Most importantly, Mr. Speaker, Howard’s mom is with us today 

as well. She’s visiting from Ireland. She’s from Nenagh in 

Ireland and her name is Breada Dean. And, Mr. Speaker, she’s 

been here for about a month, I think, planning to go home 

tomorrow, and also I believe planning to return many, many 

more times to see Howard and Sinead and probably especially 

Cara. And so we just want to welcome her to the province of 

Saskatchewan. We want to thank Sinead and Howard for what 

they’ve done and welcome all of these fine individuals to the 

Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Leave, Mr. Speaker, to make an 

extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave to make an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s a 

very special group of seven high school students with us today, 

seated in your gallery. These students are the winners of the 

Saskatchewan Dream video contest. 

 

This contest was announced in March by the Ministry of 

Education and the Office of the Provincial Capital Commission 

in celebration of the 100th anniversary of the Saskatchewan 

Legislative Building. 

 

The contest was open to students in grade 9 through 12 who are 

currently enrolled in a Saskatchewan school or home-based 

education program. Mr. Speaker, students were to submit 

written concepts describing a short video based on the 

Legislative Building in Regina and the provincial theme of 

building the Saskatchewan Dream. Three winning submissions 

were selected from across the province. The three winning 

groups of students are here today and will be introduced shortly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these students will be in their capital city and here 

in their Legislative Building for the next three days to map out, 

shoot, and produce their video with help from mentors from the 

Saskatchewan Filmpool Cooperative. So, Mr. Speaker, we will 

see them in the halls and throughout the building over the next 

few days working on their videos. This is a wonderful 

opportunity to engage the students across the province and 

celebrate the historical and cultural importance of the 

Saskatchewan Legislative Building, and I know we all can 

hardly wait to see what they produce. 

 

This group is accompanied today by Gord Heidel. Gord is from 

the Saskatchewan achievement and supports branch at the 

Ministry of Education. So please join me in now welcoming 

these very special guests to their legislature, and I hope we will 

all extend a most heartfelt welcome to them during the days that 

they spend with us in our Legislative Building. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to join with the minister and welcome these bright 

young students that are joining us here today for the 

Saskatchewan Dream contest, along with some of their teachers 

and chaperones. What an exceptional learning opportunity for 

these students, taking a look at our history as a province, the 

history of this very building, its place in the province, and doing 

so with a project that is very experiential and hands-on in 

nature, and utilizing technology here in this province. 

 

I just want to say to these students, thank you for joining us 

here today. Good luck over the next few days. Thank you for 

the videos that you’ll put together, and excited about what those 

videos are, but also their contributions to our fine province 

moving forward. 

 

I’d like to say thank you to the Saskatchewan Filmpool that’s 

going to be working with these individuals. And I’d like to say 

to them and also to the film industry in Saskatchewan and to 

these young filmmakers that we’re working incredibly hard to 

make sure that that film industry is viable in this province. I 

won’t make too fine of a point on this right now, Mr. Speaker; 

it’s of hot debate across sides of this Assembly. That film 



1428 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2012 

industry is important to this province, it’s important to the 

futures of young students like these, and it’s important to our 

economy. 

 

I’d also like to welcome Mr. Gord Heidel that’s up with them 

here today. Gord has a great history in education in Regina 

through hands-on learning, and has a great history of teaching. 

He was at Cochrane High School for many years. He’s also 

quite the athlete and extreme sport enthusiast. Often you’ll see 

Gord Heidel out on Last Mountain Lake as a kite surfer or a kite 

boarder out in the fields of Saskatchewan, out just sort of north 

of Regina. I’d like to welcome Gord to his Assembly here 

today. I ask all members to join with me in welcoming this 

delegation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce 

Lesia Karalash and Sarah Foley from Aden Bowman Collegiate 

in Saskatoon who are winners of the contest from the 

constituency of Saskatoon Nutana. Welcome to your 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in your gallery it’s my privilege to introduce Hayley 

Olson, Riley Hayes, and Kassandra James from Val Marie 

School, and their principal, Angela Clement, who are winners 

of the contest from the constituency of Wood River. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 

my privilege to introduce Dayn Halter and Mitchell Bohn from 

the Kindersley Composite School, as well as their teacher, Lisa 

Padberg, who are winners of the contest from the constituency 

of Kindersley. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d 

like to introduce eight grade 11 and 12 students from the Bert 

Fox Community High School from the beautiful, beautiful 

community of Fort Qu’Appelle. Mr. Speaker, I’ll have the 

opportunity to meet with them after, I believe, as long as I’m 

not too busy in the rotunda, which would be very nice to meet 

with them after, immediately following. I would also like to 

introduce their teachers who are Valerie Brooks and Cory 

Cochrane, and chaperone Terra Smith. So I’d like all members 

to welcome these people to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to all members of the Assembly I’d like to 

introduce a group of students that have come to join us from 

Gull Lake today. We have 14 grade 4 students and 12 grade 12 

students, and they’re in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

going to be meeting with them after session, and I’m just 

wondering at this point who will have the toughest questions, 

whether it will be the grade 4’s or the grade 12’s. My 

experience has been the younger group have the tougher 

questions. And so I’m looking forward to meeting with them a 

little later today. 

 

Accompanying this group from Gull Lake is . . . Well there’s 

two teachers, Neal Boutin and Adele Kirwan, as well as the 

teacher aid, Delee Lindsley. We have supervisors Rob Myers, 

Bev Lich, and Cindy Girodat, and the bus driver — the most 

important person on the trip — Lorna Irish. Please welcome all 

these students to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition calling for greater protection for 

late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know 

that in the early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray 

Wiebe was shot two times and died from his injuries. He was 

working at a gas station in Yorkton, alone and unprotected from 

intruders. But we know provinces such as British Columbia and 

others have brought several safety precautions through law, 

including a requirement that workers cannot be alone during 

late-night, early morning hours. And if they are required to 

work, there must be protective barriers such as locked doors and 

protective glass. 

 

I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

proud to stand today to present a petition on highways, and the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Undertake to upgrade the section of Highway 165 

between Beauval and English River First Nation by 

adding proper lighting for pedestrian traffic, by adding 

space for pedestrians on the highways and its bridges, and 

by properly surfacing the road with the material needed 

for a heavy-haul road. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 

primarily from Beauval and Ile-a-la-Crosse, and I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to education in our province. And the 



May 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1429 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to make education a top priority by 

establishing a long-term vision and plan, with resources, 

that is responsive to the opportunities and challenges in 

providing the best quality education and that reflects 

Saskatchewan’s demographic and population changes; 

that is based on proven educational best practices, that is 

developed through consultation with the education sector, 

and that recognizes the importance of educational 

excellence to the social and economic well-being of our 

province and students for today and for our future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Regina and Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Presenting a petition 

on behalf of Saskatchewan people who are calling on the Sask 

Party government to support the Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of 

rights: 

 

We, the undersigned the residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that many Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed 

incomes and are victims of physical, emotional, and 

financial abuse; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

social and economic security and a right to live free from 

poverty; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights which would 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current regulations 

being enforced are creating a challenge that are a concern for 

our traditional trappers. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued; and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation and 

regulations with respect to trapping regulations and 

firearm use in consultation with the traditional resource 

users. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

It is signed by many good people of Stanley Mission. I so 

present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 

Plains. 

 

Women of Distinction 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday night, the 

YWCA [Young Women’s Christian Association] held their 

annual Women of Distinction Awards. For over 30 years, this 

gala has given us the opportunity to recognize women whose 

outstanding achievements contribute to the health and future of 

our community and are an inspiration to others. The Women of 

Distinction Awards recognizes women in 12 categories. The 

event reminds us of the tenacious and courageous visionaries of 

the past, celebrates the women who are changing the way we 

live today, and nurture and inspire the young women who will 

shape our tomorrow. 

 

I would like to give special congratulations to the Co-Chairs of 

the Women Build — Habitat for Humanity committee, the 

ministers of Social Services and Government Services, as well 

as the rest of its members: Vianne Timmons, Pam Schwann, Pat 

Faulconbridge, Amanda Plummer, Sally Tonn, Megan 

Rumbold, Kama Leier, Karen O’Brien, Trisha Bezborotko — 

sorry if I made a mess of that — Susan Dishaw, and Teresa 

Kendal. This group of determined women won in the circle of 

friends category as they provided women of Regina and 

surrounding area an opportunity to learn construction skills and 

build a home for a family in our community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join with me to 

congratulate all of the women who won, as well as all the 

women who volunteer and give back to our community. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

North American Occupational Safety and Health Week 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week marks 

North American Occupational Safety and Health Week, 

otherwise known as NAOSH Week. The goal of NAOSH Week 

is to focus the attention of employers, employees, the general 

public, policy makers, and all partners in occupational safety 

and health on the importance of preventing injury and illness in 

the workplace, at home, and in the community. NAOSH Week 

was first launched in 1997 based on an agreement between 

Canada, the United States, and Mexico to promote safe 

practices at work. We’ve made some progress, Mr. Speaker, but 

we still have a long way to go to prevent injury, illness, or even 

death on the job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the second highest injury rates 

in Canada, and furthermore, it saddens me a great deal to know 

that last year 37 people had died on the job in this province. 

Workplace injuries, illnesses, and deaths can cause incredible 

emotional, financial stress on individual workers and their loved 



1430 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2012 

ones. There is significant costs also to businesses and the 

economy. 

 

The theme of NAOSH Week this year, Mr. Speaker, is Safety 

and Health: A Commitment for Life! Make it Work. It’s a 

strong message, Mr. Speaker, a strong message that all 

members of this Assembly must take very seriously. It’s the 

responsibility of all of us to promote safe practices at 

workplaces across Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I encourage all 

members to support NAOSH activities taking place throughout 

the province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments Corporation. 

 

Saskatchewan Athlete Plays for Washington Capitals 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 

to rise today to speak about an outstanding Saskatchewan farm 

boy making us proud on the world stage. Braden Holtby was 

from Marshall, Saskatchewan and like many talented hockey 

players, he played for the Saskatoon Blades before being 

drafted in 2008 by the Washington Capitals. He spent the last 

two seasons working his way through the East Coast Hockey 

League, the American Hockey League, and making a few 

impressive showings in the NHL [National Hockey League], 

but not quite cracking the permanent roster. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this may have all changed. Braden was called up 

for the last game of the regular season following injuries to the 

Capitals’ regular starting and backup tenders, and his impact 

has been nothing short of awe-inspiring. 

 

In the first round, the Capitals faced off against the Bruins and 

last year’s Vezina Trophy winner, Tim Thomas. Holtby and the 

Caps dispatched the Bruins after seven games. And for the first 

time in NHL history, all seven games were decided by a single 

goal. Now in the second round with the series tied 2-2, the 

Capitals are slugging it out against the Rangers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many may have noticed that Braden proudly 

wears a Saskatchewan flag on the back of his helmet, displaying 

his connection to our great province. Please join me in 

applauding Braden Holtby and letting him know how proud his 

province is of him. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Roughriders’ Number One Draft Pick 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud to 

rise in the House today to celebrate U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] Huskies offensive lineman, Ben Heenan, as the 

CFL’s [Canadian Football League] number one draft pick by 

our very own Roughriders. Mr. Speaker, this hometown talent, 

grown from Grand Coulee, just a few miles west of Taylor 

Field, became just the second Huskies player to go first overall. 

I understand that Ben has come a long way since his humble 

beginnings as a defensive lineman for the Spartans of 

Sheldon-Williams, and that his first year of playing football was 

a bit of a struggle at times. But by the time Ben reached grade 

11, he had switched from D-line [defensive line] to O-line 

[offensive line]. Mr. Speaker, he excelled. 

Ben has compiled a glowing list of achievements: Canada West 

Rookie of the Year, two-time Canada All Star, two-time All 

Canadian, and participant in the East-West Shrine Game. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, he can add first overall draft pick of the CFL draft 

to his accomplishments. 

 

Like all in Rider nation, I look forward to watching Ben hit the 

field with the green and white, bolstering our O-line. Mr. 

Speaker, I would ask all my colleagues to join with me in 

congratulating Ben Heenan as well as thanking head coach 

Brian Towriss, the Huskies, and the Sheldon-Williams Spartans 

for their role in developing this exceptional player. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

School Safety Patrol Week 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday, May 4th, I had the 

privilege of speaking with a group of 100 school safety 

patrollers from all over the province who were visiting the 

Legislative Building as part of School Safety Patrol Week. It 

was great to meet this group of student leaders and congratulate 

them on the great job they are doing. 

 

Safety patrollers are truly a remarkable asset to our province. 

They dedicate themselves to the safety of their peers, and they 

perform their duties regardless of the weather conditions they 

may face. What they do is vital to keep school crosswalks safe 

for the children of this province. 

 

As a father of three school-aged children, I see the work they do 

first-hand. I am grateful of their dedication and their willingness 

to serve others. I appreciate these young students getting 

involved and helping others at such a young age. Safety 

patrollers spread a very important message about safety every 

time they perform their duties. In fact there has never been a 

serious or fatal injury at a crosswalk controlled by safety 

patrollers. What they are doing is working and should be 

commended. 

 

Saskatchewan has Canada’s longest running school safety 

program with over 6,000 students who volunteer as safety 

patrollers at approximately 225 schools. I’d like to commend 

CAA [Canadian Automobile Association] Saskatchewan who 

sponsored this year’s jamboree once again. They have been 

involved with the safety patrol program since 1951. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing all of 

our Saskatchewan school safety patrollers that work to keep 

school crosswalks a safer place. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Radiothon Supports Work of Health Foundation 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The sixth annual 

Family First Radiothon took place last week in Moose Jaw. The 

marathon broadcast was hosted by the Moose Jaw Health 

Foundation and radio station CHAB. 

 

Over the 36 hours, requests and challenges went out to all 

citizens in a plea for support for medical upgrades to the Five 



May 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1431 

Hills Health Region. This year the funds were dedicated toward 

purchasing new lifesaving equipment for cardiac and stroke 

patients. This equipment will be used in the Moose Jaw Union 

Hospital and the new regional hospital planned to be opened in 

2015. The final total at 6 p.m. on Friday was $287,015. A final 

donation in the amount of over $65,000 from the estate of Eli 

Karmin helped to achieve the goal. Eli Karmin was a former 

news reporter with the Moose Jaw Times-Herald. 

 

Mr. Speaker, health touches everyone, and the generosity of 

Saskatchewan people to come together for important causes is 

most gratifying. The success of this fundraiser is indicative of 

the support of the residents of the Five Hills Health Region for 

the Moose Jaw hospital. 

 

Thank you to the Moose Jaw Health Foundation for their 

dedication and their commitment. Thank you to the hundreds of 

volunteers who donated their time answering the phones and 

accepting donations during the radiothon, and especially to all 

who generously donated for new and upgraded equipment at the 

Moose Jaw Union Hospital during the sixth annual Family First 

Radiothon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Northeast. 

 

Challenges to Natural Resource Industry 

 

Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last Saturday 

federal NDP [New Democratic Party] leader, Thomas Mulcair, 

took the opportunity to label Western Canada’s natural resource 

industry a disease. Yes, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of Her 

Majesty’s Official Opposition believes that Western Canada’s 

thriving natural resource economy is an illness in need of a 

cure. In a desperate attempt to shore up votes, Mulcair and the 

NDP wants to pit eastern manufacturing versus western natural 

resources as a zero-sum game. In fact, Mr. Speaker, television 

host Evan Soloman described Mr. Mulcair’s latest effort as a 

“wedge issue” which merely pits one part of Canada against 

another for short-term political gain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Canada is a nation composed of many peoples and 

many industries. These same industries face daily challenges 

that require continual adaptation in order just to survive. When 

politicians like Mulcair interfere in this process for a short-term 

political gain, nobody wins, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Last Thursday, this House passed a motion asking all federal 

parties to unite in support of the Keystone XL pipeline. 

However, that provincial NDP voted against the motion. And 

why, Mr. Speaker? Because they were whipped by their federal 

masters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the time for divisive politics is over. All elected 

officials should be united in their support for the very industries 

that generate tens of thousands of jobs and provide a high 

standard of living in Canada. Mr. Speaker, our natural resource 

sector is not a disease, and the NDP should be ashamed for 

suggesting just that. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Review of Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s proposing a 

sweeping review of 15 different pieces of labour and workplace 

safety legislation and all of the associated regulations. It’s taken 

100 years to put these laws in place to ensure fair treatment and 

safe environments for working people. In his recent decision on 

Bills 5 and 6, Mr. Justice Ball clearly identifies the lack of 

consultation with working people as one of the main problems 

with the Bills. To the Premier: how is expecting working people 

to review 100 years of labour and workplace safety legislation 

in 90 days fair and meaningful consultation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, because it’s been 100 years is 

precisely why we should have a look at this very important part 

of the economy, very important part of the legislative 

environment for Saskatchewan. And just because it’s been 100 

years doesn’t mean some pieces haven’t been removed from the 

books as new pieces of legislation have been added. Mr. 

Speaker, there are 15 pieces of legislation that impact the 

workplace — both union and non-unionized workplaces. 

 

We think now is the time, when Saskatchewan is in many 

respects leading the country in economic growth, to continue 

that advantage but to ensure our labour environment is fair to 

both the employer and the employee. And, Mr. Speaker, this is 

a consultative process that includes a 90-day period for 

commentary to be made back to the process. The Bill might be 

introduced in the fall if there needs to be a brand new Bill, an 

employment code piece of legislation. And then after it’s 

introduced, there’s even more opportunity for consultations 

because of course it can’t pass, by the rules of this House, it 

couldn’t actually be voted on until spring, a year from now. 

 

We will have an earnest, legitimate discussion, Mr. Speaker, 

about the importance of workplace reform and modernizing the 

labour legislative environment in the province. We want all 

parties to be engaged, including the NDP opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier is trying to sell his 

sweeping review of labour legislation as a consultation, but it’s 

clear he’s already made up his mind on what the coming labour 

legislation will look like. On Thursday, the Premier stood in the 

Assembly and said, “. . . maybe the union [should] do the right 

thing . . .” Sounds like the Premier’s already got his mind made 

up. 

 

To the Premier: why is he dictating the terms of the legislation 

in advance of the so-called consultations? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, individual members of 

the House may believe it’s the right thing for unions to consider 

exempting kids, high school kids, from paying union dues or 

exempting people on low-income from paying union dues. We 

exempt them from paying taxes, Mr. Speaker, dropped 114,000 

right off the tax rolls. 

 



1432 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2012 

But others may not agree, and that’s why we’re having a 

consultation process, Mr. Speaker. It will be an earnest process. 

The initial consultation period is 90 days. July, I guess the end 

of July is the time by which, the deadline by which any group 

or individual has to get their commentary in to the government 

about the questions we’ve asked. And all of these proposals are 

phrased as questions. You might know that, Mr. Speaker. In 

addition to that, if there’s legislation that comes in the fall, then 

there will be another period of months for some consultation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s a reasonable period of time. 

That’s about a year on something as important as one 

employment code, one piece of legislation, possibly, to 

modernize the labour legislative environment in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in his first term, the Premier put 

together labour legislation that violated human rights and 

violated our constitution. Some of the discussion questions in 

the review, such as opting out of paying union dues, are clearly 

in violation of long-standing case law in this country. Others, 

such as hours of work, are issues that have been negotiated and 

settled over the course of 100 years. Why is the Premier 

prepared to waste more taxpayer dollars on court challenges 

instead of defending the interests of working people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we know the NDP opposed 

essential services legislation in the province in any form, in any 

form. In the event of a workplace dispute, they would rather a 

province where the public service could withhold services like 

clearing highways in the midst of a blizzard because of a strike. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we don’t agree. We will make adjustments to our 

essential services legislation, abide by that court ruling, Mr. 

Speaker. On other parts of the ruling, we do not agree in terms 

of a constitutional right to strike. That’s new and, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s not well-received across the country by many other 

jurisdictions. 

 

And in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, we’re taking a year-long 

process now to review the labour legislative environment in the 

province of Saskatchewan, including things like the idea of 

indexing the minimum wage for those who are on minimum 

wage, including things like increased flexibility in the 

workplace if it’s negotiated between the employee and the 

employer in terms of the number of hours you can work per 

week, Mr. Speaker, including things like ensuring the penalties 

to enforce workplace safety are appropriate in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This is a broad-based, wide-ranging consultation that asks a 

number of questions of Saskatchewan people. The NDP have 

all made up their minds. They’re not interested in any change to 

these 100 years worth of labour legislative environment. That’s 

why, Mr. Speaker, this province of Saskatchewan is fast passing 

them by. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Length of Workweek 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government’s 

had five years to index minimum wage, so you could do it any 

time. And they’ve taken their time; people are waiting for it. 

But we know to build a modern economy, we need fair and 

effective labour laws, and that people of Saskatchewan 

throughout our history have worked hard and struggled to 

ensure fairness in our workplaces. 

 

But meanwhile this government is ramping up a new set of 

attacks on workers in Saskatchewan. And an obvious example 

of this is a so-called consultation with leading questions about 

the 40-hour workweek and overtime. My question to the 

minister: has it come to this, longer workweeks? Will this 

government attempt to extend the 40-hour workweek? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have a long-standing 

practice in this province where people have been allowed to 

adjust their hours with the consent of both the employer and the 

employee, and they require an exemption certificate from the 

ministry officials. Mr. Speaker, it’s a system that’s worked. And 

it’s somewhat cumbersome; a lot of people are not complying 

with it because of the timelines that are there. There are 

approximately 1,200 exemptions in the province right now that 

allow people to work more in one week, less in a week. The 

average overall is 40 hours per week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are doing nothing more than asking the 

question whether people want to continue that practice, bury 

that practice, or make it more streamlined or easier. There is no 

preconceived notions in this whatsoever. It does nothing more, 

Mr. Speaker, than ask the question. Mr. Speaker, this is a 

far-reaching, broad-based inquiry, and we want answers from 

people all the way across the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, asking these 

questions are sure making a lot of people nervous about the 

rights that they have struggled for for many, many years. And 

we know there’s no doubt, no denying that labour unions have 

historically brought improvements for workers — minimum 

wages, weekends, safety standards, and even the 40-hour 

workweek. And now we know that this government claims, 

under the current regulation process, employers and employees 

are not able to vary their hours respectfully without requesting 

and receiving written permission from the government. This 

permit process requires reviews and investigations of each 

application. This regulation acts as a safeguard to protect both 

the employee and the employer. 

 

And my question to the minister is this: if the government 

removes this regulation, and the employers and the employees 

enter into mutually agreed upon flexible work agreements, 

arrangements, what protections or regulations will be in place to 

protect both parties? 

 



May 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1433 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve got labour standards 

officers that work throughout the province. The labour 

standards officers meet and review and work with both 

employers and employees, give them advice and assistance as 

required, and make prosecutions where people have breached 

the law. Mr. Speaker, that provision would continue. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we are not committed to do this. We are 

asking the question — nothing more — asking the question, is 

this a cumbersome process now? Does it work? Is this 

something that should be varied? The 1,200 that exist in the 

province right now, we’re saying to those people, how did that 

work for you? Should there be changes made to that for them? 

Should it be an easier process? Are people complying with the 

existing law now? 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what consultation is about. That’s what 

consultation is for. And I’d urge the members opposite to 

participate in the consultation, Mr. Speaker. They will probably 

hear from some of their members as well, and we’d like to hear 

from those members. They can either contact us or they can 

contact those members. We would like to hear in any event, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well as I said, asking these questions when 

they should be talking about work-family life balance, it’s 

making people nervous in the workplace. And we know that 

people in Saskatchewan work hard and they play hard. And 

they appreciate earning a good living for their families, but they 

also appreciate the time they have with their loved ones. But 

apparently, according to this government, they just haven’t 

given enough, and they want to squeeze them even more. 

 

And now this government is looking for ways to change 

workers’ rights regarding fair overtime. And the Premier’s 

foregone conclusions — and he can laugh about it, but he’s 

been giving out a lot of mixed messages — could mean the end 

to fair overtime pay. My question to the minister: why is this 

government pushing longer workweeks and more overtime at 

straight-time pay? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that the 

member opposite was travelling across the weekend and may 

not have yet have had a chance to read the paper. Nowhere in 

the paper does it say anything about longer work hours or 

anything different . . . [inaudible] . . . It asks the question simply 

whether people should be able to have a different process to 

vary hours between one work cycle or another. And the reason 

why you might ask that question, Mr. Speaker, is so that people 

who are on the road travelling, as salesmen or whatever else 

they’re doing, would want to be able to compress their work in 

one week and spend more time at home with their families and 

loved ones as the member opposite is raising. It’s exactly for 

that reason that that the question is being posed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government will stand behind the workers of 

the province, will ensure that they’ve got labour standards 

officers that are working for them. We will ask the questions in 

a fair, reasonable, reasoned manner. And we will go on and we 

will take people’s advice in this province. And, Mr. Speaker, 

what I’d like to do is urge the members opposite (a) to 

participate. And the member in particular, I’d like to ask him to 

sit down and read the paper carefully, and maybe once he’s read 

the paper, Mr. Speaker, he’ll understand some of the questions 

that are being put forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for the Film Industry 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week the film 

industry presented a plan for discussion to the government to 

replace the film employment tax credit. This government took 

that plan, made a major change to it, and introduced its own 

ineffective plan, blindsiding those with whom they were 

supposed to be working. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has a very bad habit. They either 

fail to consult or they pretend to consult. The minister and the 

Premier have said they wanted to work with their industry 

partners to come up with a plan. Then suddenly, in the middle 

of those discussions, the government unilaterally announced its 

non-refundable tax credit. To the minister: why pretend? If he 

and has government have no intention of hearing what people 

actually have to say, why waste everyone’s valuable time and 

energy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

We welcome the member’s question. On Friday, May 4th, 

following our meeting with representatives of the film industry, 

we released a brand new three-point plan that focuses not only 

on the film industry but all creative industries. 

 

The first point is the creation of a new film tax credit that now 

includes all production costs, not just labour as before, and 

applies to digital production as well. This is exactly what the 

industry has proposed except in a non-refundable form, which 

means that they pay income tax on their corporate earnings like 

everybody else. 

 

The second point is consultation with our creative industries to 

develop a strategy for greater use of digital technology, helping 

our creative sector compete both here in Canada and around the 

world. 

 

The third point involves repurposing the sound stage as an 

incubator for film and other related industries, a creative hub 

where new technologies and new companies are born. Mr. 

Speaker, this is in fact an innovative plan that has the potential 

to provide leading-edge support for our creative industries. 

Instead of following, Saskatchewan can lead the way. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 



1434 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2012 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

film industry was surprised and shocked — not my words 

actually, Mr. Goetz’s words — surprised and shocked with the 

government’s sudden announcement of a non-refundable tax 

credit on Friday. The film industry had a program here that 

worked. It was a refundable tax credit. The government threw 

that out the window on budget day and later asked the industry 

to come up with something new. 

 

After considerable work, the industry came up with a proposal 

for discussion — for discussion. But it also hinged on the 

program being a refundable tax credit, the industry standard 

around the world, Mr. Speaker. Instead of holding further 

discussions, the government took the industry’s proposal, used 

a magic marker, and changed it from refundable to 

non-refundable. They might as well put the proposal directly 

into the shredder, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: why is the government forcing through a plan 

that will be completely useless in keeping the film industry 

alive in Saskatchewan and that won’t attract outside investment 

here? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let’s be 

clear about this. In every one of our discussions with the film 

industry, we have been very clear that the old refundable tax 

credit wasn’t viable. It obviously wasn’t helping to grow the 

industry. The industry was seriously in decline. It came at an 

enormous cost to taxpayers, and it was unfair to every other 

industry active in this province. In fact over 98 per cent of the 

$100 million paid out through this program was really just a 

grant to companies that don’t even pay corporate income tax 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Every industry creates economic activity, Mr. Speaker. Every 

industry creates employment, but only the film industry has 

benefited from provincial programs without paying income tax. 

That has to change. It’s time for a new approach based on 

growing Saskatchewan-based businesses, sustainability, and 

fairness. We believe that the new program is a fair and practical 

incentive. We’re confident the taxpayers along with our 

business community will believe that too. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The key to 

succeeding in the film industry is to attract investment from 

across Canada and around the world. That is how most film 

projects are made. In turn that outside investment creates jobs in 

this province that are filled by Saskatchewan people. These 

people pay Saskatchewan income tax. They spend money in 

this province. They pay sales tax. They volunteer in their 

communities, and they contribute to the very fabric of this 

province. All the while they tell our stories and give us pride of 

place. 

 

To the minister: why is he open to outside investment in other 

industries but not the film industry? Why is he chasing away 

investment and jobs and, most importantly, people who are 

involved in the industry and those who benefit from the film 

industry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, every industry creates 

spinoffs, but not all industries get straight-out grants. That’s the 

problem. The key to succeeding in the film industry is to get on 

board with digital, Mr. Speaker, the background conversation 

that the members opposite aren’t understanding. Digital 

technology is changing the way we work, changing the way we 

communicate in an environment that is mobile and fast, 

interactive and virtual. 

 

Adapting digital technology and supporting its application to 

our creative industries, not just film and video but all of them, is 

how we’re going to grow Saskatchewan-based businesses that 

can compete successfully in Canada and abroad. To encourage 

this growth, we need to repurpose the sound stage as a creative 

hub and a centre of excellence, but also gaming and application 

development, music and sound recording, writing and 

publishing — all of the creative industries need to be supported, 

Mr. Speaker. Supporting the film and video sector with a new, 

broader based program that helps Saskatchewan companies 

reduce their corporate income tax in a non-refundable way, is 

an integral fashion, an integral part of innovation, sustainability, 

and fairness, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since Friday’s 

sudden announcement, Saskatchewan film industry members 

have been united in criticizing the government’s recently 

announced program. Kevin DeWalt, a board member with 

Saskatchewan Motion Picture Industry Association said, 

“Clearly a non-refundable tax credit will not work.” They can 

laugh over there, Mr. Speaker, but this is serious. 

 

DeWalt went on to say if: 

 

They stick to the non-refundable aspect of it, this industry 

is gone. There is just no chance that we’ll stay around, 

any of us, because we will not be able to do business in 

this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government isn’t listening to people who 

know how this industry works. If they aren’t listening to the 

experts, Mr. Speaker, then whose advice are they relying on 

when developing policy and programs that could mean the life 

or death of a valuable industry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the NDP would have us believe that Saskatchewan’s 

film industry can’t possibly survive unless we provide it with 

grants that no other industry currently gets. We have a lot more 

faith in the creativity and the resourcefulness of our film 

companies, and so should the NDP. Shame on them, Mr. 

Speaker. 



May 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1435 

We believe that if we provide a significant and broadly based 

program that actually reduces taxes, supports the development 

of the industry-leading digital technology, and provides a centre 

of excellence where all of our province’s creative industries can 

work together and innovate under one roof, then our 

Saskatchewan-based film companies will not only survive, they 

will thrive. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Funding for Education 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the education funding 

formula put in place by that minister and government is clearly 

flawed. The education sector is speaking out and looking for 

solutions. At the end of last week, Saskatoon Public Board 

Chair, Ray Morrison said, I quote, “The province’s new 

education funding formula fails to include a mechanism to 

compensate school divisions that grow throughout the school 

year such as Saskatoon Public.” 

 

When is this minister going to put in place a mechanism that 

properly funds population growth and meets the needs of 

students in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the 

member opposite is well aware, in order to calculate a budget 

allocation, you have to use a moment in time for a student 

enrolment count. And this year’s budget, that moment in time 

was September of 2011. For 2012-13 budget for the Saskatoon 

Public School Division, the enrolment was projected to be 

20,794. When we check these school division stats as of today, 

their enrolment is 20,742. That is 52 students less than what 

they were budgeted for. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — So, Mr. Speaker, the school boards are 

wrong. Saskatoon Catholic, that’s not going to be funded for 

500 students and Saskatoon Public, that’s over 600. The 

minister is right, I guess, and the boards and their directors are 

wrong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have hundreds of students in desks in classrooms all across 

Saskatchewan that are unfunded, putting unnecessary strain on 

teachers and students. To quote Ray Morrison, I quote, “We’re 

looking in every corner (for budget trims.) Some class sizes 

might go up. Some programs might not exist.” Catholic board 

Diane Boyko said, I quote, “I think we’re seeing that we are 

being challenged to find the resources in the existing budget 

within last year (and) that isn’t addressing the increase in 

students.” 

 

Why is the minister forcing increases to class sizes, cuts to 

programs? And just exactly how is this in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan students? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the 

2012-13 budget, greater Saskatoon Catholic budget was based 

on a projected enrolment of 15,097 students. As of today, using 

their data system, they have enrolled 15,152 students. That is 55 

more students. That is approximately one student per school in 

Saskatoon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The minister can spin this any way that 

she likes, but educational leaders are saying something entirely 

different. The fact remains that the education funding model is 

flawed. It’s forcing school boards to make difficult decisions 

that will negatively impact their students. With respect to the 

inadequate funding, Ray Morrison said, I quote, “It doesn’t 

account for the 600 more students administrators expect to walk 

through public school doors next fall.” There’s 500 others in 

Saskatoon Catholic as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Students deserve better than this. The education sector is 

waiting and willing to work with the minister. When is this 

minister and government going to step up to the plate, meet the 

demands of growth, and fund school boards based on the 

number of students in the current calendar year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, year after year this 

government has stepped up to the plate when it comes to 

education. We have made it a priority year after year, and we’ve 

done that, Mr. Speaker, within balanced budgets. 

 

We could go on and on. Let’s talk about the Saskatoon Public 

School Division over the past five years. We agree that they 

have seen 1,203 students; that’s a 6.1 per cent increase in 

enrolment. But do you know what their increase in budget was 

over that same period, Mr. Speaker? Twenty-three per cent 

increase in the budget for Saskatoon public. That is only for 

operating, Mr. Speaker. That does not include all of the capital 

dollars that we have put into the city of Saskatoon, both in the 

public school system as well as in the Catholic school system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have made record investments in capital 

projects for our education system. Year over year we’re at about 

a half a billion dollars now invested, as well as a 21 per cent 

increase in operating. Mr. Speaker, we are making education a 

priority, unlike the members opposite when they had the 

opportunity to be government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask for 

leave to make a motion regarding the appointment of the Chief 

Electoral Officer. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to make a motion regarding the appointment of the Chief 

Electoral Officer. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 



1436 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2012 

MOTIONS 

 

Appointment of the Chief Electoral Officer 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That pursuant to subsection 4(3) of The Election Act, 

1996, Mr. Michael Boda be appointed the Chief Electoral 

Officer effective June 1st, 2012. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It has been moved by the Government 

House Leader: 

 

That pursuant to subsection 4(3) of The Election Act, 

1996 . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I’ll start over. It has been moved by the 

Government House Leader: 

 

That pursuant to subsection 4(3) of The Election Act, 

1996, Mr. Michael Boda be appointed the Chief Electoral 

Officer effective June 1, 2012. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Does the Assembly approve the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the work of committees this afternoon and this 

evening, I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. Tuesday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:22.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1427 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1427 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1427 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1428 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1428 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1428 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1428 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1428 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1428 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1428 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1428 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1429 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1429 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Women of Distinction 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1429 

 North American Occupational Safety and Health Week 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1429 

 Saskatchewan Athlete Plays for Washington Capitals 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1430 

 Roughriders’ Number One Draft Pick 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1430 

 School Safety Patrol Week 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 1430 

 Radiothon Supports Work of Health Foundation 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1430 

 Challenges to Natural Resource Industry 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1431 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Review of Labour Legislation 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1431 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1431 

 Length of Workweek 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1432 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1432 

 Support for the Film Industry 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1433 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1433 

 Funding for Education 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1435 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1435 

MOTIONS 

 Appointment of the Chief Electoral Officer 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1436 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


