




















































Hansard: April 17, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 30B  TUESDAY, APRIL 17, 2012, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1089 

 April 17, 2012 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — The time now being 7 o’clock, the debate 

shall resume. I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 36 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 36 — The 

Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a 

second time, and on the proposed amendment moved by Mr. 

Vermette.] 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. After a 

very nice supper break, Mr. Speaker — I must add that the 

break that I had at supper was with my colleague from 

Cumberland; we had this great meal, Mr. Speaker — I feel 

energetic, I feel enthused, and I’m ready to enter the debate 

again for a number of hours, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to point out that one of the points that I think that I 

closed off as we ended before supper break was the whole 

notion of the question that I asked the Assembly and I asked the 

people of Saskatchewan on this particular Bill, the whole 

question of why would we be excluding a number of, I think 

it’s 236,000 young people in Saskatchewan that are under the 

age of 18 and which this government and this party, the 

Saskatchewan Party, decided that they would arbitrarily 

eliminate from the decision-making process around the 

constituency boundaries or the redrawing of the constituency 

boundaries, Mr. Speaker. And that’s kind of what I want to 

begin the second phase of my discussion on in terms of the 

argument against Bill 36, and that is of course the reason why 

you would eliminate all those young people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 236,000 young people under the age of 18 in 

Saskatchewan probably represents about 25 per cent of the 

provincial population, and you’re going to find that obviously 

that as these young people become more and more up in age 

that they will soon realize that in 2012 this government didn’t 

include them and didn’t involve them in the decision-making 

process around this particular Bill. And that’s what’s really 

discouraging because I’m sure somebody within the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] ranks will tell them that’s exactly what 

happened. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s an opportunity for this 

government to simply give the Bill up and say, the Bill doesn’t 

really do anything for democracy. It’s not what we campaigned 

on. It wasn’t anywhere in any part of our campaign documents 

nor our platform. So I think it is important that if the 

opportunity presents itself, maybe what they should do is 

simply say, all right, you know, the Bill obviously didn’t fit the 

fairness factor. It didn’t pass the smell test, so to speak, and 

maybe we ought to let the Bill go and forever be forgotten. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Bill reminds me of my first goal as a 

hockey player. It was actually in Buffalo Narrows. And it was a 

2-2 game and the Bill . . . Like anything else it was certainly a 

tough game. And one of my friends shot the puck, and it 

bounced off the backboards, and I one-timed it in the top 

corner. And I had to do the shot as such so the puck was 

actually sideways because if I’d done it flat, the goalie was 

there, and there wasn’t enough room between the goalie’s mitt 

and the top of the net. So I had to do it at such an angle where 

the puck went in sideways, and Mr. Speaker, there was enough 

room, there was enough room in there. There was enough room 

in there that I had to . . . I made the shot, and it was really a 

good shot. 

 

And I’m getting to the point of the Bill, Mr. Speaker. And what 

happened was the captain of the other team, the captain of the 

other team said after that game he was so discouraged. He was 

so angry about that goal, because there was only enough room 

for the puck to fit in based on that angle, that he took the puck 

and he took it to the deepest part of Buffalo Lake and buried it 

and dug a hole in the ice and threw the puck, never to be seen 

again. So that puck lies on the bottom of big Buffalo Lake. 

That’s where this Bill should be too, Mr. Speaker. It should be 

next to that puck as a result of the goal that I made in Buffalo a 

number of years ago to win that game in overtime. That puck 

should, will never be seen again, and that’s where that Bill 

should be, tied with an anvil, never to be seen again, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And that’s my point is the same thing that puck represents — I 

think the puck represents the same amount of little space there 

is to manoeuvre that puck at that time — that’s what’s going to 

happen to these commission members, Mr. Speaker, is the Bill 

really indicates exactly what they can or can’t do. And it’s 

much similar to the space that I was given in terms of putting 

that puck through to score. That’s the same principle behind 

this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So if anything, if the Saskatchewan Party want us to do them a 

favour, we will take that Bill, we’ll crumple it up and make it as 

small and as tiny as we can. We’ll then take it to the same lake. 

It’s a fairly deep lake because that’s where a lot of the 

commercial fishing activity happens. We’ll take it to that same 

lake, and we’ll punch a hole through the ice — there’s a bit of 

ice left — and we’ll tie that thing to some other heavy 

instrument and throw that Bill down that hole, never to be seen 

again, Mr. Speaker. And that’s where that Bill belongs, right 

next to my puck in the middle of that lake because, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s not worth the paper it’s written on in any way, 

shape, or form. 

 

So I think that in relation to that Bill, the people of 

Saskatchewan would be very, very pleased if the Bill was 

pulled. I think a lot of people, a lot of families would be very 

pleased if the Bill was pulled. And, Mr. Speaker, I think there’ll 

be a lot of people privately and quietly in the backbench will 

also be very pleased if that Bill was pulled because it’s contrary 

to the reasons I think many of them got involved with politics. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that in relation to this Bill, we have 

spoken about some of the challenges to the Aboriginal 

community, the population being, a large number of the 



1090 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

population being young people and thus not being counted. And 

what you’re doing there, as well, Mr. Speaker, is you’re 

discouraging First Nations and Métis people from becoming 

involved in the electoral process because you’re really 

devaluing a lot of their young people. And that’s what this Bill 

does. 

 

Not only does it devalue people in the Aboriginal community; it 

devalues people in the non-Aboriginal community, in the 

immigrant community, in the communities that are trying to 

make Saskatchewan their home. All of a sudden they find out 

that in the process of how all things work in Saskatchewan, this 

particular government has deemed it necessary to exclude their 

children and grandchildren. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I come from an area, as I mentioned before 

— I made reference to Patuanak, to Pinehouse, to 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, to Buffalo and Beauval, La Loche, Green Lake 

— of how the fact is that in my particular riding this Bill does a 

great disservice to a lot of the young people that live in these 

communities. And the reason being is that as you look at how 

we’re going to determine the boundaries, the constituency 

boundaries, right throughout the North and all throughout the 

province in general, these young people are not in any way, 

shape, or form part of this Bill, primarily because there is a 

political agenda at play here, Mr. Speaker, and people ought to 

know what exactly is happening. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to point in some of the quotes that 

Murray Mandryk said, and I want to make sure that the 

Saskatchewan Party opposition, or Saskatchewan Party 

government hear what the media has made reference to. And 

this is on the three more MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly]. “It’s the stupidest decision and stupidest 

justification I’ve heard from the Brad Wall government so far,” 

Mr. Speaker. That’s from Murray Mandryk who a lot of times, 

Mr. Speaker, does and says things to the opposition that we 

don’t appreciate. 

 

But I need, I need to point out as well, this is what was said, 

and I quote, “It’s the stupidest decision and stupidest 

justification I’ve heard from the Brad Wall government so far.” 

So I think that’s one of the most important things, Mr. Speaker, 

that I think the media is trying to explain to the people of 

Saskatchewan, as we have, is that the justification for three 

more MLAs, the manner in which they’re doing it is not only, 

Mr. Speaker, the stupidest justification as indicated by the 

columnist, but it’s also quite frankly unfair to the democratic 

process. 

 

You and I are aware, Mr. Speaker, that people look at this hall 

as the democratic centre of the province. The Legislative 

Building in its entirety represents a lot of opportunity for a lot 

of young people to become involved with politics, and that’s 

kind of what we want to see. We want to see . . . As time goes 

on, you see more and more of the older politicians, and there’s 

quite a few over there too, that it’s maybe their time to go, Mr. 

Speaker. And what you want to do is have younger, more 

articulate, and brighter people come in and begin to form the 

new political era when it comes to operating in Saskatchewan 

and operating under this dome. So I think it’s important that we 

want to welcome the people of that era to come into this 

Assembly free and unencumbered in terms of how they think 

government should work, of how politics should work. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you want them to make those decisions 

based on good, sound advice when they’re younger and 

certainly good, sound direction when they’re . . . given by their 

parents or grandparents, and certainly informed decisions that 

they can make on their behalf and many others. And you get 

that from an early age based on being involved with politics and 

being involved with your family and so on and so forth. 

 

So I think when you exclude young people from the political 

process, you are making a serious error. It is absolutely 

ludicrous to think that somebody at the age of 15 or 16 doesn’t 

have any kind of interest in politics. Mr. Speaker, it is 

absolutely opposite what the Saskatchewan Party think. There 

are people, a lot of young people throughout Saskatchewan that 

have a strong interest in politics, and some of them are as young 

as eight, nine years old. They pay attention to what happens in 

the Assembly. Some of them take it in school. Some of them 

watch it on TV. They see it in the community. They hear it on 

the radio. 

 

So you look at all the opportunities that they have to be 

subjected to political speeches and political opportunities and, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a crying shame that in the design of the 

constituencies, as important as that decision is, that now they 

find out that they don’t count and they’re not making any kind 

of impact on the constituency boundaries issue. So, Mr. 

Speaker, it is quite clear that this is an assault on the younger 

people and the democratic values that they may have when all 

arguments point that they should be engaged more as opposed 

to engaged less as being proposed by Bill 36. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it was amazing that when I spoke about 

Quebec at length this afternoon, and we used the Quebec 

numbers just to again justify and to illustrate to the public of 

how the other provinces do it. And again, the numbers that we 

use are fairly simple. Manitoba’s got 22,000 compared to our 

17,000, and BC [British Columbia] has got 53,000 people per 

riding. And Ontario being the largest one, the granddaddy of 

all, have 125,000 people per riding. And, Mr. Speaker, it is 

quite clear that we don’t need any more MLAs within the 

province of Saskatchewan. I don’t think we’ve heard that in any 

of the ridings or any of the campaign trails that we’ve been on. 

 

But imagine for a moment, Mr. Speaker, imagine for a moment 

that for once if the Saskatchewan Party would have came clean 

with the people of Saskatchewan and during the election tell 

them we want to add more politicians, imagine the laughter at 

the doorstep, Mr. Speaker. Imagine how many people would be 

laughing most of those Sask Party guys right out of their 

doorway when they come there. One of their biggest, one of 

their flagship Bills is to add more MLAs, and imagine what 

their response would be, Mr. Speaker, to 99 per cent of them 

over there had they indicated to the people of Saskatchewan 

that that was their plan. 

 

And we had an opportunity to watch the debate. We listened to 

the interviews. We’ve seen the pamphlets. We’ve seen the 

advertisements. And nowhere in the entire arsenal of Sask Party 

spending, in the election spending, anywhere was there any 

argument or point raised for more MLAs. They didn’t bring that 

issue up, Mr. Speaker. And now, well four or five months after 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1091 

the election, and now it becomes a real important issue for them 

to do. 

 

So obviously if you look around, Mr. Speaker, there were 

people that were in the loop when this thing was being 

proposed. There was people in their front bench that had this 

maybe figured out from the start. So why, again why wasn’t the 

rest of the team advised? Why wasn’t the rest of the team 

advised and to make sure that they were going to be apprised of 

what’s going on, Mr. Speaker. Obviously the rest of the team 

didn’t know what was going on. And, Mr. Speaker, if they did, 

which I am assuming they must have had some of them 

involved, why didn’t they come forward and tell the people of 

Saskatchewan our plan is to add more MLAs once we got 

elected, Mr. Speaker? And not once did we hear that in any of 

the discussions or the debates or the radio ads that were being 

put out. 

 

Instead, Mr. Speaker, all the Saskatchewan Party done was 

attack the NDP, and that’s typical of their MO [modus 

operandi]. That’s about all they can do nowadays, Mr. Speaker. 

And I go back to that point earlier: yes, you’ve been in power 

for 16 years but it took us 14 years to clean up the mess left by 

your previous Conservative cousins, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s the bottom line. And no matter what happens, the 

biggest problem we have with the conservatives across the way 

claiming credit to the economy or to paying down debt, Mr. 

Speaker, is that they inherited all that. All the tough work was 

done before they got there. And the most amazing thing is the 

people of Saskatchewan knew the boom was coming. 

Absolutely everybody knew, and everybody knows that the 

boom will continue. But the point is it doesn’t matter who is in 

power. These things were set up long before the Saskatchewan 

Party came in, and the process will continue unfolding and will 

continue building, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s absolutely . . . It’s actually hilarious on our part when we 

hear after two or three years — I don’t even know if it was two 

or three years; I think it was about maybe 10, 15 months — 

where the Saskatchewan Party were going to pay down debt of 

40 per cent. Oh, by the way there’s this little account in the 

bank called the bank of Saskatchewan. We’re going to use that 

money to pay down this debt. 

 

[19:15] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you can obviously see that all this was set up 

and they just simply came along and they inherited a great 

booming economy, a growing population and, of course, money 

in the bank to pay down debt to appear to be able to, you know, 

to do something to make the people of Saskatchewan happy. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, sooner or later the point will come to the 

Saskatchewan Party that leadership will be required on many 

fronts. And so far what we’ve seen from them, what we have 

seen from them, Mr. Speaker, this is, this is the session that we 

will see it, Mr. Speaker. After this election in 2011, Mr. 

Speaker, the next two or three years is going to be the 

determining factor in terms of how the people of Saskatchewan 

respond to the Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

And this is one Bill. I think there’ll be a bunch of other poor 

choices that that government will make that will begin to spell 

the end for the Saskatchewan Party. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to again point out Mandryk’s quote 

just for your information. This is a guy, Mr. Speaker, a 

columnist that nobody has any influence over. I know at times 

that the Saskatchewan Party try to sweet talk him and it doesn’t 

work. They have a little relationship with him to try and 

encourage him to smile and share jokes and all that, but it 

doesn’t work. Because obviously when it comes to Bills that 

don’t pass the smell test or the press test, Mr. Speaker, what 

will happen, as Murray Mandryk pointed out, and I’ll quote 

what he said: “It’s the stupidest decision and the stupidest 

justification I’ve heard from the Brad Wall government so far.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is actually from Murray Mandryk, a 

columnist that sits up there and watches how things go again, 

Mr. Speaker, and that is absolutely . . . Some of the points that 

he’s raised, Mr. Speaker, we totally agree. We totally agree that 

it is a stupid decision and it is just a wacky justification as to 

how they’re going to do this particular process, Mr. Speaker. As 

we know, there is something much more at play. There’s a 

grander political scheme I think, and people ought to be aware 

of that. And our job as opposition members, we’re going to 

make sure that people out there know exactly what is going on. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I again do another quote. This was on CBC 

[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] radio of April 12th, 2012 

and, Mr. Speaker, that’s only a couple weeks ago. And I quote 

again, Murray Mandryk: “There is no justification for it 

population-wise or otherwise.” Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s on 

CBC, and now what we want people to do is to call CBC, text 

CBC or text The StarPhoenix or email any of the major daily 

papers. Email the Premier’s office and tell him we don’t need 

more MLAs. We can yell from the highest point in 

Saskatchewan. I’m not sure where the highest point in 

Saskatchewan . . . Cypress Hills. We want to go to the highest 

point in Cypress Hills and yell to the whole province, we don’t 

need Bill 36 because, quite frankly, even the media calls it a 

stupid decision and stupidest justification ever by the Brad Wall 

government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how many more ways we can 

tell the Saskatchewan Party that Bill 36 has got to be the most 

silliest Bill we’ve ever seen ever. And as much as you try, as 

much as you try to justify it, and the more you justify it, Mr. 

Speaker, people out there are going to catch you and they’re 

going to make sure they challenge you properly. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is something that I think is really important 

for the people of Saskatchewan to know that the 

characterization of this Bill and the justification of this Bill — 

not by the opposition who are politically motivated, but by the 

media — they have, quite frankly, phrased it as “the stupidest 

decision and stupidest justification I’ve heard from the Brad 

Wall government so far,” Mr. Speaker. And that was a quote 

from Murray Mandryk on CBC radio. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think as we go to some of the other points 

that I wanted to add to this and I mentioned that the impact on 

some of the communities in our area . . . And I come from a 

constituency of Athabasca that’s got some great potential. 

There’s a lot of people out there that are working, people that 

are really building a good, solid life. They have a lot of 



1092 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

concerns about a lot of things, but in general they have a great 

belief in the future. 

 

And I see, as I travel to different parts of my constituency, that 

there’s some very good parents. There are parents out there that 

watch that their child goes to school every day. They make sure 

that they’re dressed properly. They make sure they have proper 

food and rest and clothing. The list goes on. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they also have a great faith in making sure 

that the land is being taken care of properly. That’s one of the 

things I think that’s really, really important. Because you look 

at some of the challenges, and I go back to my earlier statement 

about the Twin Lakes School students. When they talk about 

the potential environmental problems that the Athabasca tar 

sands around the northern part of Alberta, some of the 

challenges that they may present to the environment around 

Buffalo Narrows, La Loche, Ile-a-la-Crosse, and so on and so 

forth. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, those are the issues that many of the young 

people are actively involved with. They want to know the 

answers to some of these things. And now we hear that there’s 

less and less monitoring being planned. Now we’re hearing that 

the federal government is getting out of that business and the 

province is not going to be picking up any of those particular 

costs as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that people out there 

know that the young people whom you’ve excluded from this 

Bill have aspirations for a greater Saskatchewan. They have 

beliefs that they can protect the environment, and they want to 

make sure that if there is activity on the economic front, that 

there has to be a good balance to ensure that the environment is 

not destroyed and that the environmental agenda is not 

compromised, Mr. Speaker. That’s the most important message 

that I got from the young people. 

 

So I think we’re going to hear a lot by way of a bunch of emails 

perhaps, or maybe some petitions and letters from these 

students, because that’s obviously something that we want to 

encourage. And I think that that message is getting through the 

social media, whether it’s Facebook or texting. And that’s the 

issues that are important. Those are the ones that are really, I 

think, overall justified to the young people that, yes, their voice 

is being heard. But, Mr. Speaker, all they hear from this 

government and this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is that we need more 

MLAs. Now how is that going to make any sense to the young 

people of my riding? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that there is tons and tons of 

opportunity in the Fort Mac [Fort McMurray] area when it 

comes to oil and gas development. There’s a lot of people 

working out there. And we want to see the continued 

development of the oil sands as a caucus, and certainly as an 

individual from that area. However, we want to make sure that 

in that quest to try and get as many jobs and opportunities going 

as possible, we have to make sure we strike the right balance — 

the balance between the environment and the economy. We 

understand that clearly. We understand that there has to be that 

activity. 

 

The economy’s really important to all of us. And, Mr. Speaker, 

the economy is the number one issue with the NDP, Mr. 

Speaker, and always has been, Mr. Speaker. The economy is 

something that’s first and foremost, a lot of the discussions that 

we’ve had over time, and certainly over the many caucus and 

cabinet summits, you know, that we’ve had. And it’s an 

amazing thing, Mr. Speaker, when you look at some of the 

points that the young people raise on the environment, and they 

look at some of the points that we’re raising on the economy, 

that we think that the economy is something that has to be 

embraced and has to be built. 

 

And the most amazing thing if you look at the history, Mr. 

Speaker, look at the history of Saskatchewan, every single time 

that the economy has been on the upswing, every single time 

that things are getting better and things are getting grander and 

there’s great movement and things are happening and things are 

starting to move, it has been the NDP that were in power or 

brought in those changes, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the most 

amazing thing about the right wingers over there, Mr. Speaker. 

They think they created this economy, Mr. Speaker. Fact of the 

matter is, as I said at the outset, they simply inherited the 

economy, inherited the growing population, and of course 

inherited a bunch of money but . . . And that’s the sad reality, 

the sad part of this whole notion of sitting here in the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, is how they have shouted all over the 

place, everywhere they go, oh, it was us. It was us. It was us, 

you know. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the more they say it, the sillier they look. 

But we just smile over there, because the bottom line is as long 

as we leave Saskatchewan in a greater position than when we 

got it, Mr. Speaker, that was first and foremost in many of our 

minds. 

 

So Mr. Speaker, I think that goes to show that, quite frankly, 

that the obvious reaction of a government that knows they 

didn’t do the economy, they didn’t do the booming 

opportunities in the province, that this is going to continue no 

matter who’s in power. We certainly agree with the sentiment 

of the people of Saskatchewan. The economy was moving 

forward before the Sask Party government got there and will 

continue whether they’re in office or not, Mr. Speaker. The 

world won’t stop if the Sask Party’s trounced out of office, Mr. 

Speaker. That work will continue, because it’s the right thing to 

do. And a lot of these companies are making some good 

investments in our province and we applaud that and we, of 

course, encourage that. 

 

But on the flip side, it’s all about making sure that you have a 

government that understands some of these challenges, is 

you’ve got to have a good economic agenda as well. We 

embrace that notion and we support that notion. 

 

So what happens if you don’t have all the plans in place in a 

proper point, is that you want to make sure that you have the 

balance between the economy, as I mentioned, and the 

environment. And in the event you’re not certain if you can 

provide leadership on one front, Mr. Speaker, the natural 

reaction of right wingers is to turn around and try and change 

the electoral process to their advantage, Mr. Speaker. And this 

is the first natural defensive reaction that we’re seeing from a 

right wing government, Mr. Speaker, because that’s exactly 

how they will react if people know out there that it’s not them 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1093 

doing the great job on the economy. It’s not them that has all 

put a lot of money into the debt, Mr. Speaker. It has always 

been there. It’s always been there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So now the next step is to try their darnedest to do two things. 

One is to gerrymander the electoral process, and number two is 

continue on with their whitewashing of how they balanced the 

budget and how they’re great for the economy and so on and so 

forth, Mr. Speaker. We all know, and the people of 

Saskatchewan know the exact truth and the total truth of how 

all this great opportunity in Saskatchewan came about. It took 

years and years of rebuilding. It took years and years of heavy 

lifting, Mr. Speaker. It took years and years of good leadership 

and, Mr. Speaker, during all that time, there was not one Sask 

Party government in power, Mr. Speaker. It was the NDP that 

were in power, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So all that heavy lifting and all that hard work, Mr. Speaker, we 

think, certainly from our perspectives, that no matter what 

happens in the future, it is the right thing to do to work to build 

up Saskatchewan. And so be it if somebody comes along and 

takes the credit for it. The main thing is the people of 

Saskatchewan are benefiting, and that’s the important point that 

I would want to raise in relation to this particular debate, the 

debate on Bill 36. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s why it’s important that we say, look, 

okay, you’ve been putting out all these advertisements. You’ve 

been putting all this stuff in the mail, through the radio, and 

doing all this. And you keep doing it over and over again. And 

your principal action on this whole process is to make sure you 

continue fooling people and telling people, yes, that is exactly 

what we’ve done. We’re so great for you guys that we’ll keep 

doing it, but just keep believing us. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what happens at the end of the day is that the 

people of Saskatchewan are beginning to slowly realize that the 

Saskatchewan Party had absolutely nothing to do with the 

growing economy, had nothing to do with the population surge, 

Mr. Speaker. They simply entered politics at the right time, and 

they’re able to certainly be the benefactors of that myth that 

they’re creating, that because of them there is all this great 

opportunity for Saskatchewan. Those great opportunities for 

Saskatchewan will continue under any government, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, the NDP want to make sure that we 

make that perfectly clear that this is a point that we would want 

to raise from time to time just to remind people exactly the 

history of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

As well, I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that after we have had 

the debate settled, that really the right wingers over there that 

are talking about the great economy, which one fundamental 

problem they have is they never created it, but they’re claiming 

it. But anyway, the problem that we have now is, what do we 

make sure happens to the next step, the next step in our lives as 

the people of Saskatchewan? We’ve got to make choices 

around, choices around how we spend that money, the 

new-found money, how we make sure we continue building on 

the economy, how we make it sustainable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s one of the points I would raise is that what you don’t 

do to make Saskatchewan sustainable is you don’t try and 

create more politicians, Mr. Speaker. You need more workers 

and you need more thinkers. You need more nurses. You need 

more doctors. You need more teachers. You need these people 

to build that growing economy and growing population, Mr. 

Speaker. If you don’t do that, then of course you’re going to 

have more and more problems. And that’s exactly what’s 

wrong with the right wing thinkers over there, Mr. Speaker, is 

they are more tied onto their ideology than anything else. It’s 

not common sense. It is not practical and it doesn’t serve the 

Saskatchewan people’s interests overall. 

 

And this Bill 36, I think, represents what’s wrong with the right 

wingers. It’s as much more about manipulation and spin, Mr. 

Speaker, as opposed to hard work and facts. And that’s exactly 

what we want to separate ourselves from that particular party 

and of course how the NDP operate. 

 

[19:30] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mandryk was quite clear again. He spoke 

about what he thought it was. And I want to re-emphasize, this 

is a guy that we often find the Saskatchewan Party members — 

I hate to use that word — but they kind of smile up to him, you 

know, in a small effort to, in a small effort to try and appease 

him. They say, hi, how are you? Can we go for coffee later? 

You know, that’s kind of the manipulation process I see 

happening, and they all do it. They all smile and say, want to go 

for coffee later? But anyway, and we on this side just burst out 

laughing because you can’t — I hate to use that word — but 

you can’t do that to the media, because the more you do it the 

sillier you look to us, first of all, and they don’t buy it. But then 

obviously despite all the waving and how are things going up 

there and how’s this and how’s that, Mr. Mandryk wrote, “It’s 

the stupidest decision and stupidest justification I’ve heard from 

the Brad Wall government so far.” 

 

So all the waving and all the goodwill and all the gestures 

towards him didn’t pay off. And it never pays off, but they 

continue doing that, and I think that’s shameful in many ways. 

You know, they’re going to report what they’re going to report. 

We don’t wave at them and say, hi, how are things going? Are 

you enjoying the winter? You know just say what you’ve got to 

say and do what you’ve got to do in the papers and that’s it, Mr. 

Speaker. We don’t have no control over that. But anyway that’s 

just how they operate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think one of the things that, clearly from my perspective, 

from my perspective is that you cannot manipulate the media as 

the Sask Party’s trying to do on every occasion they have. They 

try and spin their way out of trouble, Mr. Speaker, and that 

spin, spin, spin’s going to catch up sooner or later. And I think 

this Bill, Bill 36, is going to be the Bill that really brings home 

to the people of Saskatchewan the point that the Saskatchewan 

Party doesn’t know what they’re doing. They do not know what 

they’re doing, so they will naturally revert back to their old 

instincts and that is to try and fix the elections, to try and 

gerrymander constituency boundaries to their advantage, Mr. 

Speaker, and we know that. We can see that from here. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the reasons why we spend so 

much time trying to argue against this Bill, because this Bill 

doesn’t do anything for the people of Saskatchewan. It’s all 

about the Saskatchewan Party and their agenda of politics, Mr. 

Speaker. 



1094 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

So I would again point out to the people that are out there 

listening, Bill 36 is a Bill that doesn’t deserve to be passed. It 

does not deserve any kind of recognition, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 

shameful that that government is going to put this Bill forward 

to try and get three more politicians, three more MLAs at 

millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, when the people of 

Saskatchewan say they don’t want it. They didn’t want, they 

don’t want more politicians. They want more services. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is, no matter how much the 

opposition or the Saskatchewan Party, the backbenchers 

included and the cabinet ministers included and the Premier 

included, no matter how much they try and deny that this Bill is 

not going to create problems, they didn’t run on this Bill last 

fall. They didn’t tell people they were going to do that, and 

that’s the fundamental point that I want to make with my 

presentation is they never asked the people of Saskatchewan if 

they could do this, Mr. Speaker. They’ve done this six months 

after an election, and that election, Mr. Speaker, I think would 

be a lot different today had they been fairly straightforward 

with the people of Saskatchewan in relation to Bill 36. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t go to the doorstep. Mr. Speaker, 

they didn’t go to the doorstep and say, hi, how are you. I’m so 

and so, and I’m running for the Saskatchewan Party. And we’re 

going to bring you guys more MLAs, and we’re not going to 

count your kids so we can achieve the political agenda. And 

we’re going to start cutting services, Mr. Speaker. Imagine how 

many of those guys would be over there had they been truthful 

on that front, Mr. Speaker. That is the point we’re trying to 

make today is, why are you putting forward this whole notion 

of having three more MLAs when clearly last November the 

people of Saskatchewan didn’t tell you to do that? They didn’t 

give you the authorization. They didn’t give you the support 

based on that point. And I think a lot of people within the Sask 

Party ranks are not very happy with that point. 

 

So the opportunity that the Sask Party members could have is to 

withdraw the Bill and let that Bill die a quick death. That’s the 

most reasoned way to deal with this particular matter, Mr. 

Speaker, is let the Bill go. Because we all know — you know 

— how the Bill is structured to be able to be used in a political 

scheme in which the Sask Party may benefit, and that is an 

unfair process for backbenchers to stand up and defend. 

 

And we’re going to take a great interest on how many of them 

stand up and say yes to this Bill when the time comes for 

voting, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to watch. We’re going to 

watch. And if any of them stand up and say yes to this 

particular Bill, then we know that they are a party to political 

manipulation, that they are a party to gerrymandering 

constituency boundaries. Because the bottom line in this 

particular Bill — the question was never answered by any 

members of the government — why did you exclude all the 

young people under the age of 18 from being incorporated 

within The Constituency Boundaries Act to make sure we do 

this process fair and open and honest? 

 

And secondly is there’s no need for MLAs, more MLAs. It’s 

obvious by the numbers that there is no need for more MLAs, 

so why advocate for that? 

 

So we’re going to see how they stand up. We’re going to see 

how they stack up, these great agents of democracy. We’re 

going to see how they get up and defend what we think is a 

fundamental right and see how often they stand up and vote for 

something that they fundamentally know is wrong. 

 

So if they do that, Mr. Speaker, during the voting process, then 

on this side, all we’re going to do is look at each one of them, 

and then forever and a day, Mr. Speaker, we will remember 

their names and how they voted. We will remember their names 

and how they voted, and we will see exactly how well they 

sleep at nights, Mr. Speaker, after that, because we know what 

this is about. It’s a huge set-up for their political advantage, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And that’s the point that I would raise in some of my 

concluding comments, and again to point out that I would say I 

want to end my presentation on Murray Mandryk’s point once 

again. And I’d like to re-emphasize, Mr. Speaker, Mandryk on 

three more MLAs: “It’s the stupidest decision and stupidest 

justification I’ve heard from the Brad Wall government so far.” 

And that’s Murray Mandryk with The StarPhoenix. And I’ll say 

it again: “It’s the stupidest decision and stupidest justification 

I’ve heard from the Brad Wall government so far.” That’s not 

the NDP opposition saying that. It is the media saying that. So I 

think it’s really important, Mr. Speaker, that we bring forward 

some of these points. 

 

And other examples I would use, Mr. Speaker, as in terms of 

how they’re trying to interfere with the political process — and 

that was a question that my colleague from the Saskatoon area 

mentioned in the committee last night when they were asking 

about people running — people that work in the civil service, 

are they allowed to run for some of these positions? And, Mr. 

Speaker, that was a question during committee, and it’s another 

example of how Bill 36 is certainly impacting the attitudes of 

the Sask Party government. 

 

And the Chair of that committee, Mr. Speaker, I believe is the 

member from Batoche, was very adamant in shutting down that 

question. I mean clearly in the committee you’re allowed to ask 

questions on policy and practice, and yet the member was 

steadfastly rejecting any kind of questions on policy. And I 

don’t think that’s within his right to do so, Mr. Speaker. As 

opposition members, we can ask questions on practice and 

policy. Whether the member likes it or not, we have the right to 

ask those questions. Is that another attack on democracy? And 

of course the gentleman kept on and on and on. The bottom line 

is, if you have a question on policy or practice within 

committee, I think the government has the right to answer it. 

And if the committee Chair doesn’t think it’s right, I don’t think 

that that’s right either, Mr. Speaker. The committee Chair is 

supposed to be neutral. He’s supposed to be respectful of the 

fact that these committees are there to answer questions on 

practice and policy of different governments or of the different 

ministries. 

 

So we asked the question, and all of a sudden the question gets 

called out of order by the Chair. What is that about, Mr. 

Speaker? That again is an affront to democracy. It’s the same 

principle behind this Bill. It’s the same principle behind this 

Bill. You’re allowed to ask questions on any issue that affects 

the policy of the government. And when you see some of these 

chairpersons trying to shut down that debate, Mr. Speaker, it 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1095 

lends to our argument out there to the public that this is another 

example of how their misguided perception of how things 

should work, and they rule that question out of order. 

 

I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, in the future, I don’t think the Chair 

should be allowed to do that. If you had a question specifically 

on an issue on a policy or practice, you can ask that question, 

and the chairman has no right to call that question out of order 

because that’s not within their bailiwick to do so, that they have 

to and the minister has an obligation to answer the question 

because a lot of people watch those committee meetings, and 

they want to know the answers to these questions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again I would point out, whether it’s Bill 36 or any of the 

other issues that are being raised, that we have a right to 

question these Bills. We have a right to question a lot of the 

issues that are raised by this government, everything from 

policy to practice. And we think, we think overall that there is a 

lot of issues that are at stake here, and we’re paying a lot of 

attention to what is being happening to this Bill and in other 

practices of the Sask Party government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, again Mandryk, the quote, “It’s the 

stupidest decision and the stupidest justification I’ve heard from 

the Brad Wall government so far.” And, Mr. Speaker, I think 

the people of Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan I think 

share the sentiment of Murray Mandryk. I think we share the 

sentiment of Murray Mandryk. The bottom line, the reason 

why, the justification part of it is what really gets me, is what 

really gets a lot of people. The justification of it, it is just plain 

silly. And, Mr. Speaker, we see right through it. 

 

So on that note, I know it may be disappointing news for a few 

of the government MLAs, but I’m going to take my seat, and 

I’m going to ask other members of my caucus to make 

comments and to join the debate on this particular Bill because 

this Bill cannot simply die on the order paper and just by way 

of a vote to be gone. We need to speak more at greater lengths 

about this Bill. And, Mr. Speaker, I would now ask a member 

or one of my colleagues to assume the debate on this Bill. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to follow the 

member from Athabasca after what’s been an impressive 

speech on many fronts to address a Bill that really does display 

misplaced priorities of this government. I commend the 

member from Athabasca for speaking from his heart actually 

for many hours here today, Mr. Speaker. And I know what 

motivates the member from Athabasca as he looks at the 

circumstances of many of the families all across this province, 

many of the institutions across this province, and he recognizes 

how out of line this Bill is with the priorities of Saskatchewan 

people, Saskatchewan families, Saskatchewan seniors, and how 

out of line it is to serving those proud institutions here in this 

province — education, health care — right across the piece, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I certainly see it as an important debate to enter, so I’m 

pleased to do so, but I’m disappointed that we’re debating a Bill 

that shouldn’t be before us, a Bill and matters that were never 

put before Saskatchewan people. It’s a matter of being straight 

with Saskatchewan people and something Saskatchewan people 

expect. When just a few months back, as Saskatchewan people 

went to the polls and the Saskatchewan Party put forward their 

message to voters, not once in that platform was there a 

mention of excluding youth in elections moving forward, from 

electoral boundaries. Not a mention was there to spend millions 

of dollars to increase the number of politicians in 

Saskatchewan. In fact not a mention of cuts that were pending 

from this government in health care and in education and 

increases to costs for Saskatchewan families and seniors all 

across Saskatchewan. So it’s with great disappointment that we 

enter this debate because quite simply what we see, the actions 

of this government, the budget of this government, this Bill in 

itself isn’t what Saskatchewan people bargained for. Certainly 

not what they voted for. 

 

When we look at the Bill and specific aspects of it that are such 

a concern, certainly it’s that exclusion of youth, exclusion of 

children here in Saskatchewan, but it’s also adding more 

politicians at the cost of millions of dollars as we move forward 

for many, many years, Mr. Speaker — this at a time where 

Saskatchewan people are being asked to do with less and to pay 

more, Mr. Speaker. It’s unacceptable, and it certainly reflects 

priorities that are inconsistent with those Saskatchewan people 

that we know all across this province, in all ridings I should 

say, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with respect to Bill 36, the Bill that has been put forward, a 

Bill that has been a surprise and a disappointment to 

Saskatchewan people, that was sprung upon Saskatchewan 

people to spend millions of their tax dollars to increase the 

number of politicians, Mr. Speaker, we’ve put forward an 

amendment to that Bill, and that amendment reads as follows: 

 

“this House declines to give second reading to Bill No. 

36, An Act to amend The Constituency Boundaries Act, 

1993 because 

 

The Bill excludes, in determining the constituency 

boundaries, the counting of the young people of 

Saskatchewan, who deserve to be counted to determine 

the representation within this Legislative Assembly; 

and further 

 

The Bill increases the number of members of this 

Legislative Assembly by three, which is an 

unnecessary increase of politicians to represent the 

people of Saskatchewan.” 

 

[19:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t agree more with the amendment 

that we put forward on behalf of Saskatchewan people, hearing 

from Saskatchewan people to champion the true issues that 

Saskatchewan people care about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’m incredibly disappointed that here we are at 7:46 on 

Tuesday, April 17th, continuing to debate a Bill that should 

simply be pulled from this Legislative Chamber, a Bill that 

should simply be withdrawn, a Bill, Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t 

have the best interests of Saskatchewan people at heart but is all 

about political games and the best interests and political 



1096 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

fortunes of that party in government opposite, Mr. Speaker. A 

Bill and changes, Mr. Speaker, that exclude youth, the voice of 

youth, the importance of youth all across Saskatchewan, 

exclude them from being counted in the electoral redistribution 

process and in the count, Mr. Speaker, and a Bill that spends 

millions of dollars as we move forward to increase the number 

of politicians in Saskatchewan at a time, Mr. Speaker, where 

this government is asking Saskatchewan people to pay more 

and expect less. 

 

This is about elections today, Mr. Speaker, but it’s also about 

elections into the future. And when we look at the youth all 

across this province and what they mean to our economy and to 

our social well-being, Mr. Speaker, to the future of this 

province, we need to make sure that they are front and centre in 

the policy debates of this Chamber and of elections. To 

discount that voice, to exclude that voice, Mr. Speaker, is a 

shameful exercise and something this government’s being taken 

to task for, not just but us, Mr. Speaker, but by Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in many ways it’s those very youth, those 

children all across Saskatchewan for whom have specific needs 

in our constituencies that we should be evaluating when we’re 

deriving policy, making decisions around resources by way of 

the budget. And it’s disappointing and shameful, Mr. Speaker, 

to see a government not only discount that voice, but also by 

way of their budget to sort of put youth and children and 

families, Mr. Speaker, the matters that are important to them, to 

the back of the bus. 

 

And when we look at adding seats, MLAs to this province, Mr. 

Speaker, at this point in time it’s simply the wrong approach. 

It’s out of line with Saskatchewan people, what Saskatchewan 

people are calling for, what Saskatchewan people expect, and 

it’s certainly out of touch with Saskatchewan people, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s fair to say that quite simply it doesn’t add up and 

it doesn’t make sense. 

 

When we look at the actual counts, it’s interesting to look at the 

number of constituents in each of the provinces, the average 

number of constituents for the respective provinces. Here we 

are right now as already the most highly represented province 

in Canada making these changes. So it’s not as though this is 

rectifying some sort of representative injustice, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s quite the opposite. We’re already highly represented in 

Saskatchewan, which is why Saskatchewan people, who are 

very common sense people, question why this government 

would be adding more MLAs, more politicians with this in 

mind at a time where they’re asking Saskatchewan people to, as 

I say, expect less and pay more, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But by way of comparison, in Saskatchewan the number of, I 

guess comparing to other provinces, in British Columbia they 

have 2.9 times more the number of constituents than we do in 

our ridings here, Mr. Speaker. So basically three times more 

constituents than we have. With that in mind in British 

Columbia, how does this government justify pushing forward 

the advancement of millions of dollars of Saskatchewan 

people’s money to increase the number of politicians, Mr. 

Speaker? So British Columbia has three times more 

constituents than we have in our ridings. 

 

Now we could look next door. You might say, well maybe it’s 

different with our western neighbour, being Alberta. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s not. Alberta in fact has 2.5 times more constituents 

in their ridings than we do as MLAs here in Saskatchewan. So 

British Columbia, 2.9, almost three times more constituents in 

their ridings than we do right now; in Alberta, 2.5 times more, 

Mr. Speaker. So our western neighbours, Mr. Speaker, we have 

much, much, we have much smaller ridings than they have, 

many fewer constituents in those ridings, and certainly doesn’t 

provide any justification for this government to be pushing 

forward to increase the number of politicians, further reducing 

the number of constituents that we represent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Something that I’d argue that we can . . . The current number of 

constituents within a riding, certainly it allows us to have 

significant outreach and touch, and to understand what’s 

important to our constituents, and to represent them well, which 

in part, Mr. Speaker, is what we’re doing here tonight. It’s 

because of that understanding, because of that connection, Mr. 

Speaker, that we know how out of line the legislation that’s 

been put forward is; we know how out of line the actions of this 

government are. 

 

When we look at Ontario, Mr. Speaker, if you can imagine, it’s 

almost seven times more the number of constituents in their 

ridings per MLA than we have here in Saskatchewan. Almost 

seven times more — 6.7 times what we have here in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And this government thinks that 

we should be adding more MLAs here in Saskatchewan so that 

we have even fewer constituents in those ridings, Mr. Speaker, 

only to serve their own political best interest, Mr. Speaker, with 

no regard for Saskatchewan people and the priorities that are 

important to Saskatchewan people. 

 

Choosing to spend millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, to advance 

their own political best interest at the same time as they’re 

hiking the costs of prescription drugs for seniors, Mr. Speaker, 

at the same time as they’re leaving many classrooms, Mr. 

Speaker, facing cuts within the classroom for students, Mr. 

Speaker, facing the prospect of school closures, Mr. Speaker — 

all sorts of matters that are important and unaddressed and 

underfunded by this government, Mr. Speaker. It’s a question 

of choices. It’s a question of priorities. 

 

I heard something ridiculous from the Premier, Mr. Speaker, on 

this matter. The Premier somehow tried to suggest that by 

spending millions more on adding more politicians that this 

wouldn’t cost us any more. Well, Mr. Speaker, it simply 

displays the Premier’s and the Sask Party’s math on this front, 

Mr. Speaker. How does that work, Mr. Speaker? How do you 

spend more money, but not have it cost Saskatchewan people 

more? 

 

Now if the Premier and if the Sask Party is somehow 

suggesting that there are savings to be had somewhere else in 

their executive offices, Mr. Speaker, in their executive offices, 

Mr. Speaker — where in fact I know staff took 100 per cent 

increases in pay where Saskatchewan people have seen less 

than the rate of inflation, where minimum wage earners are 

locked in, Mr. Speaker, where in the Premier’s office they’ve 

seen a doubling of that pay, and all across those executive 

offices, Mr. Speaker — if the Premier is suggesting that he can 

find some savings in those offices, his political offices, Mr. 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1097 

Speaker, I would agree. And I’d encourage him to find those 

savings and I’d encourage him to make sure that those savings 

are either had and felt by Saskatchewan people or redistributed 

to priorities that matter to Saskatchewan people, certainly not to 

fund this exercise that is nothing more than serving up the 

political best interests, partisan best interests of this 

government. 

 

It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. Not only does it display early in a 

mandate for a government with a large majority, Mr. Speaker, a 

lack of focus on Saskatchewan people, a lack of compassion for 

Saskatchewan people. It shows that a government is, this 

government, the Sask Party government is, it would appear, a 

tad out of touch with Saskatchewan people, maybe more than a 

tad, Mr. Speaker. It seems that this government’s changed in 

many ways, Mr. Speaker, when you see what they offered up in 

the fall election and now what they’re doing on so many fronts, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the fact that this government is spending time in this 

House to force through the expenditure of millions of dollars 

through this Bill to increase the number of politicians, to 

exclude youth, Mr. Speaker, and to have this debate occupy this 

floor of this Assembly instead of having us being able to turn 

our attention to the matters that are important to Saskatchewan 

people and having that government spend its time in prioritizing 

what matters to Saskatchewan people, is disappointing. 

 

So I go on. It’s not just British Columbia that has far larger 

ridings by way of population. It’s not just Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s not just Ontario. It’s also Quebec, Mr. Speaker, that has 3.5 

times the number of constituents than we do here in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Or we can look at Nova Scotia, 

which is in a similar circumstance. Well they’re not putting 

forward this sort of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So if you look across the provincial perspective across Canada, 

Mr. Speaker, we are incredibly out of line by adding more 

MLAs, reducing the number of our constituents, Mr. Speaker, 

and it’s incredibly inconsistent with any of the other provinces. 

To somehow suggest that this is in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people is simply not being straight, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we look at those specific ridings and we look at the 

actual number of people that we represent, Mr. Speaker, the 

average per seat, in Saskatchewan we have just over, well 

closer to 18,000 — 17,810 constituents, Mr. Speaker. In British 

Columbia, Mr. Speaker, they represent 51,764 constituents, Mr. 

Speaker. And it just doesn’t make sense, Mr. Speaker, that with 

that sort of comparison that this government thinks that we 

should represent fewer, Mr. Speaker, that somehow we need 

more politicians, Mr. Speaker, instead of addressing the needs 

of Saskatchewan people. 

 

I have no idea, Mr. Speaker, I have no idea how members 

opposite justify to their constituents that somehow when here in 

Saskatchewan with . . . I’ll use British Columbia. Here we 

represent close to 18,000 constituents, Mr. Speaker. In Alberta 

next door, they represent 43,915 constituents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Far more than twice the amount. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — And the member from, I was going to 

say Nutana, from Riversdale states that that’s far more than 

twice that, Mr. Speaker, and certainly it is. It’s actually two and 

a half times, Mr. Speaker, what we represent. And then 

somehow we’re supposed to accept from members opposite, 

Mr. Speaker, that we should be spending millions of taxpayers’ 

hard-earned dollars here in Saskatchewan to increase the 

number of politicians, Mr. Speaker. Doesn’t make sense. It 

doesn’t add up. It’s not consistent with the priorities of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

When we think of those priorities of Saskatchewan people, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s interesting because certainly there’s opportunities 

for us to be addressing some of those needs and pressures that 

are out there. I know in the member from Arm River-Watrous’s 

riding that the school of Nokomis, an important institution to 

that community, is of great concern and at great risk of closing 

right now, Mr. Speaker. And this government has taken over 

education funding in this province, Mr. Speaker. And they’re 

sitting on their hands as it relates to education funding and 

responding to some of the needs in education, but they’re not 

sitting on their hands when they’re voting forward this Bill and 

speaking in their caucus to spend millions of dollars on 

increasing the number of politicians, Mr. Speaker. Doesn’t 

make sense. Doesn’t add up. It’s not fair to the people of 

Nokomis. It’s not fair to the people of Saskatchewan all across 

this fine province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when we look at the actual number of people in these 

ridings, I thought that Ontario was a striking example. And in 

Ontario . . . Here in Saskatchewan, remembering that we 

represent roughly 18,000 constituents in each of our ridings, 

lowest in Canada, so we have the closest touch, if you will, Mr. 

Speaker, to our constituents. No problem to fix here if you will, 

Mr. Speaker. But in Ontario, instead of having 18,000 members 

in each riding, Mr. Speaker, they have in fact 120,112 

constituents. 

 

Now the members on this side, Mr. Speaker, and I saw a few of 

them gasping on that side, Mr. Speaker, were saying, well are 

you . . . They were questioning, is that the right number off . . . 

Is that the right data, Mr. Speaker? It’s correct. I’m just going to 

make sure that I’m reading that into the record correctly. That’s 

120,112 constituents, Mr. Speaker. That’s Ontario, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s 6.7 times larger by way of population than our 

ridings, Mr. Speaker. How ridiculous does it seem, Mr. 

Speaker, for the Premier, for this government to suggest that 

somehow we’re under-represented when British Columbia has 

three times the number of members, when we have Alberta 

which is two and a half times the number of population in their 

ridings, Mr. Speaker? It speaks to misplaced priorities. 

 

[20:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll just highlight again the Bill here that’s been 

put forward. Here in Saskatchewan of course we went through 

an election in the fall. We also had a Throne Speech. What we 

never heard in that election and what we never saw in that 

Throne Speech was any mention of this plan of the Premier and 

government’s to add the politicians, three more politicians to 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And also to exclude the voice of 

young people, Mr. Speaker. Young people with bright futures 

in this province and bright individuals for whom we must 

endeavour to represent, for whom we must endeavour to make 



1098 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

sure their needs and priorities are put forward in the policy 

discussions in this Chamber, in the legislative discussions of 

government, and certainly in the budgetary discussions 

allocating resources to priorities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we see a government that didn’t suggest they were going to 

do this in the election. They didn’t have it anywhere in their 

platform. They didn’t have it anywhere in their Throne Speech. 

And then, surprise, surprise, and with great disappointment to 

Saskatchewan people, they push forward a Bill to spend 

millions of dollars to increase the number of politicians here in 

Saskatchewan and also to exclude youth, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

simply wrong. It’s the wrong direction to go, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when we could compare some of those numbers, Mr. 

Speaker, to what we have here in Saskatchewan, in 

Saskatchewan on average we represent just under 18,000 

constituents in each of our ridings. Now the Premier . . . We’re 

actually the lowest; we have the smallest ridings in all of 

Canada, Mr. Speaker, thereabouts by way of the data for 

electoral representation. And the Premier somehow thinks that 

he should be pushing forward, Mr. Speaker, adding three more 

politicians that will cost Saskatchewan people millions of 

dollars at a time where other provinces certainly serve many 

much larger constituencies. I’ll highlight these a little bit here. 

 

In British Columbia, the number of constituents are in fact 

51,764, Mr. Speaker, which is 2.9 or 3 times larger than what 

we represent here in Saskatchewan. It’s simply the wrong 

approach to go, Mr. Speaker. No mention of it in the election. 

No mention of it in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. It does 

come down to a matter of being straight and forthright with 

Saskatchewan people, and certainly in this circumstance this is 

a matter of choices that aren’t consistent with what matters to 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

We saw in fact in the recent budget, Mr. Speaker, significant 

added expenditure to . . . or cost added to the lives of 

Saskatchewan people. So at a time where this government is 

increasing the number of politicians and spending millions of 

dollars to do so, they’re adding costs to Saskatchewan families 

all across this province, cutting services all across this province, 

Mr. Speaker, and to fix a problem that doesn’t exist as it relates 

to the best interests of Saskatchewan people, but are serving up 

the partisan political interests of their own party, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s not how choices should be made. That’s not how 

legislation should be made, and this legislation and these moves 

are offside with Saskatchewan people. 

 

When we look at some of the other provinces, Mr. Speaker, in 

fact it’s Ontario that has 6.7 times the number of constituents 

that we represent, Mr. Speaker. So when we represent just 

under 18,000, those in Ontario in fact represent over 120,000 

people, Mr. Speaker, more than 100,000 more constituents than 

we have, Mr. Speaker. How does that square? How does the 

member from Last Mountain-Touchwood, who I think is a good 

person, how does he allow to push this Bill forward at a time 

where he’s got a highway along Earl Grey that needs to be 

fixed, Mr. Speaker? To spend millions of dollars to increase the 

number of politicians, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t mesh with the 

priorities of Saskatchewan people and certainly not in his 

riding, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we look at this, the Bill excludes the, in the 

determination of constituency boundaries, youth as well, Mr. 

Speaker. And youth, being the bright future to this province, 

Mr. Speaker, also have needs that need to be represented, 

voices that need to be heard, and they’re individuals that should 

be engaged, Mr. Speaker. That’s how we’re going to be 

stronger as a province. It’s how we’re going to be able to make 

improvements, Mr. Speaker. Instead we see a government 

excluding the voice of youth and taking away the importance of 

their voice in these matters, discounting their voice as policies 

are being debated, as legislation gets debated and budgets form, 

Mr. Speaker. We believe that’s simply wrong. 

 

And as the member from Athabasca has highlighted so well, 

Mr. Speaker, in debate here today, no one’s been calling for 

this. And I look to members opposite. Have they had a single 

constituent ever come to them to request an increase in the 

number of politicians? I’m looking to members opposite here. 

And are you . . . Looking to members opposite, if they’re 

comfortable to go onto the record here with this. 

 

I see the member from Biggar who put his hand up, who has 

suggested that in his constituency someone came to him, Mr. 

Speaker, and said that they wanted more politicians, Mr. 

Speaker. Well I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker, if that wasn’t the 

member from Kindersley that drove over to the member from 

Biggar’s office, Mr. Speaker, and told them that they should 

support more politicians. That might have been who spoke to 

the member from Biggar, Mr. Speaker. But I can’t imagine a 

constituent in Saskatchewan, a person in Saskatchewan calling 

for an increase in the number of politicians. 

 

What I can say, Mr. Speaker, and we as politicians, as 

legislators, we as MLAs, we meet with Saskatchewan people on 

an ongoing basis. We do so in community forums. We do so at 

schools. We do so in the houses of Saskatchewan people. We 

do so at chamber of commerce meetings. We do so in union 

halls. We do so on the doorsteps of Saskatchewan people, Mr. 

Speaker. We do it all across this province. And I can say with 

all sincerity, Mr. Speaker, I have never had somebody share 

with me that they think we should increase the number of 

politicians, short of the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we never heard a sniff of this, Mr. Speaker, in the last 

election, Mr. Speaker, from a government that put forward a 

message of something very different in the election. They said 

it was a time of boom and prosperity. This is what we heard 

about in the election. We saw the glossy brochures. They came 

out and had fancy slogans and were pretty slick, Mr. Speaker. 

But what we’ve seen in the months following, Mr. Speaker, is a 

government that’s moved forward with actions that certainly 

aren’t in the best interests of Saskatchewan people, but in no 

way resemble as well what they offered up in the election. A 

complete disconnect from what was printed in the material of 

this party, Mr. Speaker, now what they’re asking Saskatchewan 

people to accept. 

 

So it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan people at the 

very base of it are common sense people who expect you to be 

straight with them, Mr. Speaker. And I think that’s why 

Saskatchewan people are so upset about this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

so upset with the expenditure of millions of dollars, their tax 

dollars, Mr. Speaker, to increase the number of politicians when 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1099 

we already have the fewest constituents in Canada per riding, 

Mr. Speaker. Not just by a few, Mr. Speaker, but by, in the case 

of Ontario, we have more than 100,000 fewer in each of our 

ridings, and in most cases two or three times fewer than 

anywhere else in Canada. 

 

But what does this government do after it’s won a big mandate 

and come in after the fall election? You would think that they’d 

roll their sleeves up, that they’d put their ear to the ground, that 

they’d listen to Saskatchewan people, and that they’d serve 

their best interests or at least fulfill the mandate that they 

earned, Mr. Speaker. Well we don’t see any of that, Mr. 

Speaker. In fact we see something entirely different. It’s not 

what voters bargained for in the past. I’m hearing many people 

saying that they’re seeing some change in this government, 

something different, something that wasn’t offered up in the 

fall. 

 

And it’s understanding, Mr. Speaker, when at the same time as 

this government is pushing forward a Bill that recklessly and 

short-sightedly spends millions of taxpayers’ dollars to increase 

the number of politicians, that they’re asking Saskatchewan 

people to pay more, Mr. Speaker, and expect less. Putting 

forward a budget that makes cuts to seniors, makes cuts in 

education, makes cuts in the classroom, makes cuts in health 

regions all across Saskatchewan as it relates to those critical 

health services, Mr. Speaker, but at the same very time is 

spending millions of dollars, by their own choice, Mr. Speaker, 

to spend millions of dollars to increase the number of 

politicians, Mr. Speaker. It’s awfully disappointing for 

Saskatchewan people. And I can understand the rightful 

disappointment, the rightful outrage in some circumstances, Mr. 

Speaker, from what we’re hearing from Saskatchewan people. 

 

Now I hear it in my riding, Mr. Speaker. I’ve heard it from 

many. In fact I haven’t come across a single person yet, when 

I’ve been speaking about this, that somehow thought it’s in our 

best interest to spend millions on adding more politicians, but 

then cutting in the classroom or cutting in the emergency rooms 

or cutting the ability to retain the local doctor, Mr. Speaker, or 

adding costs to seniors, Mr. Speaker, by way of prescription 

drug increases that have been pushed forward by this 

government, Mr. Speaker. That’s what this government’s been 

doing. None of it was in the election material in the fall, Mr. 

Speaker. None of it was what the . . . reflecting the mandate that 

this government had earned, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What they didn’t say in the fall campaign, Mr. Speaker, was 

that they were going to spend millions on politicians, but cut 

the film economy in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, to cut an 

economy in an industry, Mr. Speaker, that employs thousands 

in Saskatchewan, has employed thousands, Mr. Speaker, in 

Saskatchewan, has provided important investment to our 

economy, Mr. Speaker. I know that to be true in Canora. I know 

that to be true in Moose Jaw. I know that to be true all across 

this province, Mr. Speaker, but to be making a cut, Mr. 

Speaker, that in fact provided an economic return, a net benefit 

to the province, if you will, Mr. Speaker, at the same time is 

spending millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, if you can imagine, 

if you can imagine, to increase the number of politicians when 

we have, Mr. Speaker, the smallest population, ridings by way 

of population, in Canada. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are 

hard-working people. I think if they looked at the riding 

examples all across Canada, they would expect their MLAs, 

their politicians to be the same. I don’t think Saskatchewan 

people look for the easy way out. I don’t think they look for the 

way to work less. I think Saskatchewan people are determined, 

hard-working people and I think it’s a disappointment. And 

that’s what I’m hearing from Saskatchewan people, that 

somehow the government opposite, Mr. Speaker, is trying to 

create sort of a cushier environment somehow for politicians, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s inappropriate. It’s out of line with the hard 

work that Saskatchewan people do. It’s out of line with the 

DNA of Saskatchewan people that I know, not just in rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but in urban Saskatchewan and all 

across this fine province, Mr. Speaker. And I think we can do 

better than this, Mr. Speaker. And I find it a great 

disappointment that we’re sitting . . . standing on the floor of 

this Chamber debating this Bill instead of it being withdrawn 

and pulled, Mr. Speaker, many weeks before. I mean it was a 

disappointment in general that it was ever introduced, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

With that being said, this government’s had ample time to do 

the right thing. We continue to extend and call on this Premier, 

this government, to do the right thing and to yank this Bill. 

Bigger government is what this governments driving by way of 

politicians, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. I never 

saw that in the member from Thunder Creek’s literature in the 

fall election. What I saw was a glossy brochure, a good looking 

picture . . . looked good on it, Mr. Speaker, and sort of snappy 

slogans, Mr. Speaker, about moving forward and boom and all 

this sort of stuff, Mr. Speaker. But nowhere in there, Mr. 

Speaker, did I see a mention that somehow what his true 

intention was, or his government’s intention was to drive big 

government by way of politicians, Mr. Speaker. To increase the 

number of politicians, Mr. Speaker. Pretty interesting, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Also it didn’t mention that he was going to exclude youth in 

that vote. And I pick on that one member; he’s a good guy and I 

like him, Mr. Speaker, but it’s the same can be said for all of 

the members, all of the members opposite. All of the members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. A good bunch in general, Mr. Speaker, 

but out of line. Out of line with the priorities they’re choosing. 

 

And what we’re hearing from Saskatchewan people is that this 

government’s changed, changed in their approach. It seems that 

for many, some are saying they’re out of touch with what the 

priorities are for Saskatchewan families. Others are saying that 

they seem arrogant with their large, their large majority, Mr. 

Speaker, feeling they can just do whatever they want. If they 

want to kill jobs in the film economy, if they want to drive 

away investment as they are, Mr. Speaker, if they want to hurt 

creative young entrepreneurs and workers in this province as 

they’re doing, Mr. Speaker, they’ll just do it and they won’t 

listen to anyone. And that’s too bad, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see that in this Bill here too, Mr. Speaker. And like I’ve 

said, there are priorities in this province that need attention, Mr. 

Speaker, that require our attention, that require our focus — 

needs of families, the needs of our economy, the needs of our 

environment. And here we are spending precious hours here on 

the floor of this Assembly trying to stop a Bill, Mr. Speaker, 



1100 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

that certainly isn’t in the best interests of Saskatchewan people, 

that redefines our democratic process, Mr. Speaker, and does so 

with the heavy hand of a majority, Mr. Speaker, that many 

people that are talking to me are referring to as out of touch and 

a tad arrogant. Mr. Speaker, it’s too bad; Saskatchewan people 

certainly expect better than that. 

 

[20:15] 

 

As I’ve said, we have incredibly low populations in our ridings 

compared to other provinces. Certainly the population growth 

that’s been occurring in Saskatchewan for many years, Mr. 

Speaker, when we add those numbers up, we still have the 

smallest ridings, Mr. Speaker, by way of population. So I know 

the Premier tried to go out and he tried to say, well boy we’re 

growing by way of our population so we need to increase the 

number of politicians. Well, Mr. Speaker, factoring in those 

individuals, Mr. Speaker, that have moved to Saskatchewan for 

many years, Mr. Speaker, and that population growth that 

we’ve experienced, we still have the smallest ridings, Mr. 

Speaker, in general across Canada, and two and three and six 

times smaller than most other provinces, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

example of being out of line with Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I highlight . . . There’s a quote that I think is 

important to put into the record, not because it has fairly direct 

and arguably harsh language but because I think it reflects what 

I’m hearing when I’m picking up the phone or talking with 

many individuals who have broached this subject with me. It 

reflects very much the sentiment of Saskatchewan people, the 

pulse of Saskatchewan people all across this province, Mr. 

Speaker, on this front. And that quote comes from one of our 

esteemed journalists, Murray Mandryk, and I quote, “It’s the 

stupidest decision, the stupidest justification I’ve heard from the 

Brad Wall government so far.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t have to be this way. There’s very 

intelligent members sitting opposite. There’s some members 

that are compassionate, Mr. Speaker, sitting opposite. How can 

they let, how can they let a Bill like this be rammed through 

without fixing something that should have been resolved weeks 

ago, Mr. Speaker? 

 

But it’s not too late. This Bill should be withdrawn. And you 

know, that’s harsh language that’s been put forward by Mr. 

Mandryk in that quote, Mr. Speaker, but it’s important language 

to share because it does certainly reflect the sentiment that I’ve 

heard in Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve heard in Yorkton, that 

I’ve heard in Moose Jaw, that I’ve heard all across this 

province. And it’s certainly what I’m hearing, Mr. Speaker, 

here in Regina. And I’ll quote just that quote one more time, 

Mr. Speaker: “It’s the stupidest decision and the stupidest 

justification I’ve heard from the Brad Wall government so far.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, to spend millions of dollars to increase the 

number of politicians when we have the smallest ridings in 

Canada by way of population, it just doesn’t make sense, Mr. 

Speaker. It has nothing to do with, about proper representation 

of Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. And at the same time in 

that same Bill, Mr. Speaker, undermining our democratic 

process, defining and changing our democratic process with a 

heavy hand of a majority that won’t listen to Saskatchewan 

people or stakeholders, Mr. Speaker, by excluding youth from 

the counts that drive the constituencies here in Saskatchewan is 

shameful. 

 

And it has consequences many years forward because the 

decisions that are being made here and now have consequences 

for elections forward, but also for decisions forward. It 

marginalizes in a significant way the voice of children all 

across this province, Mr. Speaker, and it undermines and 

discounts the voice of predominantly young constituencies and 

young communities, Mr. Speaker. That reflects, Mr. Speaker, 

an out-of-touch way by this government because those very 

young communities, Mr. Speaker, with young families and 

young children with bright futures ahead of them, Mr. Speaker, 

those are the very constituencies, those are the very 

communities, and those are the very constituents, Mr. Speaker, 

by way of the children and youth for whom we should be 

working to make sure we’re serving the best interests that they 

hold, Mr. Speaker, that we’re setting a better future for those 

children and for those families, Mr. Speaker. Instead we see 

government excluding that voice, Mr. Speaker, and 

marginalizing, discounting the voice of young people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, of course the reason this government’s been 

doing this is for their own political gain. A government that 

won a massive majority, Mr. Speaker, in the fall, we accept 

that, Mr. Speaker. We accept that they won a big majority, Mr. 

Speaker. But instead of then taking that majority and then 

serving the mandate and serving Saskatchewan people, what 

they’re doing is to go to redefine election laws in Saskatchewan 

so that they can try to entrench themselves further in electoral 

success with Saskatchewan people, electoral tricks that we’re 

seeing put forward here with no respect to the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. That’s absolutely shameful. 

 

And we call on members to withdraw the piece of legislation 

that’s put forward and save Saskatchewan people, save 

Saskatchewan people millions of dollars that are otherwise 

going to be spent by this Premier and this government to 

increase the number of politicians in Saskatchewan when we 

don’t need to, Mr. Speaker, absolutely don’t need to. And we 

could be reallocating those to priorities of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

But at the same time, Mr. Speaker, they’re excluding children 

from the equation, from all across Saskatchewan. Now I’ve 

talked about young constituencies. I’ve talked about seniors. 

I’ve talked about rural Saskatchewan. I’ve talked about urban 

Saskatchewan. I also want to talk a little bit about First Nations 

and Métis communities, Mr. Speaker. This Bill can be seen as 

nothing more than a deliberate attempt to discount the voice 

and importance of First Nations and Métis communities across 

Saskatchewan. Reason I say that, Mr. Speaker, is those First 

Nations and Métis communities are predominantly young 

communities, Mr. Speaker. Bright futures, lots of hope, lots of 

optimism if we’re serving those best interests and putting 

forward plans, Mr. Speaker, that serve the best interests of those 

constituents, Mr. Speaker, of those constituencies and 

communities. 

 

And instead, this government, this Premier want to play 

electoral games, Mr. Speaker, to sort of try to shore up the next 

election somehow, Mr. Speaker, through some sort of tricks, 

Mr. Speaker, as opposed to serving (a) the mandate that they 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1101 

earned, Mr. Speaker, and then (b) as being respectful of 

Saskatchewan people, understanding that they received a large 

majority, Mr. Speaker, but continuing to work for 

Saskatchewan people. That’s what’s changed, Mr. Speaker, and 

that’s what I’m hearing from Saskatchewan people about this 

government, sadly, Mr. Speaker — that it seems they’ve 

changed, certainly aren’t delivering what they had offered to 

deliver, promised to deliver Saskatchewan people in the fall, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when we look at those First Nations and Métis populations 

and communities, Mr. Speaker, the incredible opportunities we 

have to serve this vibrant young . . . these young constituencies 

and communities, Mr. Speaker, by way of policy and by way of 

choices here in this legislature, by way of budgetary choices 

and plans, is significant. And it’s no small part of our economic 

and social well-being as a province moving forward. And it’s 

too bad to see a government that’s discounted that voice, Mr. 

Speaker, instead of rolling up their sleeves and doing the 

important work for all Saskatchewan people, instead of 

listening to Saskatchewan people, to choosing to rewrite 

election laws with no respect to the needs of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

I notice as well in one of Murray Mandryk’s articles, Mr. 

Speaker, that the . . . or one of his comments I guess. This was 

with CBC radio. He says, “There’s no justification for it 

population-wise or otherwise,” Mr. Speaker. Now that’s a 

pretty conclusive statement, Mr. Speaker, and we concur, Mr. 

Speaker. When we look at the population information before us, 

Mr. Speaker, we have the smallest populations that we serve in 

all of Canada, not in even a comparable fashion — two and 

three and six times smaller, Mr. Speaker. And then Murray 

Mandryk goes on and says, not just from a population 

perspective, population-wise or otherwise, Mr. Speaker. So 

there’s no other justification to be moving forward with this, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I guess that’s why this government, sadly, didn’t bring this 

forward to Saskatchewan people in the fall election, Mr. 

Speaker, because they must have known at some level that to 

play the kind of tricks they were planning to play, they must 

have known that that doesn’t resonate with Saskatchewan 

people, that it doesn’t reflect the needs of Saskatchewan people. 

So it’s something for us to highlight. 

 

When we look at representative democracy and how we can 

serve our constituents and how we make sure that constituents 

are engaged and involved in decisions that have a direct impact 

on their lives, we would look at things such as ridings, and 

we’d look at things such as the number of constituents. And 

like I say, we have the smallest ridings in Canada, and we have 

the ability to serve those constituents very well, which is why 

we’re very pleased to bring forward the voice of many of those 

constituents here tonight. 

 

The member from Prince Albert Carlton, Mr. Speaker, I quote 

him from his committee, he said, “We never campaigned on 

more MLAs. We never talked about that.” That’s correct, but 

it’s a sad statement, Mr. Speaker. And I know the same is true 

in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. When members went forward into 

the election, they never campaigned on this, Mr. Speaker. They 

never suggested that they were going to spend more money on 

more MLAs, Mr. Speaker. They never suggested that they were 

going to make cuts to education and to health care that would 

have a direct impact on the services that Saskatchewan people 

rely and depend on. They never suggested that they were going 

to increase the cost of prescription drugs for seniors, Mr. 

Speaker. None of that was talked about. What we saw was a 

cheery message, one speaking about boom and prosperity and 

moving forward. And none of these items, Mr. Speaker, were 

mentioned at that point in time. 

 

We talked about the different ridings that have so many, so 

many more constituents than . . . other provinces that have so 

many more constituents than we have, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 

something that we can take a lesson from, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, every, every household in 

Saskatchewan knows that budgets are about choices: the 

choices of the Premier, the choices of the Finance minister, the 

choices of cabinet. But they should reflect the choices and 

priorities of Saskatchewan people, of communities, of 

improving the lives of Saskatchewan people. The budget that’s 

been put forward, Mr. Speaker, in fact is certainly not reflective 

of those choices that are important to Saskatchewan people and 

instead pushes forward expenditure for priorities such as 

increasing the number of politicians, Mr. Speaker, in a very 

unfortunate sort of a manner, Mr. Speaker.  

 

We know for a fact, Mr. Speaker, that the push to, the push to 

increase the number of politicians didn’t come from 

Saskatchewan people. It came from . . . And the question I’m 

hearing from colleagues is, where did it come from? And I 

think that that’s a good question, and we’ve been asking that 

question, Mr. Speaker, and we haven’t got answers to that. And 

Saskatchewan people are deserving of answers. Why push this 

forward and where did it come from? 

 

What we do know is that it serves the best interests of one 

party’s political fortunes, which is incredibly disappointing to 

see a government act out of those motivations instead of the 

best interests of Saskatchewan people. But what we know is 

that we haven’t, we haven’t heard from Saskatchewan people 

that they’re calling for more, more politicians. And I’m certain 

that that’s true in ridings all across Regina, all across 

Saskatoon, and all across rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and 

we oppose it. 

 

We find it so wrong, Mr. Speaker, that they’re going to be 

taking away youth from the count in these electoral boundaries, 

discounting that voice. At the same very time as they’re 

excluding the voice of youth, they’re in fact making cuts and 

reductions in education that have a direct impact on children 

and students all across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They’re 

choosing to spend millions of dollars on adding the politicians, 

Mr. Speaker, but causing impacts to the delivery of education 

for Saskatchewan students all across the province. 

 

We have many right now, Mr. Speaker, looking all across the 

province, looking at their own neighbourhoods and looking at 

their communities post, following this budget, and that are 

incredibly anxious and nervous, if you will, Mr. Speaker, 

looking at what those impacts will be in their own community, 

wondering what that impact will be in their own classroom, Mr. 

Speaker, for their student or for their grandchild, Mr. Speaker, 



1102 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

for the child next door, or if they’re a teacher for the resources 

that they’re provided, Mr. Speaker. They’re wondering what it 

means for school closures, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[20:30] 

 

I know the member from Arm River-Watrous who, you know, 

who should be, who should be a proponent and should be 

pushing and should be advocating to find solutions to work 

with the community of Nokomis, Mr. Speaker, on a school 

that’s important to that community, a school, Mr. Speaker, that 

in fact serves an area, Mr. Speaker, that includes the Jansen 

Lake mine project, a potential project that’s coming to be by 

BHP, Mr. Speaker. And what you’ll see potentially from that 

project, Mr. Speaker, and what the community puts forward as 

their case, is that they’re going to see many individuals, young 

families choosing Nokomis as a place to reside, Mr. Speaker. 

Because when you’re looking across the region there’s certainly 

many different communities where those many hundreds of 

workers will locate, Mr. Speaker, but certainly Nokomis is a 

very viable option for many. 

 

The elimination of that school in that community, Mr. Speaker, 

the member from Arm River-Watrous should know, will have a 

detrimental effect to that community being able to provide that 

sort of living to those families that are moving in, Mr. Speaker. 

And I don’t know where, Mr. Speaker, a member like that or 

any member in this Assembly gets off, Mr. Speaker, with 

allowing those sorts of impacts — cuts in the classroom, 

schools to be closed, Mr. Speaker — at the same time as they 

push forward the expenditure of millions of dollars to increase 

the number of politicians here in Saskatchewan. It doesn’t add 

up. It’s not consistent with the priorities of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I can think of chatting with a 

constituent just a little while ago following the election after, 

Mr. Speaker, on Grey Street in Rosemont, Mr. Speaker, with 

respect to their child, Mr. Speaker, who has a learning 

disability. And there’s been . . . and having concerns when they, 

Mr. Speaker, when they are looking at the provision of 

resources for education in this province, about whether or not 

the proper resources are being allocated to make sure that their 

child is being supported in an adequate fashion that allows them 

to move forward with a successful life, Mr. Speaker, something 

that’s a great potential for the student that we’re looking at but 

also, Mr. Speaker, for all those students in the classroom. And 

this mom puts it incredibly well. She lays out the stress and 

worry in her own life, Mr. Speaker, and all the extra work they 

go to to provide the supports for this child, this student, her kid, 

to be successful in life, Mr. Speaker. And then we see a 

government that is choosing, making the choice, Mr. Speaker, 

to spend millions of dollars on increasing the number of 

politicians, but then making constraints and cuts and impacts in 

the classroom all across Saskatchewan that certainly impact 

learning disabled children, impact all students, certainly raise 

questions around proper supports, Mr. Speaker — big 

questions. 

 

And I can think, Mr. Speaker, of a middle-aged couple, Mr. 

Speaker, on Dewdney Avenue in Dieppe. They don’t have 

children any more, Mr. Speaker; their children have grown up. 

But there’s children on either side of them, Mr. Speaker. And 

what matters to those constituents of mine, Mr. Speaker, is 

keeping Dieppe School open, Mr. Speaker, a school that is built 

in an open format in a similar model as to what some of the 

new design and construction is going on. That’s important to 

them. It’s important to them about the viability of their 

community, and it’s important to them when they look at their 

neighbours next door and these young families that are building 

their lives and requiring these services. And they’re looking for 

solutions on that front, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But they’re not just looking to the school that’s just a few 

blocks over, Mr. Speaker, in Dieppe, there over on Dewdney. 

What they’re looking at, Mr. Speaker, is the pounding of traffic, 

of heavy-haul traffic, Mr. Speaker, on their street, Mr. Speaker. 

And what they’re wondering, Mr. Speaker, is when is there 

going to be some sort of a plan to mitigate that, Mr. Speaker. 

And this is in many ways related to something that certainly 

we’ve supported and something I support by way of the Global 

Transportation Hub, something that’s bringing economic 

development, Mr. Speaker, and certainly bringing young 

families into the constituency and into the community of 

Dieppe specifically, and that will require that school, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Further to that, what they’re expecting is that . . . And they 

support the Global Transportation Hub. What they don’t 

support is the dangerous, heavy-haul traffic that’s been routed 

down their street, Mr. Speaker. If you can imagine, the dishes in 

their cupboards vibrate and shake, Mr. Speaker. And then what 

they’re looking at, Mr. Speaker, and then when we’re speaking 

about this, is a government that’s pushing forward . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I would remind the member that the Bill 

we’re discussing is The Constituency Boundaries Act and the 

subsequent amendment — not highways and not education. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And so where 

I tie in here is that the priorities of Saskatchewan people in a 

growing province are not being served, Mr. Speaker. What is 

being served, Mr. Speaker, and being served up, if you will, Mr. 

Speaker, is the expenditure of millions of dollars to add the 

number of politicians, Mr. Speaker, at the same time they 

exclude the voice of children. So my constituent on Dewdney 

Avenue, Mr. Speaker, who sees their infrastructure being 

pounded in front and safety concerns galore, Mr. Speaker, both 

for themselves but for their neighbours, Mr. Speaker, what 

they’re wondering is, why instead is there not a plan to mitigate 

that traffic? Now that doesn’t cost a whole lot of money, Mr. 

Speaker, and if it does require some, a few resources, I know 

where we can get some, Mr. Speaker, when I’m looking at 

instead of spending millions of dollars on three more 

politicians, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, it highlights the other point of 

this, is that this government wants to exclude the voice of 

children, the neighbours on either side of their house that have 

children that go to Dieppe School, Mr. Speaker, that’s being 

closed as we speak, Mr. Speaker, here this year, pushed 

forward. What they’d like to see is that being addressed. Instead 

they see a government that’s spending millions of dollars to 

increase the number of politicians. So that’s where I relate 

directly to the amendment that we put forward and the 

amendment that would make changes of course to a foolhardy 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1103 

and short-sighted Bill, Mr. Speaker, but not only that, a Bill that 

reflects an out-of-touch nature of the government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this is the interesting change that’s gone on in 

Saskatchewan since the fall, Mr. Speaker, is more and more and 

more what I hear when people phone me with concern about 

actions of government is that they’re saying, you know, I’ve 

never phoned my MLA before; I’ve never phoned an MLA 

before; or, I’m phoning you from, in often cases, one of their 

ridings too, Mr. Speaker, because they’re feeling that they’re 

not being heard, Mr. Speaker, on this front. So we’re taking that 

call from people that haven’t been engaged in the process 

before, Mr. Speaker, who are saying, something’s changed 

here, Mr. Speaker. It’s not what they bargained for. 

 

And this is where it gets to the very DNA of Saskatchewan 

people. We expect commonsense solutions. We expect a 

government that’s going to be straight with voters, straight with 

Saskatchewan people. And we haven’t got that, Mr. Speaker. 

We see that when we look at this piece of legislation that was a 

surprise for Saskatchewan people, certainly a disappointment 

we’re hearing from Saskatchewan people. 

 

We see that there when we know in the fall election, Mr. 

Speaker, when this government won a big majority — and we 

accept that, Mr. Speaker — when they won that big majority, 

not a mention, Mr. Speaker, was there of increasing the number 

of politicians. Not a mention, Mr. Speaker. And we know, we 

know, we know, Mr. Speaker, why — well we suspect we 

know — why we never heard about that, Mr. Speaker, is that 

this government was willing to be less than forthright with 

Saskatchewan people. That’s disappointing. 

 

Another reason, Mr. Speaker, is that they knew that this would 

not be something that Saskatchewan people would accept well, 

something they wouldn’t accept or support. And certainly they 

haven’t. All across the province we’ve had individuals weigh in 

and say, this is wrong, Mr. Speaker. We didn’t see it in the 

election. We didn’t see it in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, 

and it’s not fair to Saskatchewan people. Instead we see a 

government that’s spending millions to increase the number of 

politicians, to exclude youth and young communities from 

being a focus and a priority here in Saskatchewan, from being 

counted, Mr. Speaker, from being placed front and centre in the 

policy debate as they should, and the budgetary decisions as 

they should, Mr. Speaker, and pushing forward an agenda that’s 

out of line with what Saskatchewan people desire and certainly 

the best interests of Saskatchewan people. 

 

So it’s for all these reasons, Mr. Speaker, that we oppose this 

piece of legislation. It’s for all these reasons, Mr. Speaker, that 

we are so disappointed and surprised that we’re still speaking to 

this Bill, trying to stop it on behalf of Saskatchewan people 

who are incredibly disappointed with this piece of legislation, 

all across this province. And we’re going to continue to work to 

do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, a government that campaigned 

on some cheery message with slick brochures about moving 

forward and about boom and all this positive stuff, Mr. Speaker, 

and then when they move forward, Mr. Speaker, with their big 

majority, Mr. Speaker, delivering something that’s certainly not 

consistent with their mandate, Mr. Speaker, and leaving 

Saskatchewan people questioning, is it arrogance? Is it not 

understanding Saskatchewan communities? But certainly 

leaving Saskatchewan people with concern and for good reason 

— a government making structural change to our democratic 

process without an ounce of consultation with Saskatchewan 

people and without their best interests in mind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for all of those reasons, I certainly won’t be . . . I 

support the amendment we put forward, and we continue to 

urge this government to pull this piece of legislation. And I 

know one of my colleagues would like to continue this 

discussion. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

once again it’s my pleasure to weigh into the debate on the 

amendment. As you know, the amendment that we proposed 

was that: 

 

“this House declines to give second reading to Bill No. 

36, An Act to amend The Constituency Boundaries Act, 

1993 [for two reasons] because 

 

The Bill excludes, in determining constituency 

boundaries, the counting of the young people of 

Saskatchewan, who deserve to be counted to determine 

the representation within this Legislative Assembly; 

and further 

 

The Bill increases the number of members of this 

Legislative Assembly by three, which is an 

unnecessary increase of politicians to represent the 

people of Saskatchewan.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to start off tonight, I’m just wondering if it 

wouldn’t be a good idea to maybe go through Bill . . . the 

original legislation that the Bill is trying to amend just so we 

understand the context that we’re talking about at this point. 

And that Bill is . . . sorry, that law and the piece of legislation is 

Chapter C-27.1, which is entitled An Act to Provide for the 

Division of Saskatchewan into Constituencies for the Election 

of Members of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

So right off the hop, Mr. Speaker, we have a Bill that’s in place. 

It’s a perfectly adequate Bill. It certainly hasn’t been a point of 

concern. Leading up into the census for this year, we knew that 

there would be changes coming because that’s the way the 

system is set up and that’s the way it’s been done. And there 

really hasn’t been any concerns raised, as far as we know, about 

anything that was within that Bill. 

 

So what does the Bill look like? Well it’s a fairly short Bill. 

And we’re right in the middle of it now, as you know, because 

we are getting ready to appoint the new commission to do the 

work. So what is it they’re going to be doing? Well if you look 

at the Bill, it says the first thing that has to happen after the 

census occurs is that there has to be the establishment of a 

commission. So we’re in the business of doing that right now. 

And it’s done by Lieutenant Governor in Council, and they 

shall do it for every census or just following the census every 

10th year. 



1104 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

As you know, Stats Canada creates a census every 10 years. 

That gives us the population data that we need to truly reflect 

the constituency boundaries and figure out where the 

boundaries should be so that it’s fair and that it’s important that 

the population counts are as close as possible. Given 

geographic differences and various sort of particular needs of 

certain areas, make sure that the population count is as close as 

possible. 

 

So that’s the goal is to make sure that the people of 

Saskatchewan and their elected representative have the similar 

number of people in each riding to make a fair representation in 

this Chamber. And that’s what this Bill sets out to do and does 

it quite fine, if I may add. 

 

So the way the commission is going to be set up, we’re going to 

have a chairperson and two residents of Saskatchewan. And the 

chairperson, there is three possible choices for chairperson that 

the Lieutenant Governor can make, Lieutenant Governor in 

Council. First would be a judge of the Court of Appeal who 

would be nominated by the Chief Justice, or a judge of Her 

Majesty’s Court of Queen’s Bench for Saskatchewan, also 

nominated by the Chief Justice of Saskatchewan after 

consultation with the Chief Justice of the Queen’s Bench. And 

finally the third choice is a resident of Saskatchewan nominated 

by the Chief Justice of Saskatchewan. 

 

But as you can see, the thread running throughout this choice 

for Chair is that the person nominated is chosen by the Chief 

Justice of Saskatchewan, so that’s the first person. And the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council has no options there. That’s 

something, it’s a “shall” provision, so there is no choice. Once 

the Chief Justice has made the nomination, then it’s expected 

that the Lieutenant Governor in Council will appoint that 

person as chairperson. 

 

At that point . . . And yes, the Chief Justice is to be requested to 

do that by the Clerk of the Executive Council. And then finally, 

Lieutenant Governor in Council is required to consult with the 

leaders of the opposition and any recognized members of the 

Legislative Assembly, and then they shall appoint two other 

members, people who are residents of Saskatchewan and 

they’re not ineligible pursuant to section 8. 

 

[20:45] 

 

So the next clause in the Act talks about how they can appoint 

one of the members as Deputy Chair. So that’s one of the 

abilities of the commission. And then section 7 of the Act talks 

about a vacancy. So if for whatever reason one of the people 

become ineligible to act or if they resign or if something else 

happens, then the Lieutenant Governor can fill that vacancy. So 

that’s section 7 of the existing Act, the 1993 constituency 

boundaries Act. 

 

So then we turn to section 8. It tells us who is ineligible to be 

appointed. First of all, most of them, in fact they’re all elected 

members except for the Senate. So a member of the Senate, a 

member of the House of Commons, or a member of the 

Assembly, this Legislative Assembly, so none of us can be 

appointed to the Boundaries Commission, which makes a lot of 

sense, Mr. Speaker. And as I say, this Bill seems to work pretty 

fine just the way it’s written. 

There is allowances that are going to be fixed so they get paid. 

It’s a big job. We understand it’s a number of several days and 

in fact several weeks commitment by these members of the 

commission, and they have a lot of work that they have to do to 

make sure that the boundaries are fair and representative. 

 

So the way that the rules follow is in section 11. Within 30 days 

of the appointment to the commission, so as soon as they’re 

appointed, then the Clerk, the Executive Council shall give the 

chairperson a copy of that part of the census with respect to 

which the commission has established showing the total 

population. So the Clerk of the Executive Council has to 

furnish the commission with the status, or the stats that they 

need to understand the current population of our province. And 

then they have to, once they get that, they have to prepare an 

interim report and a final report containing their 

recommendations respecting constituency boundaries. 

 

There is some special needs that have been identified in this 

Bill regarding the geography of the North. So when they are 

fixing the boundaries, they have to . . . The two northern 

constituencies are already fixed and established, and it divides 

them into two constituencies. And then the rest of the province, 

at this point in time, they’re required to divide them into 56 

constituencies, which makes up the 58 that we currently have, 

Mr. Speaker. And so then, that’s the way it’s set up right now. 

 

And the next step is that in their final report they have to make 

recommendations which shall include boundary descriptions for 

each proposed constituency and the proposed name of each 

proposed constituency. 

 

So I think, you know, given that we’re into some incredible 

population changes in the province — there’s depopulation in 

some areas and increasing population in other areas — we 

know this is an exciting time for electoral boundaries, Mr. 

Speaker, and for the electoral office that we have currently in 

the province. And this is going to be an exciting year to see 

how these new boundaries are going to look, maybe some new 

changes, maybe some of us will be referred to differently. We 

just don’t know, but that could happen. So it could be quite 

interesting. 

 

The current quotient that we’re talking about now is a quotient 

that . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Maybe we could have a 

Ness Creek constituency. That would be a great name for a 

constituency. I think it would be fantastic. The member 

opposite is suggesting a new name for a constituency. 

 

The constituency population quotient is calculated. There’s a 

formula set up, and the quotient equals total population of the 

province minus the northern population. So we’ll get the 

northern populations excluded, and then we will divide it into 

56. So we’ve got the two northern constituents . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . New name, new name, Mr. Speaker. The 

members opposite are getting confused with what I’m trying to 

say. There may be new names. Certainly no new . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Speak a little more slowly. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Maybe I need to slow down a little bit. That’s 

correct. So that’s the way it’s set up. The formula is quite well 

established. It’s been used. It’s been successful and it’s 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1105 

working, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s certain rules in the Act that delineate how the 

boundaries are to be fixed, so outside of the northern dividing 

line of course. A commission shall ensure . . . Now this is the 

direction to the commission that’s very important. They have to 

“. . . ensure that the population of each proposed constituency 

is, as nearly as possible, equal to the constituency population 

quotient.” 

 

No small task, Mr. Speaker. That’s going to be a very difficult 

job, and I’m sure it is every time that the commission is struck. 

This is the most important feature of this. It’s not how many 

constituencies that there are, but it’s that there is an equal and 

fair distribution of the population. And I will be getting into the 

proposed Bill soon in terms of how that isn’t as quite as fair as 

the existing Bill. 

 

There is some room for manoeuvring for the commission, and 

that’s found in section 14(2), where they can depart from that 

requirement to make it as equal as possible. But here’s the 

conditions: 

 

special geographic considerations, including: 

 

sparsity, density or relative rates of growth of population 

in various regions south of the dividing line. 

 

So already this Bill makes provision for population and growth, 

population growth. It’s there. It’s been there for 20 years or 19 

years and, Mr. Speaker, it seems to be working just fine. 

 

It also talks about accessibility to the regions mentioned in that 

clause. So they can take in geographic considerations in relation 

to the regions. And also they can take into consideration the 

size and shape of the regions described in that first clause, 

which are the relative rates of growth, density, or sparsity of the 

population. 

 

There’s a couple more features that they can look at, and one is 

a special community of interests. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

hearing a lot about that now federally. In fact there’s an article 

in Wikipedia that talks about some of the issues that we’re 

looking at right now federally, and the current federal electoral 

district boundaries in Saskatchewan have been labelled as 

gerrymandered. The province’s two major cities, Regina and 

Saskatoon, are both tracked into four districts each when the 

populations of the cities’ proper would justify about three and 

two and a half all-urban districts respectively. So that’s just one 

point that was mentioned on the Wikipedia page. 

 

So they have to look at a special community of interests, and I 

know that we will be seeing more about that in the federal, the 

work that’s already commenced federally. And certainly there 

are people that are writing to that commission right now about 

that very issue. 

 

And then finally there’s an opportunity for the committee to 

take into account physical features of regions south of the 

dividing line. 

 

So there’s a few things that the commission is directed to look 

at, and certainly growth in population is one of them and 

sparsity of population is one of them. And we’re hearing about 

both of those issues in the current debate, and I would suggest 

that the existing Bill adequately deals with it. So that’s 

something that I think the House should take into account. 

 

There’s a few other clauses in the Bill that are more 

administrative in nature. They’re allowed to make their own 

rules, and they can conduct and hold hearings at times and 

places that they consider appropriate. So I would expect within 

the next few months there will be a number of hearings, and 

we’ll see our commission making calls for presentations from 

various interested groups and hopefully from the public as well. 

They are required to provide notice for residents for the time 

and place of the hearings. They have to advertise it in papers, 

and there’s conditions on what they have to include in the 

advertisement. So there’s a fair set of rules around that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And there’s rules for how people can make presentations at 

these hearings. And I suspect that our commission is going to 

hear from a lot of people in the next few months. They just 

have to provide notice and give their name and address and a 

concise summary of what they intend to present on and also 

what their political, financial, or other interests are. So they 

have to disclose those interests, and then they’re allowed to 

make a presentation to the commission once the hearings are 

started. At that point, the commission will prepare an interim 

report, and that’s found in clause 19 of the Bill. And if they 

want, they can get an extension of time if necessary, if the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council agrees to extend it. 

 

And then finally, after they’ve completed the interim report, 

they have to file that with the Clerk of the Executive Council. 

They have to publish it in the Gazette and one or more papers 

having general circulation in Saskatchewan, stating that the 

report has been filed. And then they have to announce the 

further public hearings once the interim report is filed. So once 

they’ve done their work on an interim basis, the public will 

have another kick at the cat and be able to make further 

presentations. 

 

The final report is then prepared, and it has to be, right now the 

time frame is six months after the date the commission is 

established. So once we establish our commission, within six 

months they have to complete their work. It’s going to be a 

tough job. And then we’ll have the new electoral boundaries, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s a number of other administrative rules where they are 

supposed to file the document and how it’s to be filed. 

 

So at this point, that’s the Bill from 1993. I think it’s a good 

Bill. It seems to have been working quite fine, and that’s I think 

one of the main reasons why we’re suggesting that the 

amendment be considered seriously by members opposite. 

There’s no need for any changes to this Bill. It’s working just 

fine. 

 

I’m going to get now into some other documentation that we’ve 

gathered in relation to the proposed Bill. As you know, Mr. 

Speaker, the Bill has two main clauses, and one is to add three 

more seats, three more constituencies to the province, and the 

second one is the way the population is going to be calculated. 



1106 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

It will exclude children under the age of 18. We take great 

exception to both of those proposals, and certainly the 

amendment that we’re proposing is exactly that. We are 

suggesting that this House decline to even give second reading 

to this Bill and because of the two main offensive clauses: the 

one in counting young people out who deserve to be counted; 

and secondly, that increases the number of members of the 

legislature by three, which we have no idea where that came 

from and don’t see it as necessary, based on all the information 

that we have gathered in our research in the last little while. 

 

So the first piece that I would like to share with you, Mr. 

Speaker, is an article from some friends of the Sask Party 

actually, the Canadian Taxpayers Federation. And there’s an 

editorial that we’ve obtained from them, and it says 

Saskatchewan doesn’t need more politicians. The questions 

they asked . . . They say the following: “During the recent 

provincial election do you remember Premier Brad Wall saying 

anything about a dreadful shortage of provincial politicians?” 

 

They go on to say, “Do you remember him saying anything 

during televised leader debates, radio interviews [television] or 

in newspaper stories about his plan to add three more seats to 

the provincial legislature?” And they go on to say, “We don’t.” 

This is a further quote: “In fact we checked his party’s 

provincial platform and there was no mention about adding 

more politicians.” And so the question they ask is, “Then why 

is his government sliding in legislation during the busy 

Christmas season that would add three seats to the 

Saskatchewan Legislature?” They say, “Good question.” 

 

I say, good question. We’re not sure why it’s being done. And 

there is some information from the government that suggests 

why it’s being done, but it just doesn’t add up, Mr. Speaker. In 

fact they go on to say on the next part of their article: 

 

In the Saskatchewan government’s news release, they cite 

the province’s growing population as justification for 

adding more seats to the legislature. The release notes 

that over the next four years, Saskatchewan’s population 

will increase by 100,000. 

 

That’s all fine and dandy, but that doesn’t mean the 

legislature necessarily needs more seats. Even if you 

don’t increase the number of MLAs, a population of 

1,158,000 works out to one politician for every 19,966 

people. That’s still the highest ratio of politicians to 

citizens in all provinces in Canada with a population of a 

million or more people. 

 

So they’re questioning that, Mr. Speaker. That’s the Canadian 

Taxpayers Federation. And as you well know, they are looking 

out for useful and practical spending of tax dollars, and this 

simply doesn’t seem to be something that we could call a useful 

and practical way of spending tax dollars. No one’s asked for it. 

No one wants it. 

 

Other information that we’ve gathered is in terms of the 

population from other provinces, and certainly the Canadian 

Taxpayers Federation twigged on to this. Even with the growth 

in population that we’re experiencing, there simply is no 

comparison or need with our neighbours both to the west and to 

the east of needing an increase. And in fact we’re already one 

of the lowest ratios, and we have lots of room in our ratios to 

get caught up to our neighbours. 

 

So if we look at our census from this year, or sorry, 2011, the 

population per seat right now on average is 17,810. If we look 

at BC to our west, we have the population per seat of 51,764. 

Mr. Speaker, this is 2.9 times the number of constituents per 

riding in BC. So they seem to be fairly sophisticated, and they 

have wide . . . a vast province as well. It’s a large province. 

There’s lots of rural area, lots of urban population. So why is it 

that their ratio is so much higher and they seem to be managing 

just fine? 

 

[21:00] 

 

Let’s look at Alberta now for a moment, can we? We have 3.6 

million people in Alberta in the most recent census, and their 

population per seat is 43,915. So in that case, in Alberta we 

have 2.5 times the number of constituents of Saskatchewan per 

MLA. Alberta, this is someone that this government often looks 

to for inspiration and modelling. And so if that’s the case there, 

where is the impetus for the additional seats here in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 

 

We just haven’t been able to find out where the government is 

coming up with this, other than a vague reference to growing 

population — certainly that population can be captured within 

these ratios — and concerns about maybe distances that some 

members have to drive. And that’s a reality, I think, in this kind 

of scenario, but it certainly doesn’t seem to justify the import of 

the Bill. I just don’t understand how that is necessary. 

 

Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, population there, 1.2 million in the last 

census, so a slightly larger population than in our province, but 

not a whole lot. It’s very close. And how many people in each 

seat do they have? 21,193 — so that’s close, about 1.2 — much 

higher. And, you know, Mr. Speaker, I did some really 

rudimentary math about this with the calculator. I’m thinking if 

we take out the children, as this Bill purports to do, we may be 

down to around 750,000 people. And so it’s actually decreasing 

the number of people to 12,000, and that doesn’t seem to really 

be necessary or valuable for any reason at all. So the exclusion 

of the children certainly doesn’t make any sense. And right 

now, you know, we’re looking at 17,810 per seat. It’s about . . . 

[inaudible]. 

 

So now if you look at Ontario, Mr. Speaker, 12 million people 

in the province of Ontario, and what do they have for 

population per seat? 120,000 people, and their ratio is 6.7 

people to every one person in Saskatchewan. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What was that? Six point . . . 

 

Ms. Sproule: — 6.7 is the ratio. My colleague asked me to 

repeat that, and I’m happy to do that because it’s very large. It’s 

in fact the largest in Canada. And Ontario is not a backwards 

province or seems to have a fairly sophisticated approach to 

politics. So it’s not clear to me, Mr. Speaker, why, again there’s 

no evident reason why this government would see this as being 

necessary. 

 

And then finally, if we look at Quebec with almost 8 million 

people in the last census — so easily the second largest 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1107 

population in Canada — and they have per seat, on average . . . 

They have 125 seats in their Assembly, and on average they 

have 63,000 people per seat on average. And that’s 3.5 times 

the number of constituents of Saskatchewan per MLA. They 

seem to be managing. They seem to be doing all right. And you 

know, if we want to look at our federal counterparts of course 

the population is much, much larger, and also the sizes of the 

ridings. And again they do seem to be managing. 

 

So those are some of the initial points I wanted to make. I now 

want to talk a little bit about the children because that’s 

something that concerns me greatly, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

16-year-old son at home who will be voting in the next election. 

His name is Sam. He’s a good student. He’s interested in a 

variety of sports and he’s starting to become politically aware 

and certainly having a mother as an MLA has forced him into it 

sooner than maybe other teenagers his age. But him and his 

friends are interested in what’s going on and certainly my own 

personal involvement in politics has sparked some of that. And 

he seems to be curious about the whole process. He was here 

when we signed the rolls and is just starting to understand what 

it means and what my job is and what it is I’m trying to do. 

 

And you know, he won’t be counted. If this Bill gets passed, he 

won’t be counted even though he’ll be voting in the next 

election. And there’s something that’s fundamentally wrong 

with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I think a lot of children, if 

they’re going to realize that they’re not being counted for the 

purposes of the representative that’s going to represent them 

here in this House, they’re going to feel discounted because 

that’s exactly what they are being, how they’re being treated. 

 

And I’m afraid with the level of engagement, citizenship 

engagement, it’s difficult to get people to vote already and if 

young people are turned off by the whole process because they 

know they’re not being counted, they’re certainly not going to 

want to find out more about the process or get engaged or join a 

party, any party, or become involved in being proper citizens of 

the province. They need to be drawn into it in certain ways and 

this is certainly not one way of doing it. And there hasn’t been a 

lot of explanation by this government as to why the exclusion 

of children is seen as something that is positive. 

 

Certainly I think the one thing that we have heard is that there’s 

concern of some of the distances that some MLAs have to 

travel and that’s certainly a concern and a real additional 

burden for them certainly. But adding . . . We’re not sure yet 

where these ridings are going to be added and, you know, I 

think in terms of the global aggregate of acreage, rural acreage, 

in adding those two extra ridings I’m not sure about the 

significant changes it will make. They’ll still be big, even if we 

add three more. And we’re not sure whether they’re going in 

the cities where most of the growth is actually occurring. And 

in fact, if we go with population growth, I would think the 

urban ridings would get larger but that the rural ridings would 

get much larger because the population growth in the rural 

areas is actually decreasing. So I’m not sure that population 

growth is going to be justification enough to make those ridings 

smaller. 

 

So it seems that just counting out the children will make the 

difference because there are more kids in urban areas and in the 

North. And we’ve talked a lot about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

about the fact that where there are more children is certainly 

where there are younger families and younger people and where 

there are more Aboriginal people. In fact some of the numbers 

we’ve seen suggest that there’s maybe up to 50 per cent of 

Aboriginal communities will be counted out because of the 

calculation of the population because they’re under 18. And 

that’s a message, I think, that to send to First Nations and Métis 

communities that is really . . . We’re going to lose a lot of their 

enthusiasm for being citizens of Saskatchewan and for their 

children being contributing members to our society and again 

engaging them in the political process, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 

something that we have great concern about and apparently the 

Children’s Advocate is now weighing in on this situation as 

well and has said that, and this is a quote, the Children’s 

Advocate has said, “To eliminate those under 18 of the 

eligibility runs contrary to everyone’s right to equal 

representation. Every citizen has the right to effective 

representation.” 

 

So we’re talking about citizens here, and my son is a citizen and 

my nephew is a citizen. And we heard our colleague from 

Athabasca talk about his grandkids. They’re citizens, and to tell 

them that they’re not or to suggest that they’re not, to me is 

insulting but it’s probably contrary to their right. And I’m afraid 

that this Bill may even end up with some legal challenges 

because of that. 

 

Every citizen has the right to effective representation and, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that includes my colleague’s brand new baby, 

Clara, who was just born a couple of weeks ago. Clara is a 

citizen of our country. She has the rights of citizenship and that 

includes the right to vote, which she will have when she’s 18, 

but it also includes, in our democracy, because it’s a 

representative democracy, she’s entitled to equal representation. 

To you, to my colleagues, to the members opposite, that child, 

brand new baby Clara, is entitled to the rights of representation 

just like everybody else. And to exclude her from the 

population count sends that message that she is not equally 

represented because she wasn’t even counted. 

 

So this is something I think that . . . Well I know my son and 

his friends, they do follow this with some interest, and they’re 

questioning politics. I think some of them are already 

disenchanted, and if the member opposite talks to them I’m not 

sure how much more enchanted they would be, but anyways 

he’s certainly welcome to it if he’s interested in it. 

 

And actually one of my constituents is talking to me from 

across the way as well, Mr. Speaker. And his daughter will not 

be counted either because she’s not 18, and she will be 

excluded from her rights of equal representation. And she will 

be my constituent, and I will look forward to representing her, 

but unfortunately she’s not being counted, and that’s the sad 

part of this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that these children are 

not being counted. And the minister opposite’s daughter is not 

being counted, and she will not be equally represented in this 

calculation that’s being proposed under this Bill. 

 

It’s age discrimination and, you know, it’s really sad, it’s really 

sad right now because today is — and we know this — today is 

the 30th anniversary of the Charter, the Canadian Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms, introduced in Canada in 1982. It was a 

very proud moment for our country when the Charter was 



1108 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

introduced. And as a young law student in the ’90s — well I 

wasn’t all that young — but when I was studying law in the 

’90s, the Charter was the single most important feature of our 

studies in law school. And it talked about the kind of rights that 

the Children’s Advocate is talking about. Something to be 

proud of is the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. And we have 

legislation that may be questioned, and I’m not sure whether 

there will be challenges, but there is some noise that there 

might be. And again, I go back to the quote of the Children’s 

Advocate: “This runs contrary to everyone’s right to equal 

representation.” 

 

And I think it’s disappointing for my son. It’s disappointing for 

all of our children that are under 18 and grandchildren and for 

the people of Saskatchewan and the children of Saskatchewan. 

 

My colleague here talked about, there are other ways to engage 

people and bring them into the process — proper schools, 

adequate tuition, sufficient support for tuition at least or at least 

tuition fees that are affordable. Those are ways this government 

could show support for children and support for young people 

in this country and engage them in the political process and 

protect our democracy. Because if our young people don’t 

protect this democracy, we’re going to lose it. 

 

And we can see little cracks in it already with the antics that the 

federal government is undertaking with proroguing and not 

following the rules, just basically ignoring judges’ comments 

on illegal actions in relation to the Canadian Wheat Board Act. 

I mean, these are serious cracks in the seams of our democracy, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. And if kids and children under 18 aren’t 

included and not given the right to equal representation, this is a 

sad and dark time for democracy in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And this is something that I think we all need to be 

concerned about. 

 

And you know what? We are hearing from people. Many of us 

talked about what happened during the election. And of course 

this wasn’t on the platform for the government when they were 

telling us about this Bill so . . . Or sorry, it wasn’t on their 

platform when we were out campaigning. But I just want to 

read to you an email that I got yesterday in my office actually, 

Mr. Speaker. This is someone I’ve never met, and she says to 

me, this is a quote: 

 

Dear Cathy Sproule, 

 

I am a member of your riding and am very concerned 

about the proposed Bill 36 - The act to amend 

constituency boundaries. The proposed criteria change of 

no longer counting people under 18 in determining 

constituency boundaries is unconstitutional and needs to 

be arrested. The aboriginal population has a very high 

population under the age of 18. This kind of amendment 

not only discriminates for age but also for race. This 

amendment would greatly affect aboriginal representation 

at a provincial level. Discrimination for age and race is a 

constitutional issue. I hope that the NDP will continue to 

fight these proposed changes. 

 

Sincerely, 

 

Tanis Walmsley 

That’s a letter from one of my constituents, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and I’ve never met this woman. 

 

We’re getting letters in the “Letters to the Editor” as well that 

question the wisdom of this Bill and the necessity of it, and I 

can share some of that with you at this point as well. The first 

one is from Philip Sparks in the Leader-Post on April 3rd. And 

what this fellow has said is, and I quote. This is another quote 

of the letter: 

 

It’s pretty easy to see where the Saskatchewan Party 

stands in regards to seniors as opposed to creating three 

more MLAs for the province. Getting three more seats in 

the legislature seems to be much more important than 

helping seniors, some of whom are struggling with high 

prescription drug prices. Now they will just have to dig 

deeper. 

 

Many seniors require more prescriptions as they get older 

and many are already experiencing financial hardship. 

Does our government care? It would certainly seem not, as 

long as they can brag about the prosperity they have 

brought to the province, crow about the “Saskatchewan 

advantage” and what a rich province we all live in. 

 

I am 71 and have health issues that require me to take 

several prescriptions every day. Now it will cost me about 

$45 more each month. But I am one of the lucky ones as I 

have two part-time jobs and I can handle it. How many 

seniors are in that position? 

 

Does the government seem concerned? Nope. Three more 

MLAs . . . now that’s important. There is an election in the 

future and I hope the seniors in this province show the 

Sask. Party the exit door. 

 

And that was from Philip Sparks from Weyburn. So that’s one 

letter that we’ve seen in the paper. 

 

[21:15] 

 

And the other one is from Joyce Neufeld dated March 31st, and 

it’s the Leader-Post as well. So, quote: 

 

I am one of the seniors affected by the increase in 

prescription fees for seniors. Premier Brad Wall and 

company can brag on the one hand about adding three 

extra MLAs, when access to MLAs is easy enough, yet he 

is hitting the most vulnerable — seniors — many of whom 

are living below the poverty line already. 

 

Wall might think that $5 is just a pittance, but ask any 

senior living on just above $1,000 a month who may be on 

four medications — that is $20 a month. I think the 

government is a real disgrace to the very people who built 

this province. 

 

The Premier should scrap the intended increase in MLAs 

(which is just a gerrymander for the Sask. Party to gain 

more seats) and return to the $15 prescription fee which 

was in effect previously. I certainly did not see any 

increase in income tax rates for the wealthy in the budget. 

What gives? 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1109 

And that’s from Joyce Neufeld from Waldeck. 

 

So we’re seeing letters to the editor. We’re seeing comments 

from the Canadian Taxpayers Federation, and certainly a 

number of editorials have really commented on this as well. For 

example we have Troy Fleece, who reported in the Regina 

Leader-Post, and he quoted some of the comments that he got 

from both the Premier and our leader, leader John Nilson. But 

he also went on to say that, and this is a quote as well: 

 

University of Regina assistant political science professor 

Jim Farney said the most appropriate method of counting 

people to decide boundaries has been the subject of 

academic debate. Narrowing it to people over 18 is less 

restrictive than counting only people who are registered 

voters, he said. But he added that by excluding people 

under 18 in Saskatchewan from the count you could be 

“shifting seats away from areas with more Aboriginals 

because they have such a young population.” 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is . . . I think we should maybe 

talk a little bit just about gerrymandering and what it is and 

where it come from. Again this is an article in Wikipedia about 

gerrymandering, and what it says is this. The description of 

gerrymandering in this article starts out by saying . . . I’ll just 

find it here. It’s a practice . . . This is a quote from Wikipedia 

on gerrymandering: 

 

Gerrymandering is a practice that attempts to establish a 

political advantage for a particular party or group by 

manipulating geographic boundaries to create partisan or 

incumbent-protected districts. The resulting district is 

known as a gerrymander; however, that word can also 

refer to the process. 

 

So gerrymandering, and they go on to say, “may be used to 

achieve desired electoral results for a particular party, or may 

be used to help or hinder a particular demographic, such as 

political, racial, linguistic, religious or class group.” And I think 

the quote from Mr. Farney from the University of Regina was 

referring to the Aboriginal demographic as this would be 

potentially a form of racial gerrymandering, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

And just a little bit about the etymology of the word. And I’ve 

spoken about this previously but I actually did a report on this 

in social studies in grade 9 and I still remember colouring the 

salamander shape of the actual district that was gerrymandered 

and where the term came from. So it says here the word 

gerrymander was used for the first time in the Boston Gazette 

on March 26, 1812. So that’s 200 years ago and a couple weeks 

when it was first mentioned. So it’s a 200-year-old word and 

the word was created in reaction to redrawing of the 

Massachusetts state senate election districts under the then 

governor, Elbridge Gerry. And so that’s where the gerry part 

came from, his last name. 

 

In 1812 Governor Gerry signed a Bill that redistricted 

Massachusetts to benefit his Democratic-Republican Party. And 

when mapped, one of the contorted districts in the Boston area 

was said to resemble the shape of a salamander. And there’s an 

image here that shows that on the Wikipedia page. So then the 

cartoonists got a hold of it and they started drawing flames and 

wings and that’s how the term gerrymandering came about. The 

exact author of the term gerrymander may never be definitively 

established but it was believed that Federalist newspaper editors 

Nathan Hale and Benjamin and John Russell were the 

instigators. 

 

So the political cartoon was certainly the image that sealed the 

fate of this word, I think, and that’s where it came from. But 

anyways this started in Massachusetts in 1812 and it’s certainly 

been used, and there’s a number of examples of it on the 

Wikipedia page where it has been used. And in fact the situation 

I referred to earlier in Canada where in Saskatoon and Regina, 

the way the boundaries were created in the last go-round with 

the commission, the federal commission, it’s been suggested 

that that was a gerrymander of sorts. And that type of 

gerrymander is called the cracking. 

 

So it’s a strategy . . . Cracking, when gerrymandering is 

occurring, involves spreading out voters of a particular type 

among many districts in order to deny them a sufficiently large 

voting block in any particular district. And certainly we know 

from the federal commission and what the reports that are 

coming out now, it’s only in Saskatchewan where communities 

of interests, like we have in Saskatoon and Regina, have been 

cracked by spreading, cutting them up and then spreading them 

out into a more rural part of the province which in effect takes 

away the community of interests where voting was very high — 

for example, the New Democratic Party in the last federal 

election. So that’s one type of gerrymandering, and it’s called 

cracking. 

 

The other type of gerrymandering is called packing. And in 

packing, the goal there is to concentrate as many voters of one 

type into a single electoral district to reduce their influence in 

other districts. In some cases this can be done to get 

representation for a community of common interests, rather 

than to dilute that interest over several districts to a point of 

ineffectiveness. So it’s almost the opposite of the cracking 

technique that’s been used. 

 

It says here also that gerrymandering can be effective because 

of the wasted-vote effect, by packing opposition voters into 

districts they will already win. So you’re not gaining anything 

there. You’re increasing excess votes for winners. And by 

cracking the remainder among districts where they’ve moved 

into the minority, the number of wasted votes among the 

opposition can be maximized. And similarly with supporters 

holding narrow margins in the unpacked districts, the number 

of wasted votes among supporters is minimized. So it’s a fairly 

sophisticated process, and there’s a number of ways to 

accomplish this. And the article goes on quite at length about 

different ways that it has been done and different types of 

gerrymandering that have occurred in the past and have been 

documented. 

 

And I think the article I just read is suggesting that what’s 

going on here could be seen by the citizenship and by the 

people of Saskatchewan, certainly by historians when they look 

back on it, as an attempt to gain advantage for the current 

government. And certainly the sad part about it is that the 

people that are being used to create that advantage are the youth 

who are being excluded right from the count itself. 

 



1110 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

In fact, I was thinking about what our colleague from 

Athabasca was mentioning earlier about going out on the ice 

and digging a hole in the ice and taking this Bill and putting 

into the lake along with the puck that he was talking about. But 

you know, there are lakes that are closer. We may not need 

even to go that far north, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because there are 

certainly a number of lakes in the southern part of the province 

where we could easily do that. And with the ice being lifted, 

maybe it’s not even necessary to go . . . You know, we could go 

out in a boat. We don’t have to be cutting holes in the ice 

anywhere. We can just put a rock around it, fold it up in a nice 

little package as my colleague described, and Buffalo Pound, in 

fact Wascana Creek — it’s right here — and that might be the 

best place for this Bill. But we could be part of the dragon boat 

races, or we could have an event. 

 

We could create a wonderful cultural event around this, if we 

decide. And we’re hoping that the government will decide to do 

the right thing, and go to the people and think about it. I guess 

that’s another point I wanted to talk about a little bit, was the 

fact that where did this come from . . . Last Mountain Lake, 

maybe, right by Arlington Beach. That might be a good place to 

do it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But I guess what we’ve been asking ourselves as well is 

throughout the election campaign, we door knocked on 

thousands of doors; members opposite door knocked on 

thousands of doors. I know I certainly never, ever heard a 

concern from any particular constituent that there weren’t 

enough politicians and that there was a burning desire on the 

part of the people of Saskatchewan to increase the number of 

members in this Assembly. I just didn’t hear it. 

 

And then, you know, we got to the Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and we heard the agenda for this government. We 

understood what their agenda was going to be for this 

legislative session. And I don’t remember reading anything in 

there about more politicians. And I think the reason why I don’t 

remember that is it’s not there. It’s not part of the Throne 

Speech of this government. And yet on the very last day of a 

short session in December, just before Christmas, on our desks 

appears Bill 36, and it’s An Act to amend The Constituency 

Boundaries Act of Saskatchewan, 1993. 

 

The whole process itself suggests to me that this was something 

that this government was not interested engaging people on, 

was not interested in talking to the electors throughout the 

election, and simply was not interested in raising as an issue or 

a goal or an agenda in the Throne Speech. So what really 

happened? And you know, it would have been great to have 

been a fly on the wall in the cabinet chamber when this decision 

was made because there’s nothing in the facts, there’s nothing 

in the rhetoric that suggests to me why this came about, why it 

was necessary, unless we look at some of the examples in 

gerrymandering that we find in history. And indeed this may be 

one of those articles in Wikipedia eventually if this does come 

about. 

 

It’s not too late, and we are certainly using the amendment that 

we’ve proposed to give this government an opportunity to think 

about it again and again. What the amendment says is that this 

House declines to give second reading to Bill No. 36. So this is 

an opportunity for all the members opposite to decline. They 

can just vote in favour of our amendment. 

 

And here’s why we think it should not receive second reading: 

because it excludes in determining the constituency boundaries 

the counting of the young people of Saskatchewan, who 

deserve to be counted to determine the representation within 

this Assembly, and further, as suggested by the Children’s 

Advocate, have a right to be represented democratically in this 

great country of ours and in this great province of ours. And 

then the Bill also increases the number of members of the 

Legislative Assembly by three, which is an unnecessary 

increase of politicians to represent the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

We’ve talked a lot about the costs of this particular Bill, and 

you know, no matter how you slice the math, we are expensive 

to have, to be — our offices, our salaries, our constituency 

assistants, our caucus supporters. This is not a cheap place. And 

so, you know, in terms of being responsible and proper 

management — and the Canadian Taxpayers Federation has 

pointed that out — is that unnecessary expenses seem to be out 

of context in this day and age, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

certainly isn’t needed. The work I think can be done 

adequately. 

 

We’ve looked at the averages from other populations and other 

provinces, and we see that they’re just . . . I keep coming to it: I 

can’t understand why this is necessary. It’s an unnecessary 

expense. It’s excluding children from their own representation 

in this Chamber. It’s adding and arranging political boundaries 

to advantage the government. And it just seems to be an 

unnecessary expense and creating bigger government which 

doesn’t seem to fit well with what we’re hearing from this 

government in other Bills. Although they are adding two more 

Crowns, so I’m not sure, but then they are cutting the public 

service. So we have a cut of 16 per cent of the public service in 

the next few years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That seems to be 

contrary to this Bill which seems to be adding more politicians. 

And certainly maybe the split personality that we’re seeing may 

manifest itself more as we go into the rest of this session. But 

we’ll see what happens. 

 

Anyways what I wanted to talk about right now is another 

article by . . . It’s an editorial by Murray Mandryk from April 

7th, 2012. And the headline of this article was that the NDP are 

right to oppose more MLAs. So he made some comments as 

well, I think, that are pretty relevant and worth reading into the 

record, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And particularly he said in the 

middle of the article: 

 

. . . physically larger rural ridings isn’t much of a 

justification. Besides the benefits of cyber communication 

that eliminates the need to travel by ox cart to meet with 

your local MLA, the job of an MLA is now a full-time one 

and the legislature’s four-day-a-week schedule and fewer 

sitting days reduces the need to spend time in Regina. 

 

And then he goes on to say: 

 

(While Saskatchewan Party MLAs dutifully argue that we 

already made allowances for northern seats, what they 

neglect to mention is those northern [riding] MLAs 

already manage to represent their constituents in ridings 

several times larger than the biggest rural constituencies.) 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1111 

[21:30] 

 

And I’ve said this before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but indeed if 

they were concerned about the size and the travel requirements, 

we would probably have maybe four or six northern ridings, if 

that’s truly the justification for this Bill is to enable people to 

travel the length of their constituency, which is an ordeal, and 

I’m not going to . . . I won’t deny that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 

an important and difficult part of some of the rural MLAs’ 

work. And getting around and getting to events, we were 

talking earlier tonight, it’s not easy. And I understand that 

travel is a huge time consumer. So time is precious for MLAs, 

and unfortunately, you know, a lot of time ends up being spent 

on the road. One of the members opposite indicated using five 

vehicles in her political career just by travelling to her 

constituents. And that’s a serious commitment and a huge 

burden for the rural MLAs. 

 

But think about the northern MLAs. If this is the true 

justification for this Bill, then we need to increase more rural 

northern ridings as well so all the good folks from the North 

can have easy access to their MLAs. Thank goodness, and I’ve 

talked about this before as well, that we have other ways to 

communicate with people these days that make it somewhat 

easier. And I’m sure most of the rural MLAs use Internet and 

email and other types of cyber communication to at least get in 

touch with people and, you know, and reduce the need to 

actually see them physically in person. And there’s always the 

telephone and the cellular telephones too. There are ways to 

connect with constituents that don’t require physical presence. 

 

And Murray’s article, one of the things he says in the 

conclusion, is that “It’s fair for the Sask. Party to argue 

inequities between the number of voters in seats like Saskatoon 

Southeast versus Saskatoon Centre.”  

 

Yes, populations have changed, and I know my colleague from 

Saskatoon Centre has some interesting numbers about the last 

time the commission was struck, and he’ll be sharing them with 

you as well. 

 

But he goes on to say: 

 

But normal redistribution — required every 10 years, by 

law — takes care of that, anyway. 

 

Despite Wall’s insistence that nothing is afoot here, the 

only plausible explanation for the Sask. Party wanting to 

do this is that it has already drawn a map that shows the 

political benefit to it of additional seats in east Saskatoon, 

southeast Regina and rural Saskatchewan. 

 

So the NDP should be opposing adding three more MLAs 

for the same reason the rest of us should be opposing it — 

it’s something that only seems to benefit the Sask. Party. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think I’ve covered most of the 

ground I wanted to cover tonight in this opportunity to speak to 

this amendment. I’m really encouraging and hoping that the 

members opposite consider the amendment and consider this 

idea that maybe it’s not time for this right at this point, and that 

we go forward with our commission in the manner intended by 

the original Act in 1993 and let them do their work. They know 

how to do the population redistribution. The Bill is very clear 

about how that shouldn’t take place. They will be consulting 

and having hearings with people. 

 

Let’s not exclude my son, member opposite’s daughter, from 

the count in my riding particularly so that I can effectively 

represent the same number of people, including children, that 

are being represented by all the other ridings and especially 

those with less children. And even more so for those First 

Nation populations where 50 per cent of their population won’t 

even be counted because their children represent 50 per cent of 

their population. 

 

So I’m very pleased to have been able to speak to this 

amendment. I think it’s an important amendment. I’m glad we 

brought it forward, and I honestly and seriously encourage 

everyone — backbenchers, cabinet members — to think just 

one more time about this. You have time, and maybe this isn’t 

the right time for this. 

 

So thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for bearing with 

me. And I’m going to close my comments for now. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy 

to . . . or mixed emotions to rise tonight because clearly we 

wish we wouldn’t have to be doing this. There’s more pressing 

business, but clearly this is probably the most important Bill 

before the House in this session. 

 

It’s ironic, as I had said a few weeks ago, that it’s a one-pager, 

but we’re forced to introduce the amendment. And the 

amendment that we’re discussing tonight and that I support is: 

 

“this House declines to give second reading to Bill No. 36, 

An Act to amend the Constituency Boundaries Act, 1993, 

because 

 

The Bill excludes, in determining the constituency 

boundaries, the counting of the young people of 

Saskatchewan who deserve to be counted to determine 

the representation within this Legislative Assembly; and 

further 

 

. . . [this] Bill increases the number of members of this 

Legislative Assembly by three, which is an unnecessary 

increase of politicians to represent the people of 

Saskatchewan.” 

 

So that’s what we’re talking about tonight. It’s a very important 

issue, very important issue. And I have to say that it’s been 

really worthwhile listening to my colleagues that have come 

before me — the member from Nutana, Rosemont, and 

Athabasca. And I hope that we all get a chance to contribute a 

bit to this discussion because I think people in Saskatchewan 

have concerns. 

 

Unfortunately in many ways this government has done a lot to 

try to introduce this Bill in a sleeper-type of way so people 

don’t get engaged. And that’s what they probably would like to 

see — an electorate, a province that is not engaged. And we see 



1112 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

that in terms of voter turnout, that people say, it really doesn’t 

matter. People, politicians, what we do, what we try to do is say 

what we’re going to do and then do what we said that we were 

going to do. That’s a pretty simple creed to live by when it 

comes to elections, and hopefully we have the courage of 

conviction to live simply by that. 

 

When we ask for people to support us, we say what we’re going 

to do, and then we do that. And we don’t change things up. And 

this is simply a really important example of going to some of 

the basic foundations of how our democratic system is made 

here in Saskatchewan. And through the evolution of 

Saskatchewan over the past 100 and now five, six years, we’ve 

come to a place where we think we’ve got it pretty well right. 

 

We’ve seen some rough bumps, such as when we went to the 

Supreme Court of Canada in the late ’80s and the early ’90s 

about trying to get the right system in place. And we see a 

Premier who’s trying to rationalize excluding young people 

because of what happened 30 years ago. But we know the 

world has changed a lot in the last, actually, 30-plus years.  

 

In fact one thing we’re celebrating today, one thing we’re 

celebrating today is the Charter — Canada’s constitution that 

we mark today — a very important milestone, something that 

happened in between 1979 and now. And I think even in fact 

that Premier Blakeney at the time did both the 1979 and the ’82 

constitution. We grow. We evolve to do the right thing. 

 

So I am very happy to be here tonight discussing the 

amendment before us. And I have to say that we even have late 

news here from CBC from 8:28 tonight, CBC. In fact I’ll read 

the newscast in case maybe you didn’t hear this. And I see the 

member from Greystone is interested, and I’ll read the whole 

thing. And I quote from CBC, new out: 

 

A plan to count only citizens of voting age in determining 

the configuration of new electoral boundaries could be a 

violation of children’s rights, Bob Pringle, Saskatchewan 

Children’s Advocate, says. 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

The province has launched a process to redraw the 

electoral map. 

 

In addition to boosting the number of politicians to 61 

from 58, the province wants the size of each constituency 

determined based on the population that is over 18. 

 

But according to Pringle, that could violate the Charter of 

Rights. 

 

“Section 3 of the charter is intended to ensure effective 

representation of the whole population, not just those over 

the age of 18 years,” Pringle said Tuesday. 

 

Pringle added the exclusion of minors may also run afoul 

of the Charter’s equality provisions. 

 

He said not counting people under 18 would affect 

communities with a large youth component. 

 

“Leaving children, youth, out of the population count to 

calculate the boundaries will have a significant effect on 

the political representation of aboriginal people and new 

immigrants due to their much younger demographics,” 

Pringle said. 

 

And it goes on to say: 

 

Saskatchewan’s Justice Minister, Don Morgan, said 

Tuesday he is aware of Pringle’s view and he disagrees. 

 

He said it is fair to count only people of voting age. 

 

Now I have to say, this information is new information. We’ve 

just become aware of it over the course of the day and of course 

this news tonight. And I think this is, this is shocking that we 

can have a government who has gone on record to say that 

they’re fighting for the children of Saskatchewan — 

particularly those who are in vulnerable situations, but all 

children — and yet they do this, yet they do this. 

 

And I remember just a few weeks ago, I think it was the kids 

from Balfour were here. The kids were here from Balfour, and 

the local MLA took at length to introduce them and made a big 

point of saying, welcome to your legislature. But really, as I 

said then, I think we are all going to be hypocrites if we 

continue down that road and we say, you don’t really count. 

And I think the member from Athabasca said it really well 

today, and I think when he talked about maybe we need to have 

a campaign, he was suggesting young people might rally round, 

why don’t I count? Why don’t I count? And I think that’s a 

really good question. 

 

And I think here we have the Children’s Advocate stepping up 

to the plate and saying, it’s much more than that. This goes 

against the Charter of Rights. And Charter of Rights are not just 

for people over the age of 18. They’re for everyone. 

 

And as my colleague from Nutana has said, talked about my 

colleague from Massey Place, and I don’t know if he was in the 

House. We were talking about the new child, Clara, and how 

Clara matters. Clara counts. Today she counts. But if we pass 

this Bill, she doesn’t count. And that’s an unfortunate thing. 

That’s a very unfortunate thing. 

 

And so I think it’s incumbent on us to pass this amendment, 

pass this amendment and defeat the Bill and send it back and 

take another look at this. Because as I said, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we have to have the courage of our conviction to say 

what we’re going to do when we knock on doors. And it’s as 

simple as that. And I think the government in many ways has 

lost its moral compass on this Bill because they did not have the 

courage of conviction to say, this is what our plan was. 

 

It was not a surprise, it was not a surprise to anyone that we 

were going to have a census and that in fact it would be in the 

10th year of what the Act, the legislation requires; that what 

would come next would be a commission to correct any of the 

imbalances that exist. And I know, and I know that — and I’ll 

talk about it later — that often my riding comes up as an 

example of the imbalance. We know that. And I know, for 

example, Southeast has had a huge population boom. 

 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1113 

But I think people need to recognize that in my riding, in 

Centre, has its own unique challenges. It’s a population that has 

a lot of rentals. We have a very mixed demographic in that 

riding, both of workers coming into the province that might 

displace people who would be voting in Saskatoon or in 

Saskatchewan, new immigrants. It’s quite an interesting 

mixture. And of course many, if you go down 22nd Street, you 

will see apartment blocks that are actually, have been over the 

last year or two actually closed because they’re being redone. 

And so there’s a whole lot of things happening in Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

[21:45] 

 

But as was stated earlier, I do want to say, and it wasn’t actually 

in the last report in terms of the constituencies, but I want to 

point out to some who might find this interesting that at one 

point, in 1993, Saskatoon Southeast was the smallest of the 11 

ridings in Saskatchewan, and the largest was my riding of 

Saskatoon Idylwyld. And how things can change as our 

demographics change and our cities change. But here I do find 

it interesting. In ’93 Southeast was smaller than Saskatoon 

Idylwyld. In fact Idylwyld was the largest and Southeast was 

the smallest in Saskatoon. 

 

But those things are worked out. Those things are worked out. 

That’s why we have these commissions every 10 years because 

we know populations shift, areas of the city grow. Other areas 

of the cities may be having challenges that are causing the 

numbers not to be there as they once were. 

 

But I do want to say, Mr. Speaker, this is a very important 

amendment before us, and one that I think we need to consider. 

And I would ask the members opposite to individually think 

about this because I think, as we get new information, we’re 

seeing that maybe this wasn’t as well thought out as it could 

have been. 

 

You know, I think that we all knew the census was coming in 

2011. And we all . . . I think if this government in its last 

mandate of the four years had, as I said, the courage of 

conviction to actually believe in this kind of thing, what they 

should have done, what they should have done — and they 

could have done this — is two years ago had hearings, public 

hearings on the issue of, do we need more MLAs? 

 

The population in Saskatchewan was growing. We’ve known 

that for several years. We’ve known it for several years because 

we have interim reports on population growth, whether it’s 

through Sask Health or is the StatsCan. Of course you have the 

official ones every five years, but it was to no one’s surprise 

that we saw the population of Saskatchewan where it was. Now 

it might have been to some of the members opposite over there 

who said, oh we had no idea Saskatchewan was growing. All of 

a sudden we find out in 2011 that Saskatchewan’s much bigger 

than it was in 2001. I don’t think that’s quite true. I don’t think 

that’s quite true. I think we all knew what was happening. 

 

And if these folks had, as I said, the courage of conviction, they 

could have gone to the people and said, you know what? I think 

we need to have some input here. What do you think? What do 

you think? Do you want to have three more MLAs, three more 

MLAs, or do you want to have services? Do you want to have 

services like keeping the senior drug plan and for young people 

the drug plan more affordable? Can we do that? What do you 

think we should do? What do you think we should do? Should 

we invest more in our schools? Should we invest more in 

keeping our tuition fees more reasonable? What would you 

prefer? 

 

Now we saw earlier today in question period that we had a 

minister in his answer try to defend — try — and of course I 

think he saw the folly of his answer when he tried to spin the 

fact that these three new MLAs would not cost anything. That’s 

unbelievable, simply unbelievable. You know, when you have a 

budget that’s grown so much under this government, so much 

under this government, how can you possibly say it’s not going 

to cost anything? They’re just going to absorb the cost. That’s 

foolish to say because once you’ve got an MLA and three 

MLAs in place, they do cost something. Now the estimated 

amount that we’re hearing is somewhere around 225, 250,000. 

That’s three-quarters of a million a year. Over the course of 

four years — you can do the math — that’s over 3 million. And 

of course it’s just not four years. We’re talking into the future. 

We’re talking into the future. So it is millions of dollars. And I 

think the government needs to own up to this idea that it does 

actually cost more money. It does cost more money. 

 

And they’ve made some choices. They’ve made choices here, 

and that’s what being a government is all about. It’s about 

making choices. It’s about setting your priorities, letting the 

public know what your priorities are, and then planning. And 

clearly they haven’t planned very well here at all, not at all. 

Because well as we say, the two reasons that we have issues: 

one, excluding those folks under the age of 18, the young 

people of Saskatchewan who for now for a generation have 

come to expect that they will be part of the formula because 

they count, and now they don’t count. So this is going to be a 

shift, a shift of how we think about young people in 

Saskatchewan. And as the Children’s Advocate says, this is an 

issue. This is one you just can’t say, hey we’ve passed the Bill 

and it’s all over with; we do the formula and it’s done, and then 

we go back to saying, welcome to your legislature. That’s not 

on any more. That’s not on any more because it’s a new 

Saskatchewan. It’s a different Saskatchewan. And it’s one that 

they knew about and they didn’t campaign on. And I think as 

we see this problem with young people becoming more and 

more disengaged with the political system, with what makes 

Saskatchewan a wonderful place, and we see that, we see that, 

we see that in terms of the voter turnout. And we know if 

there’s one demographic who doesn’t come out to vote, it’s the 

young people. It’s the young people. 

 

So what kind of message is it that we send to young people 

now? Is it really that we’re really saying, Mr. Speaker, you 

don’t come out to vote so why should we count you in the 

formula? Is that really what we’re saying? You don’t come out 

to vote, so why should we count you? I think that’s just not who 

we are here in Saskatchewan. I think we count everyone. We 

work for everyone, and we work for everyone all the time. We 

work for everyone all the time. And I think that’s an important 

principle of what Saskatchewan is all about. And we know 

across Canada, this is what most provinces do. 

 

And so I think that we’re taking a major step back. It’s not 

something that we’re going to be proud of, and I think that we 



1114 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

have some real, real concerns with it on our side of the House. 

So we feel it is our duty to oppose this. And I know many 

people have talked about some of the editorials that have been 

read into the record that it is our duty to oppose this, because I 

think people need to be aware of what Bill 36 is all about. And 

this is why we’re proposing this amendment, this reasoned 

amendment that we decline second reading to Bill No. 36, 

because it in fact: 

 

“. . . in determining the constituency boundaries, the 

counting of the young people of Saskatchewan, who 

deserve to be counted to determine the representation 

within this Legislative Assembly; and further 

 

The Bill increases the number of members of this 

Legislative Assembly by three, which is an unnecessary 

increase of politicians to represent the people of 

Saskatchewan.” 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, other provinces have gone 

through this. And I know I’ve talked about the example of 

British Columbia that just recently had hearings, had a process 

by which they went to their people — and that’s the right way 

to do it — went to their people and said, what do you think we 

should do? Our population is growing. In BC we know the 

population’s growing. The population in other provinces are 

growing. The population of Canada is growing. And so we have 

that ability to consult with people. That’s what we do. BC did, 

and what did they find out? People said, we prefer to invest in 

services for the people of British Columbia. And I think I 

would bet that in Saskatchewan, if the people across the way 

here, the Sask Party MLAs had campaigned or held hearings 

prior to the election, that’s what they would have heard. And 

we wouldn’t be here tonight doing this debate on this 

amendment. 

 

So I think this is a huge step back. And I also just want to also 

bring into the mix too that, as some of the columnists and 

others have pointed out to me, that not only when you exclude 

people who are 17 and younger, you’re excluding future voters, 

those who are 10 and 14 who would be voting. And so those are 

an important group there in any by-elections. But see this is 

where it gets complicated, because if you start saying, well 

we’ll take the 10 . . . anybody over 10, I think it’s just wise to 

stick to the Charter and say, everyone counts. It’s the right thing 

to do. And not only is it the right thing to do, it’s the most 

straightforward thing to do. It’s what we’ve been doing now for 

many years. 

 

And why all of a sudden do we say, you know what? We’re 

going to change the system. And I think for many, they shake 

their heads and say, where did this come from? Where did this 

come from? And that’s a fair question I think that the people of 

Saskatchewan have to ask. And people wonder, so where did 

this come from? We’ve not had any correspondence or letters 

saying, you know what? We need more politicians in this 

province. We’ve had lots of letters and emails and 

correspondence about what people think we need, but I have to 

be straight with you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve not had anybody say, 

you know, what we really need is three more politicians. 

They’ve just not said that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you know, and we have had this debate and I 

know that there’s been members across the way who’ve 

hollered at this when we raised the idea of representative 

democracy. And for some reason they feel that that’s not the 

principle that Saskatchewan should embrace, that they should 

not embrace representative democracy, that they will just in 

reality work for their voters, you know. You know, it’s funny, 

Mr. Speaker. I’m a teacher by trade and, you know, when we 

get standardized tests, there’s always this tendency, and I think 

people have heard about the idea of teaching to the test — 

right? — teaching to the test because everything’s measured 

around the test. So now what we’re going to do is we’re going 

to have the voters . . . Everything’s going to be about the voters. 

But yes, we’d say we work for everybody. But really what 

matters are the voters. And I think we really have . . . we’re on 

dangerous ground when we start moving away from the 

principle of representative democracy, that everyone counts, 

that the Charter really means everyone. It’s not just those over 

the age of 18. 

 

So when we get into that area, it reminds me of when we start 

teaching to the test because we want to have great test scores. 

Well we want to have good students. We want to have a good 

society where everyone counts. Everyone counts — our 

grandchildren, our future children, our seniors, our new 

Canadians, people who are in our province for whatever reason 

but are not quite yet Canadian citizens. They all count because 

they are all part of Saskatchewan. And I think that’s really, 

really important because it’s our job. It’s our job, and simply 

it’s our job to represent everyone. And I think that there is 

absolutely no excuse, there’s no good excuse for changing that. 

 

And I think this is when we start to wonder what is, what is the 

rationale behind this and is there some ulterior motives? And I 

think that this is why I keep going back to this, about the 

courage of our convictions and being able to, when we’re on 

the doorsteps, say what we really mean, say what we really 

mean. And sometimes that will be a difficult conversation. But 

if there are plans to say, you know what? We think, we think 

that we need to have more politicians. I think this is where this 

government has failed. Because they’ve simply not 

demonstrated that courage, not demonstrated that courage of 

their conviction, but in fact they’re taking the easy way to get to 

more power. And I think this is wrong, absolutely wrong. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in the time that we’ve been, you know, 

leading up to the budget and we’ve talked about austerity and is 

it prosperity or austerity, you know, when we’ve got, we’ve just 

got mixed messages here. We’ve got mixed messages that we 

don’t have a lot of money and we’ve got to be, we’ve got to be 

careful on everything. And I really appreciated this afternoon 

when the member from Athabasca was pointing out that on this 

topic we need to have an intelligent conversation. We need to 

have the intelligent discussion about what’s really important in 

our democracy here because we’re really setting something, not 

only for 10 years, but for many years. If we go to 61 MLAs, 

that’s not just for 10 years really. That’s for decades. That’s 

really for decades. We sure hope it is. If we increase the 

number of seats, it’s something for long term. 

 

So we have to have the rational conversation. But the member 

from Athabasca here was showing how difficult it is to have a 

rational, intelligent conversation with the folks over there 

because they seem to have only a couple of answers out of their 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1115 

songbook. And everything is about either the balanced budget 

or putting more criminals in jail, and you can’t have a 

conversation about anything else. They simply are incapable of 

discussing anything else. 

 

[22:00] 

 

And that’s what it’s all about, no matter what it is. And I don’t 

know how they, you know, I mean how they will defend this or 

they just go into their robo-answer about this because they 

don’t seem to have to be able to give any answers about, where 

did this idea come from? Where did this idea come from? They 

just go blank or they go to the balanced budget answer or 

putting more criminals in jail. And none of them make sense. 

You think, what channel am I tuning in to here? But that’s on 

the robo-calls, you know. 

 

And so I have to say that, Mr. Speaker, I have some real 

concerns about this because really this seems to be not well 

thought out, and we’re really seeing some questions that need to 

have some answers. And when we have . . . And I will read this 

again because I was shocked earlier this evening when I heard 

what the Children’s Advocate had to say. And this was on the 

8:30 news tonight, the 8:30 news in case members opposite 

didn’t hear it. And some say they heard and didn’t faze because 

it didn’t register. They didn’t know how to deal with it. They 

just didn’t know how to deal with it because, you know, here 

you have an officer of this legislature having this opinion. 

 

I think we have to listen to it. I think we have to listen to it. And 

it’s not a joke when the Children’s Advocate, who has been 

talking about some of the major challenges young people face 

in this province . . . And we see this government on one hand 

saying, we’re all there for children; we’re all there for young 

people. And in fact we have, before the House, we have a Bill 

creating a separate officer of the legislature because the 

Children’s Advocate was actually under the auspices of the 

Ombudsman. And now we have before us a Bill because we 

think that much of the Children’s Advocate, that he needs to be 

recognized, the officer needs to have his own independent 

status . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . There you go. There you 

go. 

 

So what he said, this is what he said, and I quote from CBC 

tonight: “A plan to count only citizens of voting age in 

determining the configuration of new electoral boundaries 

could be a violation of children’s rights, Bob Pringle . . . 

Children’s Advocate, says.” He says, and I will continue to say, 

I’ll continue to quote the article: 

 

But according to Pringle, that could violate the Charter of 

Rights. 

 

“Section 3 of the charter is intended to ensure effective 

representation of the whole population, not just those over 

the age of 18 years,” Pringle said Tuesday. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

Pringle added the exclusion of minors may also run afoul 

of the Charter’s equality provisions. 

 

He said not counting people under 18 would affect 

communities with a large youth component. 

 

And this is a quote directly from him: 

 

“Leaving children, youth, out of the population count to 

calculate the boundaries will have a significant effect on 

the political representation of aboriginal people and new 

immigrants due to their much younger demographics,” 

Pringle said. 

 

So I think we’ve got an issue here. We’ve got an issue that’s 

real and one that we just can’t brush aside. And that’s why I 

think this amendment is really something that we need to take a 

look at and I urge the members opposite to take a look at. 

Because, as I said, this is not just for the next ten years, but 

when you’re doing this kind of work, it’s for decades into the 

future. That’s the way we should be doing anything when we’re 

changing the electoral, the number of MLAs. And we know 

there’s a process for correcting imbalances, and that’s why we 

have a commission. The process has set up a commission every 

ten years and everybody knows that. Everybody knows that. It’s 

not a surprise. But it is a surprise and it’s a shock when you see 

after the election this kind of fundamental change. 

 

And you know, and it’s not that, you know, Mr. Speaker, our 

ridings are so, so large. Here we have the population per seat, 

and what we would have right now, and our population per seat 

is 17,810. And BC is 51,764. So that’s almost three times 

larger, three times larger, and they seem to be able to work with 

that. And in fact they said that’s about right. That’s about right. 

They had hearings and said, is that, do we need more MLAs in 

BC? They said no, we’re okay. We’re okay. 

 

And then we get into Alberta. They’re about 44,000. Manitoba, 

which has a population density just a little bit bigger than ours 

— theirs is 2.2 people per square kilometres; ours is 1.8 — they 

have 21,000, 21,000 people per seat. And of course, you know, 

I’ve heard our side, members on our side quote the Ontario 

number which is just mind-boggling, but they seem to make it 

work. They seem to make it work. They have 120,000 people 

per seat. That’s over six times more, over six times more. I 

think that’s phenomenal. That’s phenomenal, you know. 

 

And as I, and you know, as we were doing it, I was listening to 

the member from Nutana. And we were working out the math 

about if we were to do the same formula that these folks are 

advocating, that the government’s advocating, that we would be 

at just over 12,000 people, 12,000 people that we’d be 

representing. I mean that’s, that’s incredible. We’d be then 

one-tenth the size of Ontario. But we’re not counting kids. 

We’re not counting kids. Kids don’t count. Kids don’t count. 

So that’s the rule, and then we’d be one-tenth the size of the 

ridings of Ontario. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that we have a process for correcting 

imbalances right now. Every 10 years we correct the 

imbalances. Everybody knows that. Everybody knows that. 

And we know that the population’s grown. That’s not a 

surprise. We’ve been watching that, and we’ve been happy to 

see the population growing for several years now. No surprise 

there. So everybody knew that there would be some corrections 

coming up. That’s not a surprise. 

 



1116 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

But what the surprise was, what the surprise was that three 

MLAs and not counting youth. And as I said earlier, it’s about 

the courage of conviction. And maybe that’s not a surprise, 

because we knew this government. There were several things. 

This seems to be a habit of this government. They don’t consult 

and all of a sudden you see things they never said anything 

about. 

 

And we can go back and talk about several examples of that, 

several examples of that. We saw the essential services 

legislation that happens to be in the courts right now, struck 

down. And are we looking at a piece of legislation that may 

face the same fate . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. The 

question is, what are the court . . . Are they just going to absorb 

that cost too? That’s a no-cost item, no-cost item for the 

government, court costs. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen this happen. We’ve seen this 

before where they’ve just not had the courage of conviction to 

say what they’re going to do and then do it. They don’t say it, 

they don’t tell anybody they’re going to do it, and then we see 

this kind of legislation just before Christmas. And you know, 

this just isn’t the way this kind of change should happen. And 

we are deeply concerned that they did not campaign on it, and 

it’s not the priorities the people in Saskatchewan are talking 

about. 

 

People in Saskatchewan are talking about infrastructure. 

They’re talking about how are their roads, how are their streets. 

They’re talking about policing. You know, Mr. Speaker, today I 

had, you know, I saw about the devastating news that we had 

about, in my own riding, that a gas station on 20th Street for the 

third time in six weeks was held up after midnight. And we 

need action on those kind of things. And here we are debating 

whether we need three more politicians. I think on 20th Street 

we need three more police. We need better occupational health 

and safety regulations. We need more inspectors. 

 

What we’re having, what we’re seeing, what we’re seeing is a 

cutback in government services of 16 per cent of occupational 

health, of government services, government services, but a 5 

per cent increase in politicians, 5 per cent increase in 

politicians. It just doesn’t add up. And these are the choices of 

this government. These are the choices of this government. 

 

And so I have some real concerns, and I have to echo many of 

the issues that have been raised by members before me. But I 

have to say that when we see real issues facing people in our 

ridings, this was not brought up. This was not brought up. This 

was not brought up. You know, as I said earlier about the 

holdup on 20th Street last night, I’m sure, I’m sure Darren 

would say, what I really need is three more politicians to solve 

this problem. They’re not saying that. They’re not saying that. 

They’re saying, I need more help to make sure I’m safer in my 

workplace. That’s what they’re saying. I need more help to 

make sure I’m safer in my workplace. I don’t need three more 

politicians. So I think these folks need to focus on what’s really, 

really important. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that we have some challenges here. 

And I think this government needs to get its priorities straight, 

and I don’t know how they set this as a priority, that they 

needed three more politicians and they needed to send out the 

message that kids don’t count. Where that came from I don’t 

know, and I’d sure like to hear from the other side. When we 

have questions in question period, they do everything to avoid 

answering, answering those questions. 

 

But you know, it was interesting. I did have a chance to ask the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs during estimates about, you 

know, in the last couple of years we’ve seen some interesting 

approaches to how we do elections. And of course, what I’m 

talking about is the idea around photo ID [identification]. And 

where did that come from? And again we didn’t have a real 

clear answer when we raised those questions a couple of years 

ago as in they . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — We shut them down on that one, David. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — What’s that? 

 

An Hon. Member: — We shut them down on attestations. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — That’s right. That’s right. 

 

And so we had a chance to talk about this in estimates the other 

night. Were they going to share their approach that cities 

needed to have more councillors? Were they going to be that 

generous and say, listen, we’re adding more MLAs; do you 

guys want to have more city councillors? More politicians for 

everybody. And that’s because it seems to be the style of the 

day. Everybody wants more politicians. I don’t think so. I don’t 

think so. And this is, you know, and this is because we were 

concerned about the ID, which is a big issue in my riding, as 

there are a significant number of people that don’t have photo 

ID. 

 

But anyway so I asked them. I said, so are you going to do the 

same thing? Are you going to share this with everybody and 

just say to the cities, listen, we all think you need two or three 

more politicians? 

 

An Hon. Member: — What did Mandryk say about this? 

 

Mr. Forbes: — I’m not sure. I’m not sure he actually addressed 

this one. We’ll have to make sure we ask the columnists, what 

do they think about more city councillors? But I think . . . But 

this is the point I wanted to make, Mr. Speaker. And this is 

where the Minister of Municipal Affairs said, you know, and I 

quote — and this is on page 22, April 2nd, 2012 — and I quote, 

“We never campaigned on more MLAs. We never talked about 

that.” There you go. He admitted to it. He admitted to it. These 

folks all go, the other folks all go silent on it. But then he goes 

and he goes on to say, “I would have to say that I have never 

been asked by anybody about additional councillors in a city 

yet.” So he’s probably not going to do it because that would be 

the rational thing. 

 

[22:15] 

 

If not asked to do it, why would you do it? So I’m thinking, 

why are these folks doing this if nobody’s asked them to do it? 

And this is a question we keep asking. So who’s asked you? 

Has SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] 

asked you to do this? Has SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities] asked you to do it? Who’s asked them to 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1117 

do it? Was there an emergency resolution: we need three more 

MLAs in Saskatchewan? We don’t . . . Our numbers aren’t 

quite low, high, I don’t know what. Jack them up. Jack them 

up. More politicians in Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, you know, I don’t think that’s what they’re saying. I 

don’t think that’s what they’re saying. People are saying we 

need more services; we need support. I know when it comes to 

environment, there’s issues. I heard issues around recycling. 

We hear issues about child care. We hear issues about 

highways, P.A. [Prince Albert]. We hear issues around the 

second bridge . . . [inaudible] . . . Nokomis School closing. 

Now one of the members . . . Earl Grey highway. All of those 

things. 

 

And I’m sure we could get letters, and they’d probably be 

happy to table those letters. But they’ve not tabled the letters. 

But I did hear one. You know, there was a letter that was read 

into the record earlier, by Philip Sparks. And I just want to read 

it because I think this is where some of the members opposite 

may not quite understand it. And the title was, “Putting politics 

first.” And this was April 3rd, 2012, by Philip Sparks, and he’s 

from Weyburn. And I quote: 

 

It is pretty easy to see where the Saskatchewan Party 

stands in regards to seniors as opposed to creating three 

more MLAs for the province. Getting three more seats in 

the legislature seems to be much more important than 

helping seniors, some of whom are struggling with high 

prescription drug prices. Now they will just have to dig 

deeper. 

 

Many seniors require more prescriptions as they get older 

and many are already experiencing financial hardship. 

Does our government care? It would certainly seem not, as 

long as they can brag about the prosperity they have 

brought to the province, crow about the “Saskatchewan 

advantage” and what a rich province we all live in. 

 

I am 71 and have health issues that require me to take 

several prescriptions every day. Now it will cost me about 

$45 more each month. But I am one of the lucky ones as I 

have two part-time jobs [He’s 71 years old. He’s got two 

part-time jobs.] and I can handle it. How many other 

seniors are in that position? 

 

Does the government seem concerned? Nope. Three more 

MLAs though, now that’s important. There is an election 

in the future and I hope the seniors in this province show 

the Sask. Party the exit door. 

 

Now what I find interesting about this letter is the Sask Party 

government probably thinks he’s endorsing their position 

because he said, “Three more MLAs though, now that’s 

important.” So maybe they’re taking that as a ringing 

endorsement. No, I think that’s called irony. That’s called 

tongue in cheek. So just for you folks over there opposite, this 

is not an endorsement. That’s not an endorsement. He’s being a 

little witty. So because I want to make sure . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Sarcasm. Sarcasm, there you go. All right, 

there you go. So I just want to point that out that if this is a 

letter that they were going to table for support, the one letter 

that they thought really mattered — all right? — so, Mr. 

Speaker, I have some real concerns here because I think the 

member opposite have some real issues here about 

understanding where the people of the province stand. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s come to this, David. They’re 

crossing the floor. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — They’re crossing the floor. I have to watch my 

back here. I get a little nervous when I see somebody walking 

around with a jug of water, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I do want to say that there’s lots of things that 

I wanted to talk about. I wanted to talk about some of the 

columns that have been read into the record, but I do think that 

we have lots more to say about this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But you know, I wanted to also point out this: that, you know, 

the last time we had the commission was in 2002. And there 

were a couple of members from the other side who made 

presentations to that commission in 2002. The member for 

Canora-Pelly made a petition, and the member for 

Kelvington-Wadena presented to the commission in 2002. And 

not once in their presentation did they argue to exclude children 

under the age of 18.  

 

So somehow since then . . . And they have both been in the 

House for many years, and they’ve been successful politicians. 

They have represented their people and clearly have been 

returned with significant majorities. So clearly they have been 

doing their work in their ridings. But they do have concerns, 

like we all should have concerns, when it comes to the 

commission, that we want to make to sure the commission 

hears. How can we make the system work a little bit better 

about drawing the boundaries and making sure that we have 

good representation? 

 

But not once in their presentation did they argue that they 

needed more MLAs to help represent their constituents. What 

they did talk about was the changes to the block of 

constituencies and the boundaries to better reflect what they 

thought were the areas within the constituencies. But they did 

not propose that there should be more constituencies in our 

province. They said, you know, they wanted the constituencies 

more square so this could allow constituents more easy access 

to their MLA and their MLA office and also makes it easier for 

the MLA to locate an office that’s in a location central to all 

their constituents. 

 

And so I think this goes back to the gerrymander comment 

where you can have badly drawn constituencies that look like 

salamanders but we try to do is in squares so that the people 

have easy access. And that can be done. That can be done. We 

can make it work here. But I don’t think that . . . And here you 

have this group here who’s saying they weren’t looking to cut 

out people who were younger than 18 and they weren’t looking 

to increase the number of MLAs. They just had, they had a plan 

about how they could make it work. So why now have they 

changed their tune? 

 

So I have to say it looked like they had a more reasonable 

approach in 2002 than they do in 2012. So I don’t know what 

the change was in the last 10 years, why all of a sudden they 

had different issues. Because here you have two successful 



1118 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

Sask Party politicians who seem to be appreciated by their 

constituents because I know they get returned by healthy 

margins. Now I do have to say in that . . . But I have not heard 

from those two that one of the things that the people were 

saying in their ridings was, hey could we break this up more 

and interject one more rural or three more rural ridings. They 

weren’t saying that. They seemed to think that the numbers 

were about right and there are ways to make it work. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I keep going back to this, that we have a 

system that works. It’s got a built-in process to correct the 

imbalances. We count young people now because we value 

young people. And I think that the problem that we see coming 

up into the future is the signal that we don’t count young 

people. 

 

And as I said, as this story grows and as the momentum grows 

and questions seem to increase about the nature of this Bill, and 

as I reflect on what the folks on CBC were saying tonight, the 

fact that Bob Pringle, our Children’s Advocate, is saying that 

there could be real problems here that the . . . especially when it 

comes to the Charter of Rights. And I just want to quote this 

again because I think this is new news. And I think the folks at 

home when they hear this tomorrow on CBC, and because this 

is a late-breaking evening news . . . And when Pringle says that 

section 3 of the Charter is intended to ensure effective 

representation of the whole population not just those over the 

age of 18 years — that’s what he’s saying — I think that we 

have some work to do here. 

 

And so I think that’s why this amendment is so important and 

that we think that we need to support this amendment. When 

you have folks like the Children’s Advocate stepping up and 

saying, you know, if we really value our young people, our 

children, our youth, that it’s important that we support this 

amendment. And I want to make sure I get it, the amendment, 

into the record one more time before the evening is out because 

I know there are people who tune in after the news and want to 

hear what we’re talking about. And what our amendment is that 

we’re proposing on this side that: 

 

“this House declines to give second reading to Bill No. 36, 

An Act to amend The Constituency Boundaries Act, 1993, 

because 

 

The Bill excludes, in determining the constituency 

boundaries, the counting of the young people of 

Saskatchewan who deserve to be counted to determine 

[the] representation within this Legislative Assembly; 

and further, 

 

The Bill increases the number of members of this 

Legislative Assembly by three which is an unnecessary 

increase of politicians to represent the people of 

Saskatchewan.” 

 

So we’re going to count on the support for the members 

opposite because we think as they reflect on our speeches today 

that, hopefully, that it’s connected with some of them. We 

talked about the courage of conviction, the courage of 

conviction to say what you mean, to say what you’re going to 

do, and do the right thing. Do the right thing. So when this 

amendment comes to vote, make sure that you think about the 

Charter. Think about what the Children’s Advocate is saying. 

Think about our children and support this amendment. 

 

Now the government could do a much quicker thing and 

withdraw the Bill tomorrow as we’ve been talking about on this 

side. We’re not quite sure of where to depose, dispose of this 

Bill, you know, whether it’s in the lake out front here or another 

lake. We’re talking about Last Mountain Lake. But I think we 

need to get rid of this Bill. Bill No. 36 needs to go so we can 

get rid of this and get onto the pressing issues that really matter 

to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

There are issues out there tonight that people are concerned 

about as we talked about, this letter from the fellow from 

Weyburn talking about prescription drug costs. That’s an issue. 

That’s a real issue. I’ve raised the issue of occupational health 

and safety. Tonight there are people going to work after 

midnight who are thinking about how safe are they at work. 

 

And so I think we need to be focusing, we need to be turning to 

the issues of the day that are pressing and real, that matter to the 

people that we represent and all the people we represent 

whether they’re younger than 18 or older than 18. It’s child 

care, quality child care. All of those issues. They are important 

to each and everyone of us. This kind of distraction . . . We 

should just do the right thing, do the right thing as soon as 

possible — withdraw the Bill. And if they’re not going to 

withdraw the Bill, then do the right thing and support the 

amendment. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I know that there’ll be many, many of 

us who want to speak. And I’m not quite finished saying the 

things I want to say, so I’m looking forward to more time to 

talk about this. But I think that it’s about our job, and our job is 

to do the right thing. And sometimes we have to admit that we 

haven’t thought through all the things we’ve done. And I think 

this Bill No. 36 is a prime example of not thinking it all the way 

through, you know. 

 

We have a system. We have a system to correct the imbalances, 

but nobody, nobody during the campaign said we needed more 

politicians. And so I think this is absolutely wrong-headed, and 

the amendment is the right thing to do. So, Mr. Speaker, I think 

that . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Now being after the hour of adjournment of 

10:30 p.m., this House stands adjourned to 1:30 Wednesday 

afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 36 — The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1089 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1095 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1103 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1111 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


