




















































Hansard: May 10, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 44A  THURSDAY, MAY 10, 2012, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1475 

 May 10, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to all members of the Legislative 

Assembly, I’m pleased to introduce 13 Grade 10 and 11 

students from Miller Collegiate here in Regina in the Regina 

Douglas Park constituency, along with their teacher, Mandy 

Pitzel-Markewich, and assistants, Bonnie Bobryck and Diane 

Schlosser. 

 

I’ve had the opportunity to say hello to the students just before 

we came into the Chamber, and I look forward to meeting with 

them afterwards and spending some time with them. And I’d 

like all members to help me in welcoming these fine students to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the legislature, I’m very pleased to 

introduce 51 Grade 5 and 6 students from L’École Française de 

Saskatoon. L’École Française de Saskatoon is in Saskatoon 

Riversdale. It’s also the school where my oldest daughter has 

attended since kindergarten. So I’d like to welcome the 

teachers, Denis Sanche and Janelle Yasinski. Although I don’t 

know Madame Yasinski, I know Monsieur Sanche is my 

daughter’s morale teacher, and Hennessey says you always 

have great discussions about world issues in the class. 

 

So I will also want to make a mention to the chaperones who 

make these field trips possible: Spencer Richards, Kathy 

Richards, Deb Walker, Lisa Tremblay, and Selina Beaudin. Just 

a special hello to Spencer who’s the dad of one of my 

daughter’s classmates, Mackenzie, and to Deb Walker, a 

woman with whom I share a passion: the importance of electing 

more women to all levels of government. 

 

So most importantly though I want to welcome the students. 

It’s so very good to have kids from Saskatoon Riversdale here. 

I’ve only had two school groups in the time I’ve been an MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly], so it’s great to see you 

here. Je vous souhaite bienvenue à votre législature.  

 

[Translation: I would like to welcome you to your legislature.] 

 

And I ask all members to join me in welcoming these special 

guests to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and all members of the legislature, it’s my pleasure to 

introduce some guests in your gallery representing Cameco. 

Cameco of course is a company that is the world leader in 

uranium development, headquartered here in Saskatchewan in 

Saskatoon. They do tremendous work in the northern part of 

our province, a very admirable record of employing First 

Nations and Métis people here in our province. 

 

So it’s my pleasure to introduce Grant Isaac, the chief financial 

officer and senior vice-president from Cameco; and Jeff 

Hryhoriw, the manager of government relations, seated in your 

gallery along with my chief of staff, Cam Baker. So all 

members of the legislature, would you please welcome them to 

their Legislative Building. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

would like to rise and welcome the officials from Cameco here 

to their Legislative Assembly. Certainly on behalf of the 

official opposition, we welcome them here, and we commend 

them for the good work they do and look forward to working 

with them in the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join in 

on the welcome with the member from Saskatoon Riversdale to 

the school group that is in the east gallery. 

 

I’d like to say a special hello to Rev. Deb Walker, one of the 

chaperones along for the day. Deb along with her partner, Dave 

Moors, are the two ministers at Mayfair United right in the 

heart of Saskatoon Massey Place. And I just want to thank her 

and thank them for the tremendous work they do with many 

constituents, many who attend Mayfair United. So on behalf of 

the official opposition and all members, I’d like to thank Deb 

Walker for her great work. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for greater protection for 

late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know 

that in the early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray 

Wiebe was shot two times and died from his injuries. He was 

working at a gas station in Yorkton, alone and unprotected from 

intruders. But we know that positive statistics show that 

convenience store and gas station robberies are down by 

one-third since 1999 largely due to increased safety practices, 

including two people working together on late-night shifts. We 

know other provinces have done much the same, including 

making sure there’s protective barriers such as locked doors and 

protective glass. 

 

I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 



1476 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2012 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

the city of Saskatoon and Yorkton. I do so present. Thank you 

very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

rise today to present a petition in support of improving 

Highway 165 near Beauval, Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the 

prayer reads as follows, that: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

undertake to upgrade the section of Highway 165 between 

Beauval and the English River First Nation by adding 

proper lighting for pedestrian traffic, by adding space for 

pedestrians on the highway and its bridges, and by 

properly servicing the road with the material needed for 

the busy heavy-haul road. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that signed this petition are primarily 

from Beauval. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a whole 

number of petitions that are presented from people right across 

the whole province who are asking the Premier to withdraw Bill 

36 about increasing the number of politicians in Saskatchewan. 

And I’ll read the prayer. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to not increase the number of politicians 

in the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly and to continue 

including those individuals under the age of 18 in the 

determination of constituency boundaries. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are people from many, many 

communities across the province who are opposed to this 

legislation. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions 

on behalf of concerned residents from across Saskatchewan as 

it relates to the management and accounting of our provincial 

finances. 

 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada, in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 

financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 

people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 

taxpayers, and businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Cabri and Swift Current. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition signed by Saskatchewan people who want the 

Sask Party government to support the Saskatchewan seniors’ 

bill of rights: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that many Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed 

incomes and are victims of physical, emotional, and 

financial abuse; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

social and economic security and a right to live free from 

poverty; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights, which would 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current 

regulations being enforced are creating challenges that are a 

concern for our traditional trappers. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued, and in so doing, 

cause the government to review the current legislation and 

regulations with respect to trapping regulations and 

firearm use in consultation with traditional resource users. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 

so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 



May 10, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1477 

Happy Mother’s Day  

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Sunday is 

Mother’s Day, a special day set aside to honour our mothers, 

who loved us no matter how many times we messed up, fought 

with our siblings during long car rides, broke curfews in high 

school, or played our music far too loud. Despite all of that, our 

mothers loved us anyway. 

 

One day is hardly enough to reflect upon how our moms 

contribute to our lives and society. They nurture, guide, love, 

and support us through thick and thin. They let us have that last 

piece of saskatoon pie. They make us chicken soup when we’re 

sick. And for those of us in political life, they are our greatest 

fans and sometimes our greatest critics. They are indeed shining 

examples of selflessness. 

 

It’s a wonder that our moms have time to do all the things they 

do when society demands more and more and more of mothers. 

But this is a testament of how strong our mothers are. They’re 

skilled at being in 100 places at once wearing several different 

hats. They’re simply amazing women. I think the following 

Moroccan proverb captures the essence of mothers perfectly, as 

the saying goes, and I quote, “In the eyes of its mother, every 

beetle is a gazelle.” 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured to salute all mothers and 

grandmothers who deserve this very special day. Thank you 

very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

World Lupus Day 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to speak 

today about World Lupus Day. On this day we honour those 

affected by the serious, life-altering disease by raising 

awareness and providing education about this affliction. Five 

million people worldwide and 1 out of every 1,000 Canadians 

suffer from lupus. 

 

Lupus is an autoimmune disease that can damage any part of 

the body, including skin, joints, and organs. The chronic 

symptoms of lupus cause problems with the immune system, 

inhibiting your body’s ability to fight off viruses, bacteria, 

germs because the body mistakenly attacks healthy tissue. 

Lupus is much more common in women than in men and there 

is no cure for the disease. The goal of the treatment is to control 

symptoms ranging from mild inflammation and rashes to severe 

anemia, kidney, and central nervous system problems. 

 

World Lupus Day was first proclaimed in 2005 as a call to 

action for governments around the world to increase financial 

support for research, awareness, and patient services. This year, 

global lupus ambassador Julian Lennon will lead the May 10 

observance where he will encourage the signing of a petition in 

support of lupus research. 

 

I would like this Assembly to recognize the tremendous efforts 

of the lupus volunteers and organizations worldwide and 

remind all Saskatchewan residents that they can make a 

difference by donating or volunteering at their local Lupus 

Saskatchewan office. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Celebrating Enterprising Women 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week is 

Women Entrepreneurs Week across Saskatchewan. On this 

occasion, I’m very pleased to rise to celebrate enterprising 

women across this province for their tremendous contributions 

to business, our economy, and our communities. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to take this opportunity to recognize two very savvy, 

fun, and entrepreneurial women, Paula Woodhouse from 

Saskatoon Riversdale and Tammie McCumber, who own and 

operate a very successful business in Saskatoon. 

 

Tammie and Paula were both mothers of two young children 

when they decided to open a store called The Giggle Factory in 

2003. The two women envisioned a fun toy store for children 

where kids were encouraged to test toys placed throughout the 

store. With the help of a business loan in 2005, Tammie and 

Paula’s dream became a reality. Over the last seven years, The 

Giggle Factory has become a very popular business in 

Saskatoon with an ever-growing fan club of children and adults, 

myself included. 

 

Tammy and Paula’s business has done so well that they’ve been 

nominated in the entrepreneurship category for the upcoming 

YWCA [Young Women’s Christian Association] Women of 

Distinction Awards in Saskatoon next month. They are in great 

company with a very strong group of Saskatoon women 

entrepreneurs. 

 

As a mother, I can relate to the challenges women face in 

balancing parenthood with a demanding career. It’s wonderful 

to see so many women starting and growing businesses and 

contributing to the economy like Tammie and Paula. As over 

half the population of Saskatchewan is made up of women, it is 

absolutely necessary that women continue to move into 

leadership roles in business as well as in public policy and 

government. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I would ask my colleagues to join with 

me in celebrating the amazing women entrepreneurs of 

Saskatchewan. You are fabulous role models. Thank you. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

National Nursing Week 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every day 

Saskatchewan nurses work tirelessly to provide their patients 

with high-quality care. They are highly skilled health 

professionals who are dedicated and devoted to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize National Nursing Week 

May 6th to 12th to honour the vital role that nurses play in our 

health system and in our communities. This includes registered 



1478 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2012 

nurses, psychiatric nurses, licensed practical nurses. At the 

same time, I’d like to recognize continuing care aides for their 

important contributions to the nursing team. 

 

Mr. Speaker, keeping and attracting nurses is a high priority for 

this government. In fact, four years ago we signed a partnership 

agreement with the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, looking for 

more ways to recruit and retain registered nurses and registered 

psychiatric nurses. As a result, there are 900 more nurses 

working in the province than there were in 2007-08. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I extend a heartfelt welcome to nurses coming to 

Saskatchewan as well as to new Saskatchewan nursing 

graduates. At the same time, I offer my appreciation to all 

nurses currently working in Saskatchewan’s health system for 

their hard work, commitment, and dedication. I ask all my 

colleagues to join me in thanking our nurses for their ongoing 

contributions to the health care system and in wishing them the 

best this week. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Southeast Regional College Plays Important Role 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I would 

like to take a moment to acknowledge the work of Southeast 

Regional College in the constituency of Moosomin. Through 

the years, Southeast Regional College has played an important 

role in preparing our Saskatchewan young people to enter the 

workforce and help build our province. This has been a very 

successful partnership of community, government, and an 

educational institution. Through co-operation with the 

Cowessess First Nation, a number of excellent programs 

preparing young men and women to enter the workforce came 

to fruition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Southeast Regional College partnered with 

Cowessess First Nation to deliver training to 20 participants 

under the workplace essential skills Saskatchewan program. 

Each of these graduating students has received a job placement 

where they will be mentored over the next six months. Recently 

six young men and women graduated from the licensed 

practical nurses program, and there are currently 75 applicants 

for next year’s 14 positions in the program. I also want to 

acknowledge the college for their support of the continuing care 

aide program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to post-secondary 

education. Over $5 million has been allocated to the Southeast 

Regional College in the 2012-13 provincial budget. Tomorrow 

evening I look forward to attending the ABE [adult basic 

education] grad in Moosomin where more young men and 

women will be preparing to enter the workforce as future 

leaders of our province. I would to thank all the members . . . I 

would like to ask the members of this Assembly to join me in 

recognizing the fantastic work done by those at the Southeast 

Regional College and thank the college and their staff for the 

work they do in the Moosomin constituency. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Support for Teenage Mothers 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

Friday I had the pleasure of participating in the anniversaries of 

two very important support service programs for teen moms, 

two programs that provide a positive learning environment 

along with academic and social support to ensure and enhance 

success. 

 

The Shirley Schneider Support Centre has itself admitted in 

excess of 130 teen moms this year. Thirty-eight are set to 

graduate this year, a marvellous example of an innovative 

services approach to meet the needs of students in a regular 

class setting. In fact, Mr. Speaker, a former student of mine 

who I visited with, pregnant in grade 10, dropped out of school, 

re-enrolled two years later in the Balfour program, graduated, 

and is now a graduate RN [registered nurse] practising at the 

Regina General Hospital. 

 

These programs housed at Balfour Collegiate, the Mackenzie 

Infant Care Centre celebrating 15 years of service; and the 

Shirley Schneider Support Centre, formerly Balfour Tutorial, 

which has been providing support services to Regina moms for 

over 40 years, realized that being a young mother and pursuing 

an education is a very onerous task. 

 

Being a mom is an onerous task. Being a student mom is an 

even greater challenge. Looking after a newborn, finding a 

sitter, staying on top of studies, and getting to school on time 

proved to be almost impossible for most young moms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 

congratulating both the Mackenzie Infant Care Centre and the 

Shirley Schneider Support Centre for reaching such impressive 

milestones, and thank them for their continued efforts in 

supporting the youth of Regina. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Happy Mother’s Day 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m very 

pleased to have the honour to rise today and speak about a very 

special group of people in Saskatchewan — all our mothers. 

This weekend across Canada and the world, people will take a 

moment to give thanks to those special ladies who have been 

there for us right from the start. 

 

Anna Jarvis got it right in 1912 when she trademarked the 

phrase Mother’s Day and created the Mother’s Day 

International Association. Ever since, we have celebrated our 

mothers on the second Sunday in May, not that we need to wait 

for a special day to say thanks to mom. Any day would 

constitute an appropriate time to thank the ladies who taught us 

all the good things we know, who fed us, clothed us, got us off 

to school, who worried about us when we were out late at night, 

and were there to help us raise our families when that time 

came. 

 

These occasions of thanks to our mothers have been going on 

for a very long time. The Greeks and the Romans all had their 

days of recognition because the importance of our mothers goes 

back to the beginning of time. 



May 10, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1479 

I would like to ask all the members of this Assembly to please 

join me in recognizing and thanking those wonderful role 

models, providers, and supporters who help us navigate the 

road of life — our mothers. And on a personal note, Mr. 

Speaker, to my mother who lives in Estevan and is watching, I 

would just like to say, thanks, Mom. I love you. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Electoral Representation 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, thousands of people have written 

letters, made phone calls, and signed petitions against Bill 36. 

These people come from North Battleford, Moose Jaw, 

Martensville, Swift Current, Maple Creek, Fort Qu’Appelle, all 

over the province. None of these people want millions of 

dollars spent on three more politicians and none of them want 

young people excluded from the electoral process. To the 

Premier: will he listen to the thousands of people who are 

against Bill 36 and drop this Bill? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve raised and dealt 

with this issue in the Assembly a number of times before. We 

have had discussions about the size of some of the 

constituencies, that some of the constituencies, at the present 

time people are travelling several hours to get across. The 

people from the northern constituencies should probably take 

the time to inform their counterparts about the difficulties and 

the distances that they have to travel. We’ve certainly protected 

a legislative exemption for those constituencies. We do not 

want to have to deal with that type of situation . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — In the southern part of the province, Mr. 

Speaker. We think that this is . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Will the member for Athabasca come 

to order. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We think this 

is a fair and appropriate way of handling electoral 

redistribution. We look at the work that the MLAs do; we look 

at the distances that the constituents have to travel to see their 

MLAs. And I would like to encourage the two northern MLAs 

to deal with their counterparts and explain to them the distances 

and the travel that they go through, so that the people on that 

side of the House understand what people in Wood River, Arm 

River, and Cypress Hills are going through. And if we 

exacerbate the distances there, they should do some listening to 

the members across. And I can well understand why the 

member from Athabasca was initially in favour of the three 

additional MLAs because, Mr. Speaker, underneath he well 

understands where we’re at with this thing. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, thousands of people are asking the 

Premier to stop spending millions of dollars on three more 

politicians and to stop excluding young people from the 

equation used to draw up the new electoral boundaries. To the 

Premier: how many people have called him, asking him to 

spend millions of dollars on three more politicians and asking 

him to exclude young people from the electoral process? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minster of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the citizens of this 

province are concerned with how much money is being spent. 

They are happy and they are pleased that we are the only 

province that has a balanced budget. They’re also pleased that 

we’ve spent $5 million a year less on communication, three and 

a half million dollars a year less on executive travel. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s a sign that a government is doing what it’s 

supposed to do and what the citizens elected it to do. 

 

We are the only province in Canada that has a balanced budget. 

We are pleased to have that. We are proud to do that. We know 

that we will spend money carefully and wisely, and the three 

extra seats that we are proposing are exactly the right thing to 

do to ensure that people have got a fair and easy way to get to 

their members. Mr. Speaker, we have a history of that in the 

province. We know that we have more miles of roadway per 

capita than any other province in the country. It’s because our 

province is diverse and spread out and we want to look after the 

people in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, Bill 36 has been debated for 

weeks. Mr. Speaker, the Children’s Advocate has weighed in, 

saying Bill 36 could be a violation of the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms and the Canadian Constitution. To the Premier: will 

he admit he has made a mistake and listen to the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, there are a variety of ways 

of choosing who can and who cannot be counted in the electoral 

process. Mr. Speaker, we treat the children in our country, in 

our province very well by ensuring that they’ve got services 

that are necessary for them by way of health and education. Mr. 

Speaker, in Canada, in New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, and 

Yukon, they use voting population. In Prince Edward Island, 

Quebec, and Nunavut they use voters lists. In all of those six 

jurisdictions it is all done on the basis of people that are of 

voting age. Mr. Speaker, that is a fair and equitable way to do 

it. 

 

We apportion resources during elections on the same basis. We 

give money on a per vote basis when they do an enumeration. 

Mr. Speaker, that is the methodology that is used. It’s right and 

it’s a fair thing to do. Mr. Speaker, the things that we will do for 

children . . . We’ll take no lessons from the members opposite. 

We will ensure that the people stay in this province, that 



1480 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2012 

they’ve got jobs, futures, and careers in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for the Film Industry 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Futures and careers in this province as long 

as they don’t work in the film industry. Mr. Speaker, the film 

industry says that the minister’s plan for a non-refundable tax 

credit will not work. Now we’re hearing more from the public 

on the issue as well. They think the government is headed in the 

wrong direction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a poll released this morning, 60 per cent of 

people in Saskatchewan oppose this cut to the film and 

television industry. The minister’s plan is not going to help 

save or create even one job. It’s not going to bring any 

investment into our province. Why is this minister ignoring the 

public as well as the industry? Why does he consider himself 

the expert on this file? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the NDP [New Democratic Party] continue to stand by 

an old program that rewards companies that don’t even pay 

income tax in Saskatchewan. That’s just a grant, Mr. Speaker, 

and we don’t give grants to businesses. The old program just 

isn’t fair either. It’s not fair to companies in other industries 

that don’t get these grants, and it’s certainly not fair to 

Saskatchewan residents who are paying for them. The people 

responding to this survey may not be aware of these 

circumstances, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re moving away from the grant and we’re moving away 

from the destructive bidding war with taxpayers’ dollars that 

goes with it. We’re introducing a real tax credit. Who’s going to 

benefit, Mr. Speaker? Every film, video, and digital company in 

Saskatchewan that pays income tax in our province, that’s who. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The poll found 

incredible public support for the film industry. It’s obvious 

people in Saskatchewan know the sector adds so much to our 

province: 75 per cent of people support the film and television 

industry in Saskatchewan and feel government should too. They 

want a program that works to keep the industry here. 

 

Surely the minister can see that people don’t want the 

government to abandon this sector. Will the minister simply 

admit he’s wrong and reverse course? Will he do what 

Saskatchewan people want and change his program to one that 

actually meets the needs of the industry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday right here in question period, I began to 

outline our three-point plan to move Saskatchewan’s film 

industry forward. The moment I started, of course opposition 

members started to laugh. Now for a moment I was left 

wondering what’s funny about having a plan. Well the answer, 

Mr. Speaker, is that the NDP can’t figure out why you’d even 

need one. They certainly don’t have a plan. 

 

They have a grant. It’s a grant that ties our province to a hugely 

expensive bidding war that one noted expert described as 

irrational, destructive, and highly ineffective. Mr. Speaker, the 

NDP may well be satisfied with this old grant, but we’re not. 

We think the film industry deserves a proper plan, one that 

turns away from the bidding war, rewards Saskatchewan-based 

companies. 

 

Again, who’s going to benefit? Everybody that pays taxes in 

our province. That’s who’s going to benefit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s a growing 

consensus in this province that this minister and that 

government are doing too little, too late to ensure the film and 

television industry is able to grow and thrive. When the vast 

majority of people say the government got it wrong when it 

comes to the film industry, it speaks volumes. The minister has 

avoided calls from the industry to change course. Now he’s 

hearing loud and clear from the public. How can the minister 

and his government fail to listen to and act on what both the 

industry and the public believe is the right thing to do? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you once again, Mr. Speaker. 

As I mentioned, the NDP don’t have a plan for the film 

industry, or any other part of the economy for that matter. After 

all, this is the party whose national leader wants to shore up the 

manufacturing industry of Ontario and Quebec by destroying 

the energy economy of Alberta and Saskatchewan. So we 

shouldn’t expect much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it should come as no surprise that the NDP’s solution for 

our film industry is simply to throw more and more money at 

the problems in hopes that they’ll go away. What they haven’t 

figured out is that as soon as we up the ante, somebody else will 

push it up even higher. Nobody wins a bidding war, Mr. 

Speaker. Everybody loses. It’s about time we tried a different 

approach based on innovation and paying taxes in our province 

— two things that the NDP will never understand. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It looks like this 

minister and his government are the only ones who don’t 

understand the value of the film and television industry to 

Saskatchewan. The industry obviously understands, business 

owners understand it, students understand it, parents who have 

dreams for their children understand it, community leaders 



May 10, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1481 

understand it, the cultural community understands it, those of 

us on this side of the House understand it, people who are proud 

of Saskatchewan understand it. 

 

There seems to be one group missing from the list of those who 

get it. When will the Premier get on board and join the list of 

those who value and support our film and television industry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, as we have said before 

in this Assembly, in all of our discussions with the film 

industry, we’ve been plain. We’ve been very clear that the old 

refundable tax credit was not viable or even effective. It 

obviously wasn’t helping to grow the industry, Mr. Speaker, 

since two-thirds of the whole industry have left the province in 

the last five years alone, and it came at an extraordinary cost to 

taxpayers and it was patently unfair to other industries, none of 

whom get this kind of grant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we’ve said before, every industry creates 

economic activity; every industry creates employment. But only 

the film industry benefits from provincial programs without 

paying income tax, and that has to change. Where will we get 

the money, Mr. Speaker? We’re certainly not going to take it 

from farmers. We’re certainly not going to take it from 

municipalities, which is what the Leader of the Opposition 

would do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Surgical Wait Times 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister’s 

approach to surgery delivery in the Regina Qu’Appelle Health 

Region clearly isn’t working. As the minister plowed ahead 

with his preferred approach for for-profit surgical clinics, the 

functioning of the existing operating rooms in the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region has suffered. 

 

I’ve been receiving calls from many patients, Mr. Speaker, who 

are concerned because their surgeries that were planned have 

been cancelled. My question to the minister: how many 

Saskatchewan patients have had their surgeries cancelled 

because of shortages of OR [operating room] time in the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it has been playing in the papers over the last couple 

of days, and certainly even before that at the SMA 

[Saskatchewan Medical Association] annual general assembly 

that I attended and answered questions at regarding the surgical 

wait times in the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region. 

 

What I want to report is that, yes, there are some concerns in 

the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region. But if you look across 

the province — and I’ll address more on Regina in a second — 

but if you look across the province, you’ll see that eight health 

regions have met their target this year, Mr. Speaker. One is just 

slightly off — that’s Saskatoon — and Regina is off a little bit 

more, not significantly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In fact the wait times for people over 18 months has gone from 

1 per cent waiting that length of time to 2 per cent. So it’s not a 

big change, Mr. Speaker, but having said that, we feel that it’s 

going in the wrong direction. That is why I’ve had the CEO and 

board Chair in my office last week to ensure that they’ve got a 

plan going forward. They’re going to be reporting back to me 

on the steps that they’re going to take to address this very issue. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I heard a lot of 

bluster in that answer, but I did not hear a specific answer to the 

specific question. My question to the minister . . . Nor did I hear 

any comment on the reduction and the closure of operating 

rooms within the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region. 

 

My question to the minister: how many patients have had their 

surgeries cancelled in the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region 

and how many operating rooms in the Regina Qu’Appelle 

Health Region have been closed over the past month? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I think I could be 

accused of blustering before, but I don’t believe that last 

question would match that mark, Mr. Speaker. Because bluster 

would be: this year, for the surgical care initiative, $60.5 

million more into the initiative, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if 

you want to talk about bluster, I could say that 99 per cent of all 

the surgeries done in Saskatchewan are done within 18 months; 

96 per cent are done within 12 months. That is a far cry from 

the NDP that had the longest wait-list in Canada. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Okay, Mr. Speaker, a bit more bluster in that 

answer admittedly, but there was still no answer in that 

response with respect to how many patients have had their 

surgeries cancelled and how many operating rooms have been 

closed. 

 

We know the minister has redirected significant funds from the 

operating rooms, Mr. Speaker, in order to favour his preferred 

approach of the for-profit clinics. We know this is having an 

effect on the operating rooms within the Regina Qu’Appelle 

Health Region. Mr. Speaker, there are eight operating rooms 

that are functioning at full capacity only two days a week, and 

there are nine operating rooms operating at full capacity only 

three days a week. My question to the minister: have there been 

similar levels of cancellations in the for-profit clinics or are 

they operating at full capacity now? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we know that there are 

some issues with staffing levels right now at the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region, and I will tell you that it is not a 

result of the private clinics working both in Saskatoon and 



1482 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2012 

Regina because, if that was the case, Saskatoon would be facing 

the same problem. That isn’t the problem, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Saskatoon has gone on a different approach, trained more 

operating nurses to deal with issues of maternity leave and 

perhaps injury, Mr. Speaker, so they’ve been able to keep 

running almost at capacity. Regina Qu’Appelle has had issues 

around some human resources, especially around the OR 

nurses. They are taking steps to address that. They’ve got a 

number of people going through the OR course right now that 

will then be able to see the operating rooms running closer to 

capacity in the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region by fall, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but even having said that, last year — the year 

previous, Mr. Speaker — we were at 21,800 operations in 

Regina Qu’Appelle. This year 22,700. That’s up 1,000 

procedures in the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, Mr. 

Speaker. More work to do? Certainly. We want to see those 

numbers drop. But we know we’ve come a long ways from the 

NDP days. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s interesting. 

We’ve seen the minister, he’s been very keen to bolster the 

resources for the for-profit clinics, but when it comes to 

ensuring the necessary resources are there for the existing 

operating rooms within the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, 

the urgency is not there. 

 

Patients are concerned, Mr. Speaker, because surgeries are 

being cancelled, though the minister won’t say how many. And 

now physicians are adding their voice to the concerns that are 

being raised. My question to the minister: what does he have to 

say to the many physicians who want to provide much needed 

surgeries to their patients but they are unable to get the 

necessary operating room time in the existing operating rooms 

in the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said in 

my previous answer, we know that there are some concerns 

around the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region. That’s why 

we’ve talked directly with the CEO [chief executive officer] 

and the board Chair who are in the process of consulting with 

the surgeons in the Regina Health Region to find a plan as we 

move forward. Some of it is human resources; some of it is 

surgical time allotment, that is for sure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, if we ever were to go back to the NDP days 

and you know, if they ever get to be in government again, 

which I’m not sure but if they were, Mr. Speaker, I would like 

to make sure that every person that’s accessed a private clinic, 

be it in Saskatoon and Regina, which is well over a couple of 

thousand procedures, Mr. Speaker, those procedures never 

would have been done. They would have languished on longest 

waiting lists, Mr. Speaker, because they are ideologically 

opposed to any third party delivery — no paying out of pocket, 

no queue jumping, Mr. Speaker. Those patients appreciated the 

services they got. They would never receive them under the 

NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While the elimination 

or the postponing of surgeries for patients is the most 

concerning issue, what is also very concerning, Mr. Speaker, is 

the atmosphere of fear that has been created among the 

physicians in Regina based on the minister’s approach. Doctors 

are worried. Doctors are worried that if they speak up and 

advocate for their patients, this could have an effect on the 

availability of operating room time. 

 

The president of the Saskatchewan Medical Association, Dr. 

Vino Padayachee, said this in the Leader-Post: “People are 

afraid to voice their opinion because they may be the ones who 

are affected.” My question to the minister: why has he created a 

situation where doctors are afraid to advocate for their patients 

here in Saskatchewan, and how is that acceptable in any way, 

shape, or form? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell this House, 

and I would directly comment to the physicians within the 

Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region the same comments that I 

made at the SMA general assembly last Friday, Mr. Speaker, 

when an orthopedic surgeon asked me a question regarding wait 

times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, nothing could be further from the truth. What we 

want those surgeons to do is have input. How we fixed 

problems within our health care system under the NDP were 

driven from top down, Mr. Speaker, from the bureaucracy 

down. How we solve problems in the health care system is from 

bottom up, Mr. Speaker, making sure that the physicians, the 

nurses have input to solve the problems that we’re facing, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I can tell you that many of the surgeons have already met with 

the CEO last Thursday. There will be more meetings going on 

this week to design a solution to the problem that Regina 

Qu’Appelle is experiencing, Mr. Speaker. But nothing could be 

further from the truth that physicians should be afraid to speak 

their minds. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister says it 

couldn’t be further from the truth, but for some reason the 

president of the Saskatchewan Medical Association says that 

surgeons in the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region are afraid to 

speak up, and the reason provided is because they believe it 

could affect their ability to access the operating room. 

 

My question to the minister: if this is what the Saskatchewan 

Medical Association is saying, and saying so publicly, how do 

these physicians come to this position? How do they come to 

the understanding that that might be a reality? Could the 

minister please explain this to the doctors of Saskatchewan. 

 



May 10, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1483 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, you bet I can explain it 

to the doctors of Saskatchewan. The surgical care initiative, Mr. 

Speaker, is led by who? Dr. Peter Barrett, Mr. Speaker. The 

vast majority of input to the surgical care initiative is through 

physicians, through nurses, through health care providers, Mr. 

Speaker. It isn’t driven through the ministry. It isn’t driven 

through the minister. It is driven through the health care 

providers, Mr. Speaker. We’re finding solutions to deal with the 

longest wait-lists in Canada across the province, in Regina 

Qu’Appelle. If we’re going to find a solution, it’s going to 

come from the grassroots, from the physicians, the OR nurses, 

and the people that are supplying the care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, maybe the opposition doesn’t understand that 

because what we are seeing here, Mr. Speaker, is a government 

that is not afraid of setting targets and then living up to those 

targets, Mr. Speaker, forcing health regions to meet those 

targets. That never happened under the NDP. They would rather 

have patients languish on the longest waiting lists in Canada, 

Mr. Speaker. I think the people of Saskatchewan have told the 

NDP what they thought of that, 49 to 9. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Review of Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this government’s document on labour consultation is 

anything but direct. In fact it’s extremely vague. Mr. Speaker, 

despite the potential impact on workers in every corner of this 

province, the government is limiting the consultation period to 

90 days. No public hearings will be held. It seems they don’t 

want to face workers directly and hear how disastrous these 

proposals would be to safe and fair working places in our 

province. 

 

To the minister: if he won’t pull the sham of this consultation, 

will he at least hold public meetings? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d encourage the 

members opposite to participate in the process. I’d urge them to 

write letters. I would be pleased, Mr. Speaker, to meet with the 

member opposite and hear his own concerns and whatever else 

he wants to bring forward, Mr. Speaker. I am always available. 

I have every day this week met with union leaders regarding 

this very issue, and intend to meet with them later today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will have an open and frank discussion. We 

will try and have meaningful input from as many sources as we 

possibly can. And, Mr. Speaker, in the fall, we will introduce a 

piece of legislation that we expect will deal with the issues of 

essential services and the other things that come about as a 

result of the consultative process, Mr. Speaker. We will take 

care and we will listen carefully to what we are told by people. 

Mr. Speaker, I would urge the members to get on board and 

welcome whatever input from them they choose to make. 

 

[10:45] 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear what the 

trademark of this government is — no public consultations, no 

meeting with ordinary people, families throughout this province 

so they know what’s going to go on with one of the strongest 

pieces of legislation in our province that we have a right to be 

proud of. But, Mr. Speaker, this week the minister’s been all 

over the map in terms of what things are in and out of this. And 

people expect more. 

 

When they voted at the polls, this was not the thing that these 

people were talking about. And this week we’ve said this has 

been a sham exercise. Some things are in, some things are out, 

and some things are so out of line that the government 

themselves are ruling them out of order. Will he do the right 

thing, Mr. Speaker? To the minister: will he do the right thing 

and withdraw this so-called consultation document? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, for the last five years 

we’ve heard the members over there say, you didn’t consult; 

you didn’t consult. Mr. Speaker, that’s what we’re doing, is 

consulting. Now he’s saying, I don’t like how you consult. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d urge that member, and I’d urge the nine of 

them over there, to get on board and have some meaningful 

input into this process because, Mr. Speaker, we sent out 657 

letters to stakeholders. They say they want input from the 

public? We want input from the public as well. We put it on a 

website. Mr. Speaker, that’s what we’re going to do and we will 

have a careful, considered, measured process. And I urge the 

members on there not to politicize the process, but to get on 

board and tell us what they hear from their stakeholders 

because that’s what we’re hearing directly, Mr. Speaker, is 

what people want in the legislation. And as we go forward, 

we’ll do that and I ask them to do the same thing. That’s what 

they’re paid to do. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 

have been instructed by the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Will the member for Athabasca finally 

come to order? The chairman for Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice Committee. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 16, The Correctional Services Act, 



1484 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2012 

2011 with amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 

Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 

be requesting leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on this Bill and the Bill and its amendments be now read 

the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Corrections and Public 

Safety has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee 

of the Whole on Bill No. 16, The Correctional Services Act, 

2011 and that the Bill and its amendments now be read the third 

time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read the first 

time? 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 16 — The Correctional Services Act, 2011 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I move the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing that the amendments be 

now read the first and second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 16 — The Correctional Services Act, 2011 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 

be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Corrections and Public Safety that Bill No. 16, The 

Correctional Services Act, 2011 be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am further 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 15, The Uniform Building 

and Accessibility Standards Amendment Act, 2011 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and 

that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Corrections and Public 

Safety has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee 

of the Whole on Bill No. 15, The Uniform Building and 

Accessibility Standards Amendment Act, 2011 and that the Bill 

now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 15 — The Uniform Building and Accessibility 

Standards Amendment Act, 2011 
 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 

be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Corrections and Public Safety that Bill No. 15, The Uniform 

Building and Accessibility Standards Amendment Act, 2011 be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 



May 10, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1485 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 394 through 397. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 

questions 394 to 397. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Northeast. 

 

Natural Resource Sector in Western Canada 

 

Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ll be 

moving a motion at the end of my remarks here today. But it’s 

with somewhat mixed feelings, Mr. Speaker, I stand here today 

and engage in this debate. It is troubling to have to rise in this 

Chamber for the second time in two months, Mr. Speaker, to 

debate an issue that really should have unanimous support in 

this province, unanimous support in this Assembly by the 

people who are elected, the members of this Assembly who are 

elected by the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

It is troubling, Mr. Speaker, because we’re seeing a disturbing 

and alarming trend is developing where political leaders, 

primarily from the East, from Eastern Canada, Mr. Speaker, 

feel it’s okay and in some cases necessary to attack the natural 

resource sector in Western Canada and particularly here in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You might recall, Mr. Speaker, that a couple of months ago 

there were some unfortunate comments from the Premier of 

Ontario who made reference to the natural resource sector in 

Western Canada and its detrimental effect on the Canadian 

dollar — I believe he called it a petrodollar at the time — and 

the impact this petrodollar, the deleterious effect it was having 

on the Ontario manufacturing sector. 

 

And we know, Mr. Speaker, when that happened — when the 

Premier of Ontario come out and made those unfortunate 

remarks — that after our Premier responded to him and 

responded to the country, as did the Premier of Alberta, in 

calling those remarks divisive and not warranted, we know that 

the Premier of Ontario did try to backtrack somewhat. We 

know the Premier of Ontario did try to clarify and I think ended 

up basically fuzzifying the issue. But make no mistake about it, 

Mr. Speaker; it was a direct attack on the oil and gas sector in 

Western Canada. 

 

Now premiers make these kinds of comments from time to 

time, Mr. Speaker, to protect their political interests. It’s 

disturbing, Mr. Speaker, but it is a political reality in Canada. 

But what about national political leaders, Mr. Speaker, not the 

regional parties like the Bloc Québécois that purports to speak 

as a national party — and we know what happened to them in 

the last federal election, Mr. Speaker — but a truly national 

party whose leader aspires to be the Prime Minister of Canada? 

What happens when a political leader who aspires to be the 

Prime Minister of all of Canada makes remarks about a 

particular sector, an economic sector in Canada, Mr. Speaker, 

and disparages that sector at the expense of another sector in 

Canada? 

 

Now we were all shocked, Mr. Speaker, last May I think, 

including the members on the other side, that the federal NDP 

party actually became Her Majesty’s Official Opposition in 

Ottawa after the May election last year. Of course there was no 

help from the federal wing of the NDP here in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, as they failed to elect a member again I think for 

the last three or four elections. But again I give credit to Mr. 

Layton, the late Jack Layton who led his party to official 

opposition status, riding a wave of momentum primarily in 

Quebec, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now when you’re the official opposition and you are the de 

facto government-in-waiting, you should try and represent 

people from all across Canada. When was the last time, Mr. 

Speaker, you heard a national leader disparage a particular 

sector of our economy, particularly here in Western Canada? 

 

Now I want to be very, very clear on what the leader of the 

NDP said, and it’s been quoted widely across Canada since this 

interview came out from last Saturday, Mr. Speaker. Let me 

quote. The federal NDP leader said Saturday that, because of 

the way it raises the value of the Canadian dollar, other parts of 

the country are paying a price for the prosperity enjoyed by 

natural resource sectors. It’s by definition the Dutch disease, the 

federal NDP leader said Saturday on the CBC [Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation] radio show The House. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s somewhat troubling. And as I get to 

the end of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to ask this 

Assembly condemn the federal NDP leader and the statements 

made by that particular Member of Parliament from Quebec, 

calling our natural resource sector a disease. 

 

But the more alarming trend, Mr. Speaker, is not so much that 

we’ve had eastern political leaders attacking the natural 

resource sector in Western Canada. The truly alarming trend 

here is where the Saskatchewan NDP stand and where they 

have consistently sided with political leaders from Eastern 

Canada who continue to attack the resource sector here in 

Western Canada. Let me just quote you, Mr. Speaker, what the 

Energy and Resource critic, the member from Nutana, said in 

response to the federal NDP leader’s comments. And I’m 

quoting from the newspaper, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Provincial NDP Energy and Resources critic, the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana, told reporters on Monday that her party and 

its federal counterpart have been very consistent in their 

positions about resource development, noting their view is to 

consider environmental, economic, and social effects. As for 

Mulcair’s comments, the member from Nutana said, I don’t 

agree that it isn’t in the interests of Saskatchewan; it very much 

is in the interest of Saskatchewan as long as development is 

focused on that triple bottom line. 

 

We’ve been very clear, the member from Nutana said, that we 

support resource development. Strange. What we see this as is a 

discussion about a very complex economic argument and that 

that is the impact of an artificially high dollar on the 



1486 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2012 

manufacturing sector. 

 

The real issue is how the resource sector development affects 

the province of Saskatchewan. What we’re looking for is 

value-added in the resource sector and that’s clearly the focus 

of the NDP view, and if there are issues around economics, 

that’s something the federal government has to deal with. Mr. 

Speaker, that was the response from the official opposition here 

in Saskatchewan, from the Energy and Resources critic. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it was interesting in the same interview that 

the federal NDP leader was involved in because he went on to 

say . . . And I’m not an economist, Mr. Speaker. I’m not a 

trained economist. I have had some experience in the financial 

sector and I did write all the exams for the certified financial 

planner designation, and passed them, Mr. Speaker. But the 

federal NDP leader went on to say, also discuss the need for 

“internalization of the environmental costs of oil sands and 

other natural resources development.” Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve 

heard a lot of financial terms at the executive table and at the 

board table of the various organizations I’ve been involved 

with. I’ve never heard the term internalization of the 

environmental costs as it applies to a particular sector of the 

economy. Well you know what that is, Mr. Speaker. You know 

what that’s code for. It’s a tax. It’s a tax, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The NDP leader further went on to say he wrote a policy 

options paper. In it he proposed a comprehensive cap-and-trade 

plan that would be based on the principle that polluters pay, Mr. 

Speaker. Now it’s interesting because if we go back to the 

comments, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier of Ontario spoke out 

against the natural resource sector in Western Canada, in 

particular the oil and gas sector, our Premier was the first to 

stand up and defend the people of Saskatchewan and the 

industries of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the thousands and 

thousands of unionized employees that work in the natural 

resource sector — potash, oil, gas, coal, forestry, Mr. Speaker, 

uranium. I think we had some guests here earlier today 

representing the uranium sector, thousands of unionized 

employees, primarily from northern Saskatchewan who work in 

that sector. 

 

And Mr. Mulcair, the federal NDP leader, Mr. Speaker, wants 

to impose a tax on the oil and gas sector. And as my colleague 

from Dewdney, Regina Dewdney said to me today, if the NDP 

ever became the federal government in Canada, the NDP would 

become the new NEP [National Energy Program], Mr. Speaker. 

We would see the largest transfer of wealth from Western 

Canada to Eastern Canada in the history of our country, Mr. 

Speaker. And they support it. They support it. When the 

Premier of Ontario made those comments about our natural gas, 

our oil and gas sector, here’s what the Energy and Resource 

critic said, Mr. Speaker. And I quote from Hansard: 

 

I think we heard from our Premier recently about the 

Premier of Ontario being concerned about the Canadian 

dollar. To me that’s a valid concern. [This is what she 

said.] And to be calling it divisive is actually, our own 

Premier is actually driving a wedge into the discussion, 

because the concern, the concern of the people, the concern 

of the people of Canada is that it be fairly priced. 

 

Not the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Canada. And then, Mr. Speaker, the federal NDP leader 

referenced a cap-and-trade program, the internalization of the 

environmental costs on the oil and gas sector. 

 

[11:00] 

 

The member for Saskatoon Nutana, who’s their Energy and 

Resources critic, in that same debate, Mr. Speaker, that same 

debate we had before the Assembly a couple of months ago, 

went on to say there’s different ways to properly tax oil and 

gas, and one of the conventional methods that’s being 

suggested is the cap-and-trade system, the cap-and-trade 

system. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, here we have, here we have three separate 

examples in the last two months of eastern political leaders on 

two separate occasions attacking the natural resource sector of 

Western Canada, in particular here in Saskatchewan. As well 

we had a vote on the floor of this Assembly to support the 

Keystone XL pipeline. And in all three instances, Mr. Speaker, 

the members of the official opposition of Saskatchewan sided 

with Eastern Canada and not the people of Saskatchewan. 

Shame on you. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker — and I hear the member from Regina 

Rosemont chirping from his seat, and I’ll get to him in a minute 

so he should just keep his powder dry — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to warn the member to make his 

address through the Chair. 

 

Mr. Doherty: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. You know, as we 

campaigned in the election last fall, Mr. Speaker, one of the 

major planks of the NDP platform was resource revenue 

sharing for First Nations in this province. And the members 

opposite went around this province and in their individual 

constituencies, Mr. Speaker, and while we fundamentally 

disagreed with that position, I give them credit for standing up 

and saying, here is what we would do if we were government. 

They told the people of Saskatchewan what they would do with 

resource revenue sharing in the province. Matter of fact, the 

member from Regina Rosemont, Mr. Speaker, who was the 

architect of that platform, of that platform in the last election 

and did the financial calculations for it, of which many of the 

different planks weren’t even costed out, and he aspires to be 

leader of that party some day, Mr. Speaker . . . God forbid that 

ever happens in this province. 

 

But they went around the province telling the First Nations of 

this province that they would share resource revenues with 

them. Then their federal leader comes out and says, we think 

we should slow down the natural resource sector in Western 

Canada because it’s having a detrimental effect on the 

manufacturing sector in Quebec. And they stood side by side 

with them again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can’t imagine how many First Nations are calling into their 

offices these days saying, well how are you going to share 

revenues with us, resource revenues with us, if you’re siding 

with the MP [Member of Parliament] from Quebec who’s your 

federal leader and saying we should shut down the natural 

resource sector in Western Canada to benefit, to benefit Eastern 

Canada, the manufacturing sector? 



May 10, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1487 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what I really am concerned about is, where 

is the courage on that side, Mr. Speaker? Where’s the future of 

that party, particularly the member from Regina Rosemont and 

Saskatoon Massey Place? Where is the courage to stand up and 

say, this is wrong? We got it wrong last fall. The people of 

Saskatchewan told us we got it wrong, and we continue doing 

the same thing over and over again and expecting different 

results. Where’s the courage, Mr. Speaker? 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, there was a leader of their party at one 

time named Tommy Douglas who had a famous quote, and he 

said, “Courage, my friends; ’tis not too late to build a better 

world.” Courage, my friends. Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, if 

Tommy Douglas was sitting in that chair today and an MP from 

Quebec stood up and attacked Saskatchewan that he would sit 

on his hands and say, well we kind of disagree or we agree with 

it. We’re going to equivocate on this. We’re not exactly clear 

what our position is. We’re going to look at the internalization 

of the environment cost of this sector. No, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Tommy Douglas also had another great quote, and I think it 

applies to this particular debate as well: 

 

Canada is like an old cow. The West feeds it. Ontario and 

Quebec milk it. And you can well imagine what it’s doing 

in the Maritimes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say to the members opposite, you have an 

opportunity now to differentiate yourselves from what 

happened last fall. You have an opportunity, particular the 

member who aspires to be the leader, Mr. Speaker. He sits there 

. . . And I won’t get into it. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think when I was walking around in my 

constituency last fall, Mr. Speaker, in the election, I heard it 

over and over again. Why is the NDP so down on 

Saskatchewan? Why are they so negative about what’s 

happening in this great province of ours? A year before the 

election, Mr. Speaker, they put out a pamphlet that said boom 

to bust. Do you recall that? A grey, dark pamphlet that said 

boom to bust. The province was in a bust situation. Well that 

didn’t fly. The people of Saskatchewan went, huh? 

 

So they changed it a year later and they went around saying, 

well we’re all prospering in this but not everybody, Mr. 

Speaker. And I knocked on doors and they kept saying to me — 

particularly unionized workers who by the way voted mostly 

for us than you guys in the last election — kept saying, why 

can’t they just say something nice about our province once in a 

while, Mr. Speaker? Why can’t they just stand up for the people 

of Saskatchewan? 

 

I talked to an individual who was in a room with 10 unionized 

workers, 10 unionized workers, Mr. Speaker, and they told me 

not one of them was voting for the NDP. And do you know 

why? Because they say one thing on the floor of the Assembly 

about unions and unionized workers, then they go out and say 

another thing to the media, to Eastern Canada, about supporting 

them against the unionized workers in the natural resource 

sector in this province, Mr. Speaker. And they didn’t vote for 

you because of it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s akin to farmers in this province, it’s akin to 

farmers — and I’m from Rose Valley, Saskatchewan — going 

down the road and saying to him, you know, Joe, I know 

you’ve got new farming practices and new techniques and new 

technologies, but you’ve got to stop growing so much wheat. 

You might flood the market with it some day, Mr. Speaker, and 

that’s going to drive the price down. Please just dampen it 

down a little bit so the rest of us don’t suffer at the hands of 

your innovative practices on your farm. 

 

That’s exactly what the Leader of the NDP from Quebec is 

saying about the resource sector here in Western Canada, Mr. 

Speaker. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I am going to ask that this 

. . . I move the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly recognizes the importance of the 

resource sector as a vital component of Saskatchewan and 

Canada’s economy, and condemns statements made by 

federal NDP Leader Thomas Mulcair that our resource 

sector is a “disease.” 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 

Northeast: 

 

That this Assembly recognizes . . . 

 

Will the minister come to order? 

 

That this Assembly recognizes the importance of the 

resource sector as a vital component of Saskatchewan and 

Canada’s economy, and condemns statements made by 

federal NDP Leader Thomas Mulcair that our resource 

sector is a “disease.” 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 

of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the federal Leader of the NDP, 

Mr. Mulcair, told CBC’s The House on May 5th, 2012: “The 

point that I’m making is not that we should be against the 

development of the oil sands, but it has to be sustainable.” The 

root of this comment is sustainable development. That’s the 

principle our NDP holds across the country and especially here 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

The provincial NDP’s record on this issue is consistent. We 

support smart growth and economic development of our natural 

resources. We follow the triple bottom line principle — 

economic, social, environmental factors need to be considered 

in any project. We will be in close touch with our . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — If the members want to participate in the 

debate, they will have that opportunity, including members 

from both sides of the House. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — We’ll be in close touch with our federal 

counterparts to ensure that Saskatchewan’s best interests are 

well considered. It’s too bad that the Sask Party can’t do the 

same and stand up for Saskatchewan to their federal 



1488 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2012 

counterparts when there are massive cuts to agriculture or other 

areas that hurt our province. 

 

Clear throughout our province’s history and our party’s history, 

we stand for developing our resources responsibly. It was the 

NDP who reformed our royalty structure to encourage new 

development. We think the industry has benefited from this. 

And it is the NDP who see the whole picture. We have a 

common sense position on our resources, just like the economy. 

There can be no social development without economic 

development. There can be no economic development without 

social development. The same principle, which is common 

sense, applies to our resources. We can’t choose between 

economic development and environmental protection. It isn’t 

one or the other. It’s both. That’s why we believe in smart 

growth. 

 

We believe in developing our natural resources to get maximum 

benefit for the people of this province who own them. We will 

see economic development and jobs. We will use those 

revenues to have social development, better health care, better 

education, more services for everyday families, and enough 

money in the pockets of the middle class to live, work, and 

raise a family. We want to protect the environment through 

rigorous environmental protections. It’s the triple bottom line 

approach. It’s common sense. It’s what the people of 

Saskatchewan expect and deserve. 

 

The other principle we believe in is value-added. You can see 

the NDP lives that principle through our support for the 

upgrader in Lloydminster and here in Regina. Non-renewable 

resources can only come out of the Earth one time. We need to 

use them to their peak benefit. We need to make sure those 

non-renewable resources are working for their owners, the 

people of Saskatchewan. That’s why we want to see jobs here 

in Saskatchewan to process our natural resources. Extraction 

doesn’t have to lead directly or only to exporting. That’s old 

thinking. That’s thinking that comes from the old cliché of 

hewers of wood and drawers of water. We think, in the 21st 

century, is smart, sustainable growth. 

 

Let’s talk about who supports that position. Peter Lougheed in 

Alberta, he supports the oil sands development as he led the 

charge in the 1970s, but he also supports jobs in his province. 

Premier Lougheed believes responsible development of his 

province’s natural resources make sense. He said in September: 

“We should be refining the bitumen in Alberta, and we should 

make it public policy in the province.” He went on to say, “I 

would prefer we process the bitumen from the oilsands in 

Alberta and that would create a lot of jobs and job activity.” 

 

Mr. Lougheed has spoken on this matter before. He spoke to the 

Canadian Bar Association at one of their conventions and said 

that environmental concern is no passing fad. Mr. Lougheed 

stated that on a point that we all should agree on. This province 

is guaranteed the exclusive right to develop how, or to decide 

how to develop, conserve, and manage natural resources. Too 

bad our Premier can’t learn from that well-respected former 

premier. And we on this side of the House and in our party 

believe we can do that responsibly with concern to grow the 

economy, protect the environment, and use those resources to 

invest in social programs that benefit us all. 

 

It’s been the cornerstone of the NDP policy on our natural 

resources for generations. You can look to Mr. Blakeney, one 

of the best premiers in Canadian history, for leadership on this 

file. You can look to Mr. Romanow and Mr. Calvert who 

fought hard to develop our resources responsibly. You want 

evidence of that, Mr. Speaker? Look at the headlines, from the 

Calgary Herald, no less, January 31st, 2007: “Albertans moved 

east to cash in on Saskatchewan’s boom.” That’s before the 

Sask Party took over our resources. The NDP were the stewards 

of that resource boom. 

 

Here’s another headline from the Calgary Herald, February 1st, 

2007: “Saskatchewan Premier desperately seeks workers: 

province enjoying resource boom of its own.” The NDP, we 

rolled up our sleeves and developed our resource industry in a 

responsible way, a Saskatchewan way, a sustainable way. 

Another headline, this time from the Leader-Post, May 26, 

2007: “Saskatchewan’s mineral exploration boom increases in 

intensity.” The NDP has always believed in this balance, what 

we call smart growth. 

 

The NDP’s position on this is clear now and always has been. 

We support economic development. We support resource 

development. We think the best way to do it is through 

sustainable growth with a triple bottom line evaluation process 

— it has to be good for the economy, good for the environment, 

and good for social progress. 

 

We will continue to work in Saskatchewan to make sure that 

our resources are being used for the people of Saskatchewan. 

And that’s a fundamental tenet of the New Democratic Party, 

and it’s a fundamental tenet for all New Democrats in this 

country, is that the resources of Canada must be used for the 

people of the province. 

 

It was very clear when the Premier of Saskatchewan took over 

the government in December of 2007 that he took over the 

government at a time of boom. But a very clear message was 

sent to the Premier, don’t touch the NDP resource policies 

because those are the policies that have made the boom happen 

in the province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, guess 

what? The Minister of Energy and Resources has gone to 

Calgary, Edmonton, places around the world to assure people 

that he will not change those NDP policies because they have 

provided a benefit for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Now what’s disheartening and what’s difficult is that this same 

government who took over monies and funds allocated to deal 

with environmental protection to try to have the balance has 

effectively downplayed and eliminated a number of the 

initiatives which were to provide the triple bottom line 

perspective that the NDP have. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 

people in many parts of Saskatchewan but also many parts of 

Canada are worried that this government seems to want to 

spend all the money, do it in lots of different ways, without 

keeping track of the environmental issues and the social issues. 

And so, Mr. Speaker, when things get a little difficult in this 

province, we often know that they end up trying to distract from 

what’s happening here by looking at some other issues. 

 

But the key point as we go into this debate today, Mr. Speaker, 



May 10, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1489 

is that the NDP have a strong common sense, smart growth 

position. It’s a position that’s been built over many decades of 

very careful work within the resource extraction industry. We 

know that we have to have a 21st perspective, 21st century 

perspective that is common sense, that makes these resources 

be used for the best use of all the people of the province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we support economic development. We 

support smart growth, and we will continue to do that in the 

decades that come. And we know that Saskatchewan people 

will be with us. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do have 

comments on our particular motion, but I think there’s some 

things that the Leader of the Opposition just said that require 

some rebuttal. And I first want to quote our current Agriculture 

minister who has infamously said, you apparently can say 

anything you want to in opposition. Because the Leader of the 

Opposition is . . . Well I’ll leave it to the people here to decide 

what exactly his comments were. 

 

But I do want to say one thing, that he just said that in 2007 the 

people of this province made it very clear to our new 

government that we were not to mess around with any of the 

NDP’s resource policies. Well, Mr. Speaker, apparently the 

NDP didn’t get their own memo. Because the 2011 election is 

not that long past us, and to my recollection, I’m pretty sure 

that the NDP’s proposal to pay for their $5.5 billion platform 

commitments, which would have spent us into deficit, called for 

hiking of potash royalties, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when he stands here and says with a straight face that the 

people of this province don’t want us messing up with the 

NDP’s resource policies, it’s the NDP who are messing with 

their own resource policies, or at least that’s what their proposal 

was, Mr. Speaker. It’s a bit baffling. So back to our current 

Agriculture minister. Apparently the NDP have taken that to 

heart — you can say whatever you want to in opposition. And 

I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that we’ll be using that quote again in 

the future because it’s pretty good. 

 

I do want to go to what the federal NDP leader has said about 

our province, Mr. Speaker, and I do also want to note our 

provincial NDP leader actually in his comments didn’t really 

stand up for Saskatchewan at all. He tried to brag about his own 

government’s record. They did do some good things, and I 

believe when we were in opposition we gave them credit for 

some of the good things that they did when it came to business. 

But I didn’t hear anything in his comments about standing up 

for Saskatchewan and/or condemning what their federal leader 

has said about Western resources, Mr. Speaker, which I think is 

shameful. 

 

The federal leader, Thomas Mulcair, wants to be prime minister 

of this country. He is actively pitting one section of our country 

against another, and our provincial NDP have done absolutely 

nothing to stand up for our province and to make sure that our 

interests are respected, if nothing else, Mr. Speaker, by their 

federal leader, which I think is pretty shocking. 

 

The NDP leader has called what is currently going on in 

Ontario the Dutch disease, saying that it is the fault of Western 

Canada and our resource base that manufacturing in Ontario is 

hitting the skids. And, Mr. Speaker, we have seen commentary 

after commentary after commentary from economists and 

people in the industry saying that that is absolutely not what’s 

happening. If you look into the United States and their 

manufacturing belt, they are seeing the same decline. It has 

nothing to do with the resource sector from our province. And 

to say otherwise I think is a bit . . . It’s not a true reflection of 

what is actually going on. And again, Mr. Speaker, I’m quite 

disheartened that the Leader of the Opposition refused to stand 

up for Saskatchewan in his comments. 

 

We had a motion before this House in March. It was referenced 

earlier in a speech that Ontario’s premier has taken the same 

position, blaming Western provinces for the malaise in 

manufacturing in Ontario. And on March 8th, a motion was 

introduced that this, and I quote, “That this Assembly calls 

upon all partners in Confederation to join Alberta and 

Saskatchewan in sharing a positive message regarding Canada’s 

oil sands.” And, Mr. Speaker, as soon as that, within seconds, 

as soon as that motion was introduced, the Energy critic for the 

NDP, the member for Nutana stood up and said that she 

supported that. 

 

Well I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that when it’s the 

Ontario premier who comes out and attacks our natural resource 

sector in the West, that the NDP are okay with that. But it’s 

when it’s their own federal leader does exactly the same thing, 

where are they, Mr. Speaker? Absolutely silent. And when 

asked for their response to this, she was, oh well, you know, 

that’s an economic policy. That isn’t our responsibility, that’s 

federal responsibility, which I think is a complete abdication. 

They want to be government again one day, Mr. Speaker. Stand 

up for our province. Stand up for the economics of our 

province. Stand up for the resource base in our province, Mr. 

Speaker. But she’s apparently incapable of doing that, and just 

having heard her leader’s comments in this House, I see where 

she’s getting her instruction from. 

 

There’s one other, one other thing I would like to reference the 

member for Nutana, and my colleague had used a quote, I don’t 

have the actual quote in front of me, but to paraphrase, she had 

referenced the fact that the NDP have been absolutely 

consistent on their position on resource development. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, as we all know I love searching for quotes and things 

and so I have a couple in front of me. For those who have been 

around for a while, it’s not on yellow sheets but in my mind it 

is. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, for their absolute consistency on resource 

development policy from the NDP in this province, there’s a 

few positions. I don’t have them quite chronologically, but in 

their glossy brochure that they love to talk about, at least last 

session when they had a different Environment critic, on page 

16 of their energy and climate change plan — because I haven’t 

referenced this in a couple of years, so this brings back some 

good memories — but anyway they said, and I quote, 

“identified economic opportunities for the development of new 

energy resources such as oil sands.” So they’re in support of it 

there. That’s interesting. Then Dwain Lingenfelter comes along 

and . . . 

 



1490 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2012 

An Hon. Member: — Where is he now? 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Well we don’t know where he is. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh, we know where he is. 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Well I’m getting to that. 

 

So Dwain Lingenfelter comes along in 2009 and says, and I 

quote — the brochure was called Making Saskatchewan a 

Green Policy Leader — and I quote, “Saskatchewan should 

prohibit the mining of its oil sands.” Not scale it back, not make 

sure it’s environmentally friendly. Don’t do it at all. 

 

So there’s their consistency on the resource development in our 

province, Mr. Speaker, is on one hand they’re saying that there 

is great opportunities for our province. And then Mr. 

Lingenfelter comes along and says, no we should prohibit it, 

which is an interesting position, Mr. Speaker, considering he 

comes from big oil in Alberta. He vacated our province and he 

went to go work for an oil company, and then he came back. 

But while he was an executive with the oil companies, he went 

down to the United States and he promoted oil sands. And he 

said, if you don’t like oil sands, what companies will do in 

Canada is build bigger pipelines to the West Coast and export it 

to China. 

 

So he’s working for oil. He’s totally promoting it. He comes 

back to the province, says we should ban it altogether. And now 

that he’s out of provincial politics, where is he, Mr. Speaker? 

He’s working for oil companies again. It’s exactly where he is. 

So there’s the NDP’s consistency on their resource policies in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think it’s a ridiculous thing for them to stand up and say that 

they’re consistent. There’s no consistency. They’ve had 

flip-flops on environmental policy. They’ve had flip-flops on 

our resource policy. And the biggest flip-flop, Mr. Speaker, is 

on one hand they say that they’re going to stand up for our 

province, and when their own federal leader comes out and 

attacks us, they are absolutely silent on the issue, Mr. Speaker, 

which I think is really most unfortunate. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I said at the beginning of my comments, 

there are experts after experts who have come out and 

condemned the position of their own federal leader. And with a 

few minutes left on the clock, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote a 

few of them because I have to say I’m not going to speak on 

behalf of all of my caucus colleagues, but I’m sure a few of 

them will agree with me that when it comes to economic 

policies for our province and our country, we will take the 

positions of economists and experts before we’re going to take 

the position of an NDP federal or provincial leader any time, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So their federal leader has blamed us for the problems in 

manufacturing. I’d like to quote Jack Mintz, professor of public 

policy at the University of Calgary. He says and I quote, 

manufacturing in Ontario, Quebec, Michigan, and Ohio all have 

“been on a steady decline for 35 years.” That suggests the 

exchange rate isn’t the issue on either side of the border. 

 

He goes on to say, “Instead of a Dutch disease, what we really 

have is a manufacturing malaise.” Rather than a cause, 

Canada’s resource sector has been something of an economic 

salvation for its economy. 

 

On Global TV there was a story on May 7th. And I quote: 

 

Economist Jason Child says the main reason the dollar is 

rising is more people are investing in Canada and says the 

argument of a higher dollar killing the manufacturing 

sector is hard to make. 

 

Child says, and I quote, “There are lots of countries that have 

made manufacturing work even with a high exchange rate. The 

German mark comes to the floor as an example.” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Roger Gibbins, Canada West Foundation, 

said just this week and I quote, “The economic prescription 

advanced by Mulcair is both simple and potentially disastrous.” 

 

And again, as I said, I will take the comments from these 

experts before I will take any kind of economic or resource 

advice from the NDP, either provincial or federal. And I would 

ask the provincial NDP to stand up for our province instead of 

sitting on their hands. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 

my pleasure to rise in the debate today to the motion that’s been 

proposed. The NDP’s record is clear. We support resource 

development. We support resource development that is 

sustainable and that stands up to a triple bottom line evaluation. 

We want it to be good development — environmentally, 

socially, and economically. 

 

The National Energy Board supports our position. When 

they’re evaluating interprovincial pipelines, the triple bottom 

line that they look at is their policy as well. They look at the 

environment, the social, and the economic impacts of any 

interprovincial pipeline that is proposed. So the question to the 

members opposite is, what’s wrong with the position of 

supporting resource development but saying that it should be 

responsible and sustainable? What’s wrong with that? It doesn’t 

seem that they are in support of that. I ask the members 

opposite, what’s wrong with calling on Saskatchewan’s smart, 

talented, and common sense people to look to a value-added 

economy? 

 

Saskatchewan’s greatest resource can’t be found in the ground. 

It’s found in our people — our creativity, our professionalism, 

the bright, common sense way that we have continually 

exceeded expectations. We have the capacity here to not only to 

extract our precious resources which are not renewable, but to 

turn that into value-added industries. 

 

There’s an old proverb: give a person a fish and they will eat 

for a day; teach a person to fish and they will eat for a lifetime. 

 

Saskatchewan has been given the proverbial fish. Our beautiful 

province has given us an abundance of natural, non-renewable 

resources. But there’s more that we could be. By taking it out of 

the ground, we became a have province. But by fostering and 



May 10, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1491 

encouraging value-added industries out of those natural 

resources, we could build financial security for generations to 

come — for future generations, for our grandchildren and their 

grandchildren. 

 

For our non-renewable natural resources, fostering value-added 

industries would help Saskatchewan take maximum benefit 

from our resources. So instead of embracing value-added 

opportunities, instead of insisting that our industries deliver 

environmental and social and economic — that’s the triple 

bottom line — benefit to Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan 

Party government instead is waging a petty political fight. 

They’re fearmongering, and they’re trying to score political 

points. They’re trying to distract from the real issues that are of 

concern to Saskatchewan people today. 

 

The Premier has gone on tirades to disagree with a complex 

economic theory. His divisive attacks don’t build up our 

industries and they don’t create jobs. They don’t protect our 

environment or promise a better future for our children. 

 

[11:30] 

 

I would ask the members opposite to put aside the political 

games. We support resource development. We want 

development to be sustainable. And we want resource 

development to have environmental, social, and economic 

benefits. Don’t the members opposite want those things? That’s 

the National Energy Board’s triple bottom line theory. 

Economic, social, and environmental factors need to be 

considered. 

 

I’m on the record. My colleagues in the NDP are on the record. 

We support a strong resource economy. Clear through our 

province’s history and our party’s history, we have consistently 

stood for developing our resources responsibly. It was the New 

Democratic Party who reformed our current royalty structure to 

encourage new development. And as my colleague mentioned, 

that structure hasn’t been changed since this government came 

into power. They obviously support the royalty structure that 

was established by the NDP. And if you look at the position of 

our former Premier Allan Blakeney in the constitutional 

discussions in 1982, he clearly, clearly supported the resource 

sector in Saskatchewan, and in fact fought really hard to make 

changes to our constitution to protect the resource sector in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Again, our party’s position has been clear all the way through. 

We think the industry has benefited well from the royalty 

structure. Certainly resources in Saskatchewan have benefited 

very much from Allan Blakeney’s strong support for provincial 

autonomy in that area. And that is certainly what we do support. 

Again, we have a common sense position on our resources just 

like we have a common sense position on the economy. And, 

Mr. Speaker, it is the New Democratic Party who sees the 

whole picture. There can be no social development without 

economic development. And there can be no economic 

development without social development . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . And I’m glad the member opposite agrees with 

me. 

 

The same principle, which is common sense, applies to our 

resources. We can’t choose between economic development 

and environmental protection. It isn’t one or the other; it’s both. 

And that’s why we believe in smart growth. We believe in 

developing our natural resources to get maximum benefit for 

the people of this province who own them. We will seek 

economic development and jobs. We will use those revenues to 

have social development, better health care, better education, 

more services for everyday families, and enough money in the 

pockets of the middle class to live, work, and raise a family. 

 

So we want to protect the environment through rigorous and 

safe environmental protections. It’s the triple bottom line 

approach, and it’s common sense. It’s what the people of 

Saskatchewan expect and deserve. 

 

And the other principle that we believe in is value-added. You 

can see that the New Democratic Party lives that principle 

through our support for the upgrader in Lloydminster and here 

in Regina. Non-renewable resources can only come out of the 

earth one time. We need to use them to their peak benefit. We 

need to make sure that those non-renewable resources are 

working for their owners, the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And that’s why we want to see jobs here in Saskatchewan to 

process our natural resources. Extraction doesn’t have to lead 

directly and only to exporting, and that’s old thinking. That 

thinking comes from the old cliché of hewers of wood and 

drawers of water, and we think that it’s better to think in the 

21st century — smart and sustainable growth. 

 

Thomas Mulcair told CBC’s The House on May 5th, 2012, 

“The point that I’m making is not that we should be against the 

development of oil sands, but it has to be sustainable.” That’s a 

common sense approach to developing natural resources and 

certainly Saskatchewan’s non-renewable natural resources. 

Make sure that it’s smart and sustainable growth. If the 

members opposite don’t believe in that, they should state it for 

the record. They certainly have done a number to 

environmental programs and environmental protection already. 

 

The provincial NDP’s record on this issue is consistent. We 

support economic development, including the oil sands and 

resultant pipelines, that follows a triple bottom line theory — 

economic, social, and environmental factors need to be 

considered. The NDP began our resource boom. We want to 

keep it going, not just by encouraging an active resource sector, 

but by encouraging a strong, sustainable sector that always 

fulfills the triple bottom line standard. And the NDP believes 

that a value-added economy is the common sense next step that 

will make sure that every bit of the one-time resources we take 

from the ground is delivering maximum value to Saskatchewan 

people now and in the future. 

 

In addition to the comments about the non-renewable resources, 

it would make sense for this government to start talking more 

about renewable resources. And that is actually the future of 

this province and the future of our economy. They call it smart 

energy. 

 

There’s all sorts of things this government could be doing on 

the environmental record and certainly on the energy 

development side to support the development of renewable 

resources for our energy, Mr. Speaker. And it’s sadly deficient 

in both their Throne Speech, in their platforms, and in the 



1492 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2012 

budget this year. We see cuts to the go green program, and we 

see only focus on the carbon-source energies. There are all 

kinds of other types of energy that should be explored and is 

being explored in many other countries around the world, and 

instead we seem to have inherited the world’s worst record for 

carbon and greenhouse gas emissions. It’s not something that 

this government should be proud of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And of course, in the whole scheme of this, Mr. Speaker, this 

discussion is nothing but petty politics and our time would be 

better spent focusing on issues that are priorities instead of 

worrying about other provinces’ resources. 

 

This government should be focusing on affordable health care 

and stop raising the costs of prescriptions for seniors who are 

on fixed incomes, living with an ever-increasing rent and food 

costs. And this government chooses to focus on their health 

care and take more money out of their pockets there. This 

government should focus on timely surgeries and make sure 

that the good people of Saskatchewan and the surgery doctors 

have time to do the proper surgeries in Saskatchewan. 

 

This province should focus, or this government should focus on 

the heritage of our province instead of forcing our museums to 

have lesser hours because they’re not financially supported. 

 

This government should support things like the film industry in 

Saskatchewan, making sure that it’s viable and that it helps it 

through the tough times like this government has helped other 

industries, and certainly Saskatchewan has helped industries 

through tough times. It’s not the first time that it’s happened. 

They should tend to labour issues and deal with the outstanding 

issues in the labour area, Mr. Speaker, and they should focus on 

doing the job that we have here in front of us instead of having 

three more politicians at a cost of $1 million to the people of 

Saskatchewan. So thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very excited 

about joining this debate. Like the member from Martensville, I 

want to clarify a couple of things that the Leader of the 

Opposition said. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition said . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . No, no, not the Leader of the Opposition. No, I’ll get to that 

one in a second. The Leader of the Opposition said that we 

don’t oppose our federal counterpart. He said that we, as the 

Saskatchewan Party, listen to our federal counterpart. Last time 

I was in the federal election and I voted, I really didn’t see the 

Saskatchewan Party on the ballot and I’m just wondering if the 

Leader of the Opposition did, because I certainly missed it. 

 

So back to the debate, Mr. Speaker. Sask is now on the 

international map for the first time in a long time, Mr. Speaker. 

I’d like to say publicly to the world, we have arrived. Built on 

agriculture of this province, it was diversified into natural 

resources — oil, forestry, natural gas, mining, amongst others. 

Our most important resource, Mr. Speaker, is not in the ground 

that we walk on, Mr. Speaker, but it’s the people who call this 

great province home. These people now understand what it’s 

like to see Saskatchewan moving forward, and they’re very 

excited about this. They work hard. They have integrity. And 

they’re excited that the Saskatchewan Party government is 

exploring all options within our province, not just one single 

sector. 

 

The Premier said in 2007 that we were at a tipping point in 

Saskatchewan. Now we are seeing the benefits of all of the 

resources and we’re exploring all of our options above and 

below the soil of this great province. The natural resource 

expansion has allowed record investment for the people of this 

great province, record investment in social services, highways, 

schools, and something that we hold very dear in our hearts 

here in Saskatchewan — record investments in our health care 

system. 

 

I want to get into some of the facts about our natural resource 

sector, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Don’t confuse them with the facts. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — No, I’ll try not to confuse the opposition 

with the facts. In 2009, Canada’s natural resources accounted 

for 11.1 per cent of the total GDP [gross domestic product], 

11.1 per cent. And somehow down in the East, they don’t think 

that that’s significant. The jobs the Canada resource sector 

employed — 759,000 people, and that was in 2009. Now we’re 

exploring Saskatchewan. This is growing every year, Mr. 

Speaker. This accounts for 5.2 per cent of the total direct 

employment in Canada for 2009. The resource sector 

announced . . . Sorry. The resource accounted for 23.8 per cent 

of total capital investment in Canada in 2009, a dollar value of 

$73.6 billion. This energy accounted for 20.1 per cent or $62.2 

billion. More than 3,200 companies across Canada from coast 

to coast to coast provide jobs in the mining industry with 

service ranging from engineer consulting to drilling equipment. 

 

Here’s what we’re going to look at in the next 25 years if we 

keep growing, Mr. Speaker. An assessment of the economic 

impact of the West’s oil sands over the period from 2010 to 

2035 found that the largest beneficiary in terms of GDP and 

employment would obviously be in Alberta where the richest 

oil sands are. 

 

The second largest is Ontario, Mr. Speaker. Ontario’s 

benefiting from what’s happening out west. It was projected 

that 882,000 jobs would be created in Ontario over this next 

25-year period. I’m wondering if the people in Ontario would 

like those jobs to continue or if they would like to see those 

jobs evaporate over the next 25 years. Nationally, 65 per cent of 

respondents agreed that it was possible to increase oil and gas 

production while respecting the environment. And I’d like to 

say, Mr. Speaker, that our Environment minister has taken 

some great strides to make sure that this is happening within 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I have a couple of quotes here, Mr. Speaker, that I’d like to 

read. Jack Mintz, the professor of public policy of the 

University of Calgary: 

 

Manufacturing in Ontario, and Quebec, Michigan and 

Ohio all have “been on a steady decline for 35 years.” That 

suggests the exchange rate isn’t the issue on either side of 

the border. 



May 10, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1493 

“Instead of a Dutch disease, what we really have is a 

manufacturing . . . [problem]. Rather than a cause . . . 

 

Some other quotes that I have is, economist John Childs said 

that the main reason the dollar is rising and more people are 

investing in Canada and says the argument of a high dollar 

killing the manufacturing sector is hard to make, Childs says. 

There are lots of countries that have great manufacturing and 

even work with high exchange rate. The German mark comes to 

the floor as an example. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the natural resource sector accounted for 46.7 per 

cent of Canada’s total exports in 2009. This is a huge dollar 

value and I think it needs to be emphasized, Mr. Speaker, total 

dollar value of $168 billion for our country. 

 

The Saskatchewan picture — forestry, potash, oil, natural gas, 

uranium, amongst other minerals — Saskatchewan’s per capita 

energy production is the highest in our country. Saskatchewan 

accounts for roughly one-quarter of Canadian primary energy 

production, no small achievement for a province with only 3 

per cent of Canada’s population. 

 

Saskatchewan’s primary energy production come from coal, oil, 

natural gas, hydro, uranium, wind, and biofuels. Saskatchewan 

is the only province in Canada and one of the few jurisdictions 

in the world with commercial production from all of these 

sources. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Now we get into what has happened down east — Mr. Mulcair, 

the NDP federal leader. It is very disturbing as a taxpayer 

within Saskatchewan, as a father, that we have somebody from 

the East, the federal NDP, telling us what is best for 

Saskatchewan. I think that the people of Saskatchewan know 

what is best for Saskatchewan. And I think they knew that in 

2007 and again in 2011 when they put a Saskatchewan Party 

government in charge of this great province. They knew we had 

the potential for years and years in this province, and we 

couldn’t quite meet it under the NDP. The reason we couldn’t 

meet it is because the NDP would not allow growth. They were 

very scared of this growth word, this growth that they had 

coming from, that we have now coming from our population, 

we have coming from our energy sector. We have growth in all 

areas. This growth allows us to be able to invest in some of our 

most important things that we hold dear in Saskatchewan. The 

Saskatchewan Party is making sure that everybody in this 

province is moving forward and enjoying this prosperity. 

 

A couple of things that I just heard the member from Nutana 

say was that the Premier was pulling political games and having 

divisive attacks. What about the NDP? The NDP federal 

government, or federal opposition, is saying that the East — 

this is an east-west issue — the East is suffering so we have to 

hurt the West to make sure everybody stays the same. God 

forbid, Mr. Speaker, that the West start to survive and strive on 

their own. 

 

How did the NDP start the resource boom, I’d like to ask them. 

I’d really like to ask them how they started the resource boom. 

When they were starting the resource boom, what did they do? 

The best thing that they can say is, well you know what? Let’s 

spend more money and tax them to make sure that they are 

going to leave, that all of the businesses that are coming in the 

last little while are going to leave the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP are scared of growth but I can see in 

their interest here today that only half of their caucus is here 

today to listen to this very, very important debate. The 

province’s eyes are wide open, Mr. Speaker. All the potential. I 

may start to sound like an old man to my kids, Mr. Speaker, but 

I say to them, I remember when the days were the dark days of 

the NDP, when we were taking money from the East and it was 

going out the other direction. Now we are a have province, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

very pleased to join in the debate today to talk about this 

particular motion that was brought forward by the 

Saskatchewan Party MLAs. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point 

out, I want to pick up on an opening line that the member from 

. . . I’m not sure where he’s from, one of the backbenchers over 

there, when he mentioned a new and disturbing trend is what he 

phrased it when he started speaking of his motion, Mr. Speaker. 

I want to tell the people back home, the people that are 

listening, the new and disturbing trend that has the 

Saskatchewan Party so worked up, Mr. Speaker, is a national 

poll shown in the article here, The Globe and Mail. And the 

national poll, the headline reads: “NDP broadens support into 

Tory turf, poll shows.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s important, that’s what they’re 

getting all worked up about, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why the 

motion came forward. And that’s really important that the people 

of Saskatchewan know the purpose of that motion, and the reason 

they’re getting so worked up is a national poll shows that the NDP 

are moving forward. They’re moving up in the polls, and they’re 

even moving up in the polls in traditional Tory ridings, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now what really amazes me, Mr. Speaker, is the Saskatchewan 

party caucus over there has the audacity to talk about defending 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And let’s do a little history lesson 

here, Mr. Speaker. The $800 million equalization fight that we 

started as a government against the federal government, Harper, 

their leader Harper, Mr. Speaker, what’s the first thing the Sask 

Party done is they stopped the court case on the $800 million 

equalization fight that we started with Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. That 

government stopped the court case and they sat on their hands. 

They never defended Saskatchewan one bit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let’s look at Bill C-10, Mr. Speaker, the federal crime Bill. Let’s 

look at the federal crime Bill, Mr. Speaker. How much cost is this 

going to cost all of Saskatchewan to house the prisoners that the 

federal government are wanting to house over Bill C-10, Mr. 

Speaker? It’s going to make that so-called sliver of a surplus 

erased overnight, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let’s look at the federal cuts, Mr. Speaker, that affected many, 

many parts of our province. Where was the Sask Party standing up 

for the people of Saskatchewan? They were nowhere to be seen, 

Mr. Speaker. They were very quiet. 

 



1494 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2012 

Let’s talk about the huge environmental cuts, Mr. Speaker, the 

plan that the federal government has to do away with 

environmental regulation and oversight, Mr. Speaker. Not a peep 

from the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we continue moving forward. Even with the Canadian Wheat 

Board, Mr. Speaker, the elimination of the Canadian Wheat 

Board, not a peep from the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. To address 

the challenges facing our producers, Mr. Speaker, not a peep from 

the Sask Party when it comes to taking on the federal government, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

When it talks about trying to address the growing challenge of 

water problems in our province, whether it’s illegal drainage or 

flooding, nothing from the federal government, not a peep from 

the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So don’t tell us who is fighting for the interests of the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We’ve always maintained when it 

comes to the federal Conservatives, the Sask Party will simply sit 

on their hands and they will not bite the hand that pats them on the 

forehead, Mr. Speaker. That’s exactly what is happening there, 

Mr. Speaker. So I want to point out to the people in 

Saskatchewan that we will continue, we will continue to fight 

for Saskatchewan’s interests because it’s the right thing to do. 

 

And if you’re looking at the messages from the members 

opposite, clearly they have shown no fight to protect the people 

of Saskatchewan’s interests when it comes to the federal 

Conservatives because, Mr. Speaker, time after time they’ve sat 

on their hands and they have simply given up, Mr. Speaker. 

And that’s a shame to see that happening from our current 

provincial government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out as well this . . . when 

you talk about the provincial NDP, the common sense approach 

that we have, I want to take this opportunity to explain to the 

people that are listening, to clarify our position as a provincial 

NDP. And, Mr. Speaker, the important point that I would raise, 

and I want to impress upon the people that are listening . . . our 

leader spoke about it very briefly when he mentioned the 

concept of smart growth. So to the people out there that are 

listening, the words and the terminology that we would use as 

New Democrats is the phrase smart growth. 

 

And what does smart growth, Mr. Speaker, actually mean? 

Well let us explain . . . I will explain that to a number of 

members opposite because they have a hard time 

understanding. Mr. Speaker, smart growth is very simple. That 

we have three pillars or three concepts that we think is really 

important for smart growth. One of them is protect our workers 

to make sure that people, that the working men and women in 

Saskatchewan have an opportunity to participate in the 

economy, Mr. Speaker. So we want to maximize benefits to the 

working families. The common sense concept is that working 

people in this province should have the opportunity. We should 

maximize their benefits, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other point that’s really important is that we can’t 

compromise our workers in any way, shape, or form. We can’t 

treat them like dirt. We can’t simply disregard some of their 

health or their environmental concerns. We have to make sure 

there’s room for the opportunity for them to grow, and we’ve 

got to maximize their earnings, Mr. Speaker. We know that is a 

common sense position that it makes sense to make sure that we 

protect the workers, Mr. Speaker. That is one of the pillars I 

think is really important is to work with organized labour, to 

work to make sure workers are protected, and that they have the 

opportunity to make a really good living. And that’s something 

that I think is primary and foremost in many of our members’ 

minds. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what we also want to point out is we believe 

in the whole notion of environmental protection. That is very 

key, Mr. Speaker. One of our planks in the smart growth 

strategy is to make sure that we incorporate in our minds the 

two words of sustainable development. It goes back to a 

comment that we had from one of the producers in the province 

when they came to visit the NDP opposition when a couple of 

the farmers said to us, we make a living off that land. We have 

to make sure that we protect that land as best we can, Mr. 

Speaker. That was the message we were given by the farm 

community. We make a living from that land; we have to 

protect that land. So many producers out there know the value, 

Mr. Speaker, of environmental protection. 

 

And I think people out there worry. They worry a lot when they 

start hearing news that the environmental regulation oversight 

is diminishing on the federal basis; the province is not picking 

up the extra duties. And I think what’s . . . overall, people are 

getting a sense that both their Sask Party and their federal 

Conservative cousins are now doing away with the oversight 

needed to protect the environment. 

 

Elders in northern Saskatchewan tell us it’s very simple. You 

have to make sure you have clean air, clean water, clean land. 

It’s very, very simple. Without those three principles, you 

cannot sustain life. And what is an economy without the people 

working that economy if they’re healthy and they’re highly 

productive, Mr. Speaker. It is all common sense. 

 

So from our perspective, Mr. Speaker, the third important 

component of our smart growth concept is quite literally to 

make sure that we invite the private sector in, that we develop 

the resources on a continual basis, and we create opportunity 

for as many people of Saskatchewan, and to try and derive as 

many of those benefits associated with that industry to make 

sure we have a long-term, healthy outlook for the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we look at some of these points that are being 

raised. And I would ask the people of Saskatchewan one simple 

thing, is that the poll show nationally the federal NDP are 

moving ahead and all of sudden the Sask Party is getting all 

worked up, Mr. Speaker. They talk about protecting 

Saskatchewan’s interest when we’ve seen they have not done 

so, Mr. Speaker, on many fronts. And then the people out there, 

they get discouraged because they hear there’s opportunity on 

the economic front. But they ask the question, we need to 

balance the environmental agenda as well, which is a key point 

in our planning strategy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I tell the people of Saskatchewan one simple message. The 

provincial NDP worked very hard to build this economy. It 

took us many years to rebuild the credibility of the province. 

We had some great fights going with the federal government 



May 10, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1495 

which the Sask Party gave up on. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

seeing the benefits of that work today. So I tell the people of 

Saskatchewan one simple thing. It’s all about smart growth. It’s 

all about having a sustainable development strategy in your 

mind. And the three pillars are worker protection, 

environmental protection, and making sure we have good, 

profitable companies that can sustain themselves over years. 

And that is all based on common sense . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time for the debate has expired. I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

have a question for the member from Saskatoon Sutherland and 

the question is: does the member opposite believe that we 

should do more to bring value-added opportunities to our 

province? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am very 

in support of growing this province. Everybody on this side of 

the House is very excited about what’s happening in 

Saskatchewan, and you know what? There’s a sense of 

optimism going on throughout our province, optimistic that we 

are ready for growth, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we are ready for 

the future. For the first time in a long time, Saskatchewan is on 

the map, Mr. Speaker. As far as saying we are ready to go 

forward, we are ready to take that province forward with the 

goodwill of the people of Saskatchewan; they have entrusted 

this to the Saskatchewan Party. I’m very proud of this. Thank 

you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP talks about 

the need to, and I quote, “internalize the costs of tar sands 

development.” In fact, the federal NDP’s House leader wants 

to, and I quote again, “ban raw bitumen exports and declare 25 

per cent tax for non-renewable resource extraction.” And as 

recently as Monday, the member from Nutana said these issues 

are, and I quote again, “something the federal government 

would have to deal with.” 

 

To the member from Athabasca: given the NDP’s abdication to 

the federal government, does that member also support the 

NDP’s position of relinquishing economic responsibility of 

natural resources to the federal government? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, what’s really 

important? This is a very important debate that we’re having 

right across the country, Mr. Speaker, and today we’re 

supposed to be . . . And my point is, when I spoke earlier, that 

the federal or the national headlines show that the NDP are 

surging ahead of the Tories and that’s why they’re getting all 

worked up. 

 

But on something as important as this matter, Mr. Speaker — 

where we’re debating this in the Assembly, and that’s what I’m 

talking about it, of how they politicize this issue — why isn’t 

their Premier here today to help defend Saskatchewan’s interest 

instead of opening up a sporting goods store . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I’d like to caution the member. 

Members are not to reflect on the presence of other members in 

the Chamber. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, and they made reference to 

some of our caucus members earlier. I’m wanting to ask the 

question, is why aren’t some of their key players in the 

Assembly today debating this thing which is so important to 

them? And, Mr. Speaker, all this is a political agenda on their 

part. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 

member from Saskatoon Sutherland. This member is a new 

member here in the province and he’s quite enthusiastic about 

many things that happen. But can this member tell us why the 

government that he has joined has been so careful to make sure 

that all of the NDP policies as it relates to resource extraction 

are kept in place? And can he understand, does he understand 

why the Minister of Energy goes around and says, well don’t 

worry, we’ll stick with the NDP policies because they are ones 

that work for Saskatchewan? So my question is for the member 

from Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

[12:00] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for the question. I 

am having lots of difficulties of keeping track what the position 

of the opposition is. One day it’s supporting this, next day 

condemning it. The next day we’re going to change this. We’re 

going to go from a nickel to a dime. Mr. Speaker, it is very 

difficult to keep track of what’s going on. Maybe if the 

opposition could clear up a few things for us and stand up and 

tell us exactly what their positions are on this, then maybe, 

maybe I could answer the question, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP’s belief 

that Canada’s natural resource sector is a disease is based on 

junk economics. In fact Stephen Gordon, who contributes to 

The Globe and Mail, noted that, “The loss of 500,000 

manufacturing jobs since 2002 has been more than offset by the 

creation of 2.5 million jobs in other sectors.” To the member 

from Saskatoon Nutana: does the NDP truly believe that our 

thriving natural resource sector has caused the decline in 

manufacturing jobs in Eastern Canada? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



1496 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2012 

As we said earlier, it’s clear that our record on this issue is 

consistent. We support economic development, including the 

oil sands and resulting pipelines, that follow the triple bottom 

line theory that economic, social, and environmental factors 

need to be considered. 

 

The motion in front of us today is really not a useful motion at 

all. It’s just a distraction, as my colleague said, because this 

party is . . . the government is trying to change the channel here 

on what are the real issues that affect people in Saskatchewan. 

Three more MLAs, cutting museums, cutting tourism, films, 

failing to tend with issues related to labour — that’s what 

should be on the motion today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not a 

distraction like this that has no merit in this legislature. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

going to ask the member from Sutherland again the question. 

He spoke about the optimism. We spoke a lot about the 

optimism over time, Mr. Speaker. And the headlines, as my 

colleague indicated, show that Saskatchewan was just doing 

great. The vast majority of the people of Saskatchewan, I would 

venture to say 99.99 per cent, knew the boom was coming. It 

was well on its way. They know the boom will continue, Mr. 

Speaker, no matter who’s in charge. There’s a big difference 

between the values of each party but they know things are 

going to be going great. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to ask the question. If you didn’t 

believe in the NDP prior to the last election, why did you 

believe in the NDP strategy when it comes to developing all the 

resources in the province of Saskatchewan? Why did you 

continue to adopt our practice? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I’m not quite sure 

what their practice is. I believe my history recalls that to lower 

the potash royalties, this was a joint decision supported by all 

parties within this House to be able to move this province 

forward. I don’t think that this was strictly the NDP, and I take 

offence at the NDP always saying, this was us. We did 

everything. You’re benefitting from everything. We hear the 

member opposite always say, 60,000 people lined up at the 

borders waiting for you to come back. You’re absolutely right 

they were waiting. They were waiting until they had a 

responsible government that was going to be open for business, 

that was going to help out the people of Saskatchewan in all 

aspects, not just in the aspects that best suited the NDP. Thank 

you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Parent: — Mr. Speaker, the past few years have presented 

significant challenges to all industries because of the recession. 

However, the decline in manufacturing in Ontario, as 

unfortunate as it is, follows the same trend in Michigan and 

Ohio. Yet with no facts to support the NDP’s case, they 

continue to insist our natural resource sector is “a disease.” To 

the member from Saskatoon Nutana: is the NDP cure for this 

so-called disease a carbon tax? And if not, what does the 

member propose as a cure? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

As I said earlier, this is a completely sort of silly conversation 

today because this has nothing to do with the issues that are 

facing the people of Saskatchewan. What we should be, what 

this government should be talking about and worried about . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. All members would like to 

enter into the debate. At the moment the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana has the floor. The member may continue. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

The issues that are important to Saskatchewan people at this 

point in time are those relating to affordable health care, about 

timely surgeries. We’re looking for affordable housing. These 

are issues that matter to the people of Saskatchewan. This 

useless debate is not one that focuses what should be 

happening. It should be . . . these guys should be worried about 

what’s going on in Saskatchewan right now and looking after 

the issues that are important to Saskatchewan people — 

protecting labour, industry, film industry, and tourism. That’s 

what they should be looking after. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — My question is for the member from Regina. 

He operated in the Devine government that put our province 

into bankruptcy. Did he learn some of the same lessons that our 

Premier did, and can he tell us what he’s learned from that? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time for the 75-minute debate 

has expired. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 601 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Forbes that Bill No. 601 — The Jimmy’s Law 

Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I had some 

chair issues there. I’m pleased to enter the debate here today on 

Bill 601, An Act to amend The Occupational Health and Safety 

Act, 1993 to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late night hours. 

 



May 10, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1497 

This is in fact . . . Actually, this is also referred to as Jimmy’s 

law because it’s dedicated to Jimmy Ray Wiebe. Last year, last 

June actually — we’re coming up on the first anniversary, and 

not a very pleasant anniversary — Jimmy Ray Wiebe was shot 

and killed while working the late-night shift alone at a Yorkton 

gas station. So one of Jimmy’s close friends didn’t think that 

was acceptable and Aaron Nagy has become, has started a 

campaign to create more safe and secure working conditions for 

those who work late at night. And the NDP is very proud to 

give Aaron this support, or our support. 

 

My colleague from Saskatoon Centre has done much work with 

Aaron on this Bill. He’s done his research, which has also 

involved late-night tours of gas stations and convenience stores 

to discuss with workers their concerns and thoughts on this Bill. 

He’s visited many communities throughout Saskatchewan and 

has had much support from those working in those stores who 

think he’s on the right track. 

 

So again, it’s one thing to do a literature search, which he’s 

done, and review best practices of what other jurisdictions are 

doing, but I think it’s most important to hear how those who are 

working these front-line jobs and these late-night shifts feel 

about their safety and their security. It’s not an easy thing, 

actually. Shift work at the best of times is hard and demanding. 

It’s hard on your family life, it’s hard on your body clock. 

Working late nights is tough, but it becomes even more difficult 

in a situation where your safety actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

is on the line. 

 

So the member from Saskatoon Centre has said again that he’s 

had much response from those with whom he’s spoken, that 

those who are working in this industry think this is a good idea. 

 

So in his research the member from Saskatoon Centre has 

discovered there are already many 24-hour establishments safer 

than he anticipated, which is a good thing, and about 80 per 

cent of the businesses are already practising the principles 

behind Jimmy’s law right now. So that really is a positive thing. 

And as he’s put it, “It’s not going to take a revolution to move 

it to the next level. It’s just getting the few that are not and 

make this a consistent law across the province.” 

 

So we have very good, by and large, we have very good 

employers here in Saskatchewan doing really good things. And 

I know that people’s safety is top of mind for most employers. 

But it’s about that incentive to move all employers to ensuring 

that their staff on late-night shifts feel safe and secure, not just 

feel safe and secure, but are safe and secure. So if this Bill 

becomes law, it will amend The Occupational Health and 

Safety Act to require employers to schedule at least two workers 

for shifts between 11 p.m. and 6 a.m. or provide a secure barrier 

or locked door between a worker and the public. 

 

So just a little bit about what Jimmy’s law is based on. It’s 

based on a law that was proposed or some ideas in BC [British 

Columbia] on Grant’s law. So in 2005, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

Grant De Patie was killed trying to stop someone from stealing 

$12.30 worth of gas from an Esso station in Maple Ridge, 

British Columbia — $12.30 and Mr. Grant De Patie was killed 

for this. He was working alone at night, so that is where 

Jimmy’s law is based on. It is based on Grant’s law in BC. 

 

So what happens late at night for people who are working shift 

work in those jobs? Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve had the 

opportunity, it’s been quite a long time, but when I was in 

university . . . I’ve never worked in late-night retail, but I’ve 

worked as a server in bars as a waitress, getting off work at 3 in 

the morning when the pubs and the bars close. And even 

walking out to one’s car there’s a feeling of insecurity. The 

night provides opportunity for all kinds of things to happen that 

normally don’t happen during the day, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Late-night crime is a reality, and it’s a reality here in 

Saskatchewan. The reality is Jimmy’s tragedy was not an 

isolated incident. Just in Saskatoon actually, not in my 

constituency, just adjacent to my constituency, there’s a Fas 

Gas on 20th Street and Avenue H. And on March 14th there 

was, just a few months ago, there was a . . . someone came in 

with a sword, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Shortly before that, actually 

not long before that, just a few weeks previous, there was 

another attempted robbery with a shotgun, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

So this is a reality. In Regina I believe there were several 

robberies in the last few months as well, late-night robberies. 

 

So Jimmy Ray Wiebe’s experience of being held up is not an 

isolated experience. Fortunately his death, there’s fewer people 

. . . The reality is there are many attempts at robberies and 

many opportunities for violence to happen on the late-night 

shift. 

 

So I want to talk a little bit about some of the cross-Canada 

experiences. And the thing that jumps out for me, particularly 

as a woman, that it’s often women who have been the victims 

of these crimes and young women who have been the victims of 

these crimes. So I’d just like to highlight for you some of these 

crimes that have occurred. 

 

So in January 2006 in Montreal, a young woman, 17-year-old 

Brigitte Serre was stabbed to death during her first time on the 

overnight shift. She was working alone. You know, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I think one of the most tragic things, this was her first 

shift, and she had never worked the night shift before. She had 

traded shifts actually. So this was someone who, wrong place, 

wrong time — an incredibly sad story. 

 

In June 2007, a Langley, BC woman in her late 40s was 

working alone when she was sexually assaulted and locked in 

the storeroom for an hour. 

 

We have in September 2005, Jennifer Teague, who was 18 

years old, vanished as she walked to her nearby home after 

finishing a late night shift at Wendy’s in Ottawa. Her body was 

found two weeks later in the bushes. 

 

In May 2001 a store clerk, Yancy Meyer — he was 19; he was 

a first-year student at St. Francis Xavier University in Nova 

Scotia — he was stabbed to death by a man wearing a 

Halloween mask as he staffed an all-night needs store in 

Antigonish, Nova Scotia. The robber got nothing. He escaped 

with nothing, Mr. Speaker. So Yancy Meyer lost his life not 

even for $12.30 of gas, as we’d heard previously. 

 

In February 2000, Tara Ann McDonald was 25 and was 

working as the lone clerk during the night shift at the Subway 

store in Calgary when she was bludgeoned to death. The cash 



1498 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2012 

register that had less than $50 in it was stolen. 

 

May 1997, a Calgary Mac’s store clerk, Shamsudden Taj, who 

was 23 years old at the time, was found unconscious in the 

store. He was the night shift worker and the victim of a brutal 

beating. And he died a few hours later in the hospital, and 

cigarettes were stolen. 

 

[12:15] 

 

In March 1997, Kelly Kaler, 19, was strangled and stabbed to 

death with scissors while working alone at night at a Money 

Mart cheque-cashing outlet in downtown Vancouver. 

November 1994, Eileen McCoy, 46 years old was sexually 

assaulted and murdered after vanishing from her night shift at a 

Mac’s store in Taber, Alberta. May 1993, a night shift clerk, 

Lailanie Silva, 22, was abducted from a Calgary 7-Eleven store 

and murdered. In September 1983, 18-year-old Barbara 

Turnbull was left paralyzed after being shot by robbers while 

working as a night clerk in a Mississauga convenience store. 

The robbers escaped with $200. 

 

January 1982, Laurie Lee Boyd, 16, who was a part-time clerk 

working the 6 to 11 p.m. shift at the Red Rooster store in 

Okotoks, Alberta was abducted, sexually assaulted, and stabbed 

to death. A more recent case here just in September 2007, 

44-year-old Delores Reynolds had her throat slashed from ear 

to ear and was raped during a robbery while working the 

graveyard shift at a Halifax gas station. 

 

So those are some stories nationally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

they’re not nice stories at all. And the one thing in common 

here, these were all people who were working alone on the 

night shift. 

 

The one thing, Mr. Speaker, my dad was a police officer for 

almost 30 years in Saskatoon, and the one thing that he has 

taught me, not just about personal safety but about crime in 

general, is that it’s much better to prevent a crime than to deal 

with it while it’s in progress or the ramifications of its 

aftermath. So that’s the one thing my dad . . . I grew up in a 

house where actually we talked a lot about crime and crime 

prevention and all those kinds of things. And today we call it 

crime prevention by environmental design, but I think the basic 

principle and one lesson that my dad has imparted on me is that 

criminals don’t want things to be easy for them. They are 

always looking for the easy mark. And I would argue there is 

no easier mark than a staff person alone on a graveyard shift. 

There is not an easier mark than that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When it comes to preventing crime, and I’ll take it out of sort of 

the more violent crime, and something my dad would tell me is 

when it comes to property, you might trim the hedge in front of 

your basement window so you can see it from the street so you 

don’t have, a criminal doesn’t have the opportunity to hide 

behind the bush and break into your house. Or you might want 

to install motion lighting, those kinds of things. It’s about those 

simple things that prevent crime that make it harder for the 

criminals to do their job . . . or not their job, to do the things 

that criminals tend to do. 

 

And again, having two people on staff at night is a way to 

prevent crime, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m not saying it’ll never 

happen, and we have had tragedies, a tragedy here in 

Saskatchewan with two people working together, two women 

during a day shift. So there is never any guarantee in life. 

 

But the goal of crime prevention is to do your very best to 

lessen the odds of a crime occurring. And again criminals are 

looking for the easy mark. Having two people work together on 

a late-night shift makes it harder for a criminal to do what he 

wants to do. If you were the thief, would you choose to enter a 

store that had one staff person in it, or would you choose to 

enter a store that had two staff people? I would argue that the 

store with only one employee or fewer security measures is 

going to be the easy mark, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I don’t just feel 

that; I think I know that. 

 

And there are always exceptions, and crime will still be 

perpetrated where there are two people present, but it is about 

lessening the risks, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And again as I said, no 

one is saying this is a foolproof system. But it’s about 

improving your odds, so making things harder for criminals to 

do what they plan to do, which means they’ll be less inclined. 

 

Even as a business person, I think that my goal would be to 

make sure that my store is less likely to be a mark or a target for 

criminals as well. It’s good business sense to prevent crime. It’s 

also good business sense to ensure your employees are safe. But 

when it comes to making sure that your business is safe from 

crime, again this is something that would be I think a good 

business practice. 

 

There is a well-worn saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there is 

safety in numbers. And I think that there is more than a grain of 

truth, I’d actually say that saying is very much rooted in truth. I 

think, again, common sense and good business practice. 

 

I think as a woman too, I’m perhaps, I think women in general 

are perhaps more aware of our vulnerability at night. There’s a 

reason on university campuses there are safe walk programs to 

get students from point A to point B with more than one person. 

There’s a very good reason. Sexual assaults, personal attacks, 

all those kinds of things are in the realm of possibilities or go 

up when you’re on your own, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There is 

safety in numbers. 

 

And as I pointed out earlier, I’ve never worked late-night retail, 

but I’ve worked many, many jobs where I’ve been alone at 

night. I’ve worked into the wee hours of the morning. I’ve 

worked as a waitress leaving a bar at 3 in the morning. I’ve 

worked as a reporter at a newspaper wrapping up copy for a 6 

a.m. deadline and being the only one still in the newsroom, 

maybe because I didn’t have my work done but I’ve been the 

only one still in the newsroom late, late at night by myself. 

 

Or actually even just being at the legislature, there’s occasions 

here that I’ve been here, and the halls are quiet. I know you take 

comfort in knowing that there’s security here, but I’ve been in 

this building where it doesn’t feel like there’s anybody else in 

this building, and there’s very much a sense of vulnerability 

that comes with that. 

 

I know when I get to my apartment and I get out of my car and 

walk from my car to my apartment door, there’s a sense of 

vulnerability. So imagine being alone in a workplace at night. 



May 10, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1499 

And all kinds of things happen at night. People tend to do sillier 

things at night as well, and it’s not to say people don’t drink to 

excess during the day or engage in activity that most of us 

wouldn’t engage in, but the reality is these behaviours increase 

at night, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So because of the night, the nature of what night is, that 

increased vulnerability, these behaviours increase in the dark. 

There’s more places for people to hide, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So 

there is an increased vulnerability for, a sense of vulnerability 

for people at night. So again imagine being one of these store 

clerks at a Mac’s store and someone comes in in the middle of 

the night. You’re by yourself. Perhaps someone’s had way too 

much to drink or perhaps is doing something else that they 

shouldn’t be doing, and you are alone. And whether you’re a 

man or a woman, it’s problematic, but again I’m coming from 

the perspective of being a woman who’s worked alone at night 

and has had some sense of vulnerability of that. There is safety 

in numbers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I think it’s interesting to note that even police officers work in 

pairs at night, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In Saskatoon it’s common 

practice that officers pair up at the start of their night shift. I 

have members opposite saying, well not everywhere — well of 

course, not everywhere — but in Saskatoon they’ve recognized 

that their officers are safer when they work in pairs. They work 

in pairs at night because your crime load increases at night and 

it’s easier to . . . There is safety in numbers, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

In fact actually in speaking with a few police officers, I 

couldn’t confirm it, but not only generally right now they pair 

up right when the shift starts, but the one police officer with 

whom I was speaking believes that actually is written into their 

collective agreement, that they work in pairs from 11 p.m. to 6 

a.m., Mr. Deputy Speaker. So police officers, police officers 

who are armed with side arms, they have side arms, they have 

pepper spray, they have batons, they have all the tools and the 

training, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So they have side arms. They 

have pepper spray. They have batons and all the training to 

keep themselves safe, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And they believe 

that it’s best to have two people working together at night, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and feel quite strongly about that. 

 

So I would argue that if it’s good enough for our well-trained 

and -armed police officers to work in pairs on the overnight 

shift, why would we not want to do this for other employees, 

that is, pair them up, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Why would we not 

want to pair . . . Just to be clear here, I’m not advocating 

anything but pairing people up. 

 

And too I think my perspective as a woman and as a mother and 

as a parent of a child who’s not too far away from working, 

from being interested in employment . . . She’s 14 years old, 

and I think she would like to earn a living other than babysitting 

her four-year-old sister. So she’s starting to think about other 

ways to earn extra money. So honestly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

would not want to even think about Hennessey working at a 

Mac store or a gas station or anywhere during a night shift, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. I couldn’t imagine her working a night shift by 

herself at any of these places, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I hear these folks on the other side going ooh, thinking that I’ve 

said something nefarious or bad here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 

my point is here that I would not want my daughter working 

alone on a night shift in some of the businesses that operate at 

night. Well I just wouldn’t want her working alone on a night 

shift. Of the stories that I’ve recounted, most of the stories that I 

recounted that happened on a national level were young 

women, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I can’t even go there in my 

mind to think that that is even a possibility. 

 

So I think about all the Hennesseys of the world, and I want 

them to be safe in their workplaces, men, young men and young 

women. And again I would argue it’s common sense and that 

there is in fact safety in numbers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again 

as I said in the start of my remarks, nobody is thinking that this 

is the panacea that cures all crime, but again it’s about making 

you less of a target, less of an easy mark for criminals. 

 

So again I don’t think any parent . . . I’ve talked a little bit 

about Hennessey but I don’t think any parent wants to be up 

late at night, 3 in the morning, thinking about their son or 

daughter working at a facility that they’re all by themselves. I 

can’t even imagine what that would be like, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

And I would also like to point out that many of these folks who 

work in convenience stores, gas stations late at night, 

sometimes they’re not . . . These folks are the front-line service 

providers. They are the face of their business. Actually it’s 

interesting. You look at all kinds of research, and lower waged 

employees are the folks who are the face of the business. And 

sometimes we don’t always, whether it’s around work-family 

balance, whether safety, all kinds of things, we don’t value 

these folks who are the face of their organization nearly 

enough. And I think we could value them by saying, we want to 

make sure you’re safe; we will implement measures to ensure 

that you are safe on the night shift. 

 

These are folks who are working, making sure that services are 

convenient for all of us, making sure that we can get gas at 3 in 

the morning. These are folks who are making sure if we need 

children’s Tylenol at 2 in the morning that they’re there, or if 

we need a litre of milk because we forgot to pick up milk for 

our kids’ cereal in the morning. So those folks who are working 

the late-night shifts are the ones who are there for our 

convenience to make sure that we have what we need. And this 

is a modern economy, a 24-7 economy. And so again I just 

want to emphasize that these people are the front. They are the 

face of their company and deserve to have the safety measures 

in place that could keep them from being one of the statistics 

and one of the stories that I cited earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I think that we can find a solution for business where it makes 

sense and that involves two, perhaps adding two workers or 

creating other safety barriers. For some businesses it will be 

having two employees on shift, and for others it might involve 

safety barriers and locked doors. And again this is not a 

panacea, but this will go a long way to providing not only a 

sense of security, a sense of security, not just a sense of security 

but a very real security for people. 

 

Again, criminals . . . Don’t want things to be easy for them. 

They are looking for the easy mark and the easy target. So our 

goal should be to make sure that we lessen those numbers of 



1500 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2012 

easy targets. And I just want to emphasize again that Saskatoon 

city police officers work in pairs at night, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And I’ve spoken about that but I think that that’s really 

important to remember that these are folks who have side arms, 

batons, and pepper spray and they still pair up at night, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. So at the bare minimum, I think we should be 

able to do the same for our, make sure that we can pair up or 

create proper barriers and locked doors for these folks. 

 

So I’d like to actually, before I finish here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

go over the Bill, which I have in my stack of papers here. Just 

one moment, please. 

 

[12:30] 

 

So Bill No. 601, I know I mentioned it earlier, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I mentioned Bill 601, An Act to amend The 

Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1993. 

 

The preamble goes: 

 

WHEREAS Jimmy Ray Wiebe of Yorkton was working 

alone at a gas station on June 20, 2011 when he was 

murdered; 

 

WHEREAS in memory of Jimmy Ray Wiebe, all gas 

station, convenience store and other retail . . . workers 

working overnight need some form of protection either via 

a fellow co-worker or protective barrier: 

 

THEREFORE HER MAJESTY, by and with the advice 

and consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

enacts as follows: 

 

. . . The Jimmy’s Law Act. 

 

It would involve late-night hours, meaning any time between 11 

p.m. and 6 a.m., a late-night retail premises, meaning: 

 

a gas station or other retail fueling outlet, convenience 

store or any other retail store where goods are sold directly 

to consumers that is open to the public during late night 

hours. 

 

The new section 14.1 would be added following section 14: 

 

Late night retail premises safety requirements 

14.1(1) If a worker is assigned to work alone or in 

isolation in late night retail premises, then, in addition to 

any other obligations the employer has under this and 

other Acts, regulations or collective agreements the 

employer must also do either or both of the following 

when an individual worker is assigned to work late 

night hours: 

(a) assign one or more other workers to work with the 

individual 

worker during any late night hours; 

(b) ensure the individual worker is physically 

separated from the public by a locked door or barrier 

that prevents physical contact with or direct access to 

the individual worker; 

(2) An employer operating a late night retail premises 

must develop and implement a written procedure to 

ensure a worker’s safety in handling money; 

(3) A worker described in subsection (1) must be trained 

in the written procedure referred to in subsection (2); 

(4) An employer of a gas station or retail fueling outlet 

must require that customers prepay for fuel sold at those 

facilities during late night hours.” 

 

So again just before I move to adjourn debate, Mr. Speaker, I’d 

just like to say this is about making sure that our citizens of 

Saskatchewan are safe no matter where they work and that 

there is in fact safety in numbers. This is about working for 

both employees and businesses, making sure that businesses 

and individual employees are not the easy mark or the easy 

target. It’s making it harder for criminals to do their work. And 

again it’s about making sure that people are safe. 

 

And as we approach the one-year mark, anniversary of Jimmy 

Ray Wiebe’s death, this is I think — and Mother’s Day — this 

would be a very fitting opportunity to pass this piece of 

legislation. 

 

But with that, I know that there is other work to do following 

this. So I would like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. At this time 

I’d like to move to adjourn the House. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government Whip has moved to 

adjourn the House. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. This House stands 

adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:33.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1475 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1475 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1475 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1475 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1475 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1475 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1476 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1476 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1476 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1476 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1476 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Happy Mother’s Day 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1477 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1478 

 World Lupus Day 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1477 

 Celebrating Enterprising Women 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1477 

 National Nursing Week 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1477 

 Southeast Regional College Plays Important Role 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1478 

 Support for Teenage Mothers 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1478 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Electoral Representation 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1479 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1479 

 Support for the Film Industry 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1480 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1480 

 Surgical Wait Times 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1481 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1481 

 Review of Labour Legislation 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1483 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1483 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1483 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 16 — The Correctional Services Act, 2011 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1484 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 16 — The Correctional Services Act, 2011 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1484 

 Bill No. 15 — The Uniform Building and Accessibility Standards Amendment Act, 2011 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1484 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1485 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Natural Resource Sector in Western Canada 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1485 

  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1487, 1495 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1489 

  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1490, 1495 

  Merriman ...................................................................................................................................................................... 1492, 1495 

 



 

  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 1493, 1495 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1495 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1495 

  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1496 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 601 — The Jimmy’s Law Act 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1496 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


