




















































Hansard: April 04, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 27A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 4, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 959 

 April 4, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to ask 

for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked leave of the Assembly 

for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and 

thank you, colleagues. Next Monday, April the 9th, is the 

National Day of Remembrance of the Battle of Vimy Ridge. 

Mr. Speaker, this year marks the 95th anniversary of this 

four-day battle that led to the capture of the German-held high 

ground in northern France by the Canadian corps. 

 

This fateful Easter Monday marked the first time that Canadians 

fought together. It took them four days to gain control of Vimy 

Ridge. Mr. Speaker, of the 49 battalions that were there for the 

fight, four were recruited in Saskatchewan. They were the 5th, 

the 28th, the 46th, and the 1st Canadian Mounted Rifles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Quartermaster Sergeant Leonard James Chase 

with the 5th Battalion Corps of the Canadian Railway Troops 

was one of those brave men present during those four days. In 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to have his 

daughter, Mrs. Gerri Moen of Regina, and her sons, Richard 

and Keith Moen with us here today — if you’d just give us a 

wave, please. And they are accompanied by Gwen Jacobson. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in order to commemorate this anniversary and the 

sacrifice and bravery of those that fought alongside of 

Quartermaster Sergeant Chase, a display of artifacts has been 

placed in a glass case in the front entrance of the Legislative 

Building and will remain on display for the public until April 

20th. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the actions of these soldiers define the character 

and strength of our country and province. We owe a debt of 

sincere gratitude and must never forget the defining 

contributions of those who served, those who came back and 

helped continue to build our nation, and those who never 

returned home to enjoy the freedom for which they fought so 

bravely. So in their honour, Mr. Speaker, on April 9th, flags on 

the Saskatchewan Legislative Building will be at half-mast. 

 

I encourage everyone to take a moment today and on Monday 

to honour their legacy and reflect on their deeds and dedication 

to the people of our province and country. Please also take a 

moment to view the artifacts on display. Mr. Speaker, I would 

ask all members to join me and welcome these very special 

guests to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I ask for 

leave for an extended introduction as well. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I, too, 

on behalf of the official opposition want to welcome Gerri 

Moen and her sons, Richard and Keith Moen. There’s no 

question that we’re very proud of their history. And also to 

point out that Gerri being the daughter of Quartermaster 

Sergeant Leonard James Chase who fought on Vimy Ridge with 

the 5th Battalion Corps of the Canadian Railway Troops. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I wear this pin to honour him and the many 

veterans that served the country. This pin commemorates the 

victory at Vimy Ridge on April 9th, 1917. The pin shows the 

towers of the Vimy Memorial in France, and the four coloured 

bands represent the four Canadian divisions made up of 

100,000 men who fought as a great force. The red band is for 

First Division, dark blue is for Second Division, grey-blue is for 

Third Division, and green is for the Fourth Division. The Battle 

of Vimy Ridge was Canada’s bloodiest day in history with 

3,598 Canadians being killed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my father was a veteran, spoke very highly of his 

love for his country and for his service, and taught all of our 

family the value of serving their country as a great honour. And 

I have an incredible amount of respect for the families that have 

gone through this. That respect carried on to a number of my 

siblings — several brothers and sister and my young daughter 

who also served in the military. So from our family to yours, we 

honour you, we respect you, and we thank you for your great 

service because we understand what it took to make Canada 

what it is today and to fight half a world away and go through 

that great sacrifice. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I too join in honouring our guests and to tell 

all the people of Saskatchewan, this great country, to take a 

moment next week and to remember our great veterans and the 

love of the country that they fought for called Canada, and the 

peace we enjoy today. So I thank you again. God bless you and 

have a safe journey home today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask leave to 

introduce a . . . extended introduction for guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Yorkton has asked for leave 

for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 



960 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2012 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your gallery, I 

would like everyone to join with me in introducing and 

welcoming three very significant community leaders from 

Yorkton: two have been community leaders for quite some 

time, and one is quite new but very significant. 

 

Before I introduce them, just a few comments. On July 1st in 

Yorkton, it was a devastating day — a historic flood. With 

those challenges, there were many challenges, but with those 

came opportunities. And as it’s been said in the Bible, all things 

work together for his good. And they did. The most devastated 

area is being developed into a flood catch basin by the city. 

Then there’s opportunity for green space. Then a greater idea: 

how about a permanent concrete skate park? A local 

businessman who was involved with the insurance industry was 

aware of a community grant program through the Aviva 

insurance company. The top prize was $150,000, and if only we 

would be able to access some of that money, it would go a long 

ways for this project. The plan was set in motion. Local and 

social media promotion campaigns started endless work by 

those involved, particularly these three. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

Yorkton Aviva skate park, bike, and walking path idea won the 

main prize of $150,000. 

 

With us today in your gallery are three, again, very significant 

people from the Yorkton area. Dave Nussbaumer — just give us 

a wave, Dave — is with Farrell Agencies and the mastermind 

behind this idea, although he’s very magnanimous. He would 

never take very much credit for that. 

 

Along with us today is Nathan Grayston, the skateboard, I 

guess, aficionado. He’s with the association. He’s an avid 

volunteer and a social media wizard, second to none I would 

say. Just give us a wave there, Nathan. He was offering to 

maybe do a demonstration out front later. He’s got his boards 

with him. 

 

And also with them is Lisa Washington, the community 

development manager with the city of Yorkton and also my 

cousin. So we are very happy to have them here today. 

 

Last week was also very exciting for this project, Mr. Speaker. 

The city of Yorkton and the New Line Skateparks hosted the 

first of two skate park design sessions for the new concrete 

skate park plaza on Brodie Avenue. They are hoping to break 

ground at the end of May and have skaters in the park by this 

fall. 

 

As Mr. Nussbaumer said when he had found that this project 

was being awarded some funding, a community is only as 

strong as its volunteers, and Yorkton is a very strong 

community. Lisa Washington added this: “And I would like to 

add that it is a microcosm of how strong our province is. There 

was province-wide support for this project that helped it 

become a reality.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to not only congratulate 

our visitors today but welcome them to their Assembly and 

thank them for their very much hard work. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of First Nations and 

Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. As a government we are always looking for 

partnerships, especially with First Nations people across 

Saskatchewan, partnerships that can enhance the entrepreneurial 

spirit of First Nations. Today we have the privilege of 

welcoming to the Legislative Assembly two First Nations 

chiefs, Chief Robert Head of the Peter Chapman First Nation — 

give us a wave — and Chief Calvin Sanderson from the 

Chakastaypasin First Nation. 

 

And usually when I see the two of them, we see a third chief, 

Wally Burns from James Smith Cree Nation, but Mr. Burns is 

under the weather a little bit so he’s left it to his two other 

colleagues who will be meeting with some of my colleagues 

and myself later today. Ladies and gentlemen, please help me in 

welcoming the two chiefs to their Legislative Assembly this 

afternoon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you and to all members of the Assembly, I would 

like to introduce 41 of grade 8 students and their teachers, Sarah 

Myers and David Pratte, and chaperones, Judy Yahnke, Yvonne 

Sawatsky, and Michael McIntee from Saskatoon Caswell 

Community School, seated in your west gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 100 years ago the children of the first classes at 

Caswell Community School played games at recess among the 

cows in Robert Caswell’s pasture. I can remember that. Today 

the Caswell neighbourhood is well known for its character 

homes and quiet side street. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to welcome these students to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations in 

welcoming our honoured guests here to the legislature. Chiefs 

Sanderson and Head, it’s good to see you here. We give our 

best, of course, to Chief Burns in a speedy recovery. 

 

It’s always good to see somebody from Chakastaypasin in the 

gallery here at the legislature. I wish you all the best in terms of 

the negotiations with the provincial government. May it be 

prosperous both for the people of James Smith and for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Again, I ask all members to join to me in welcoming these 

individuals to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. I too would like to join with the member from 

Meewasin to welcome the kids from Caswell School here. I 

have a special place in my heart for Caswell School. It’s only a 



April 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 961 

block from where I live on 29th Street. But I taught in this 

school and actually taught the grades that are here today. My 

own kids graduated from Caswell School, so I really feel a real 

keen affection for the kids from Caswell. And I want to 

welcome their teachers as well. 

 

And I know my colleague from Massey Place — there’s three 

MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] who actually 

represent Caswell — also would like, probably want to say a 

few words in welcoming the kids from Caswell too. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for protection for late-night 

retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know in the 

early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray Wiebe was 

shot two times and died from his injuries. He was working at a 

gas station in Yorkton, alone and unprotected from intruders. 

 

But we know that from positive statistics, that they show that 

convenience store and gas station robberies are down by 

one-third since 1999, largely due to increased safety practices 

including two people working together on late-night shifts. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

the good city of Moose Jaw. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of the trappers of 

Saskatchewan, whom I often call the conscience of the land. 

The current regulations being enforced are creating challenges 

that are of a concern to our traditional trappers. And the prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued; and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation and 

regulations with respect to trapping regulations and 

firearms use in consultation with the traditional resource 

users. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is signed by many trappers and community 

members. And this particular petition is signed by the good 

trappers of Sandy Bay and of course their supporters. Mr. 

Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from 

across Saskatchewan as it relates to education in the province of 

Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to make education a top priority by 

establishing a long-term vision and plan, with resources, 

that is responsive to the opportunities and challenges in 

providing the best quality education and that reflects 

Saskatchewan’s demographic and population changes; 

that is based on proven educational best practices, that is 

developed through consultation with the education sector, 

and that recognizes the importance of educational 

excellence to the social and economic well-being of our 

province and students for today and for our future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition calling on the Sask Party government to 

support and pass the Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that many Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed 

incomes and are victims of physical, emotional, and 

financial abuse; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

social and economic security and a right to live free from 

poverty; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights, which would 

provide seniors with social and economic security and 

protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Remembering Vimy Ridge 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Battle of Vimy 

Ridge has great significance for Canada. It was the first instance 

in which all four Canadian divisions, made up of troops drawn 

from all parts of the country including four battalions recruited 

in Saskatchewan, fought as a cohesive unit. In four days of 

fighting, Canada suffered over 10,500 casualties, yet the battle 

was hailed as an important Allied success in the war. 



962 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2012 

Each year Canadians commemorate April 9th as a national day 

of remembrance to one of the most important military 

engagements in Canadian history. Looking forward to the 100th 

anniversary of Vimy Ridge in 2017, the Vimy Foundation has 

been actively working with Canada’s youth to share the story of 

Vimy Ridge with a new generation of Canadians. Mr. Speaker, 

in honour of the sacrifice made by our soldiers, the nation of 

France granted 107 hectares of land at Vimy Ridge on which to 

build and maintain the Canadian National Vimy Memorial, 

Canada’s largest overseas war memorial. Canada suffered 

60,000 fatalities through the First World War, and Vimy Ridge 

Day encourages our citizens to preserve the memory of 

Canadian Expeditionary Force members killed in action. 

 

On behalf of this House, I would like to extend my sincere 

gratitude to the memory of those Canadians whose sacrifice and 

bravery resulted in the great freedoms that we enjoy today. Let 

us never forget those who fought so bravely. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Pink Shirt Day 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise in the 

House today in recognition of Pink Shirt Day, a yearly event led 

by community partners to raise awareness amongst citizens of 

this province to send a strong signal that we will not tolerate 

bullying in our communities and schools. As you are well 

aware, Mr. Speaker, students and residents across 

Saskatchewan have been and will continue to participate in 

activities of Anti-Bullying Week this week. 

 

We wear pink, Mr. Speaker, to show solidarity. And when we 

wear pink, we spread the message that bullying, violence, and 

discrimination — motivated by ignorance, intolerance, and lack 

of understanding and respect — are simply not acceptable. Mr. 

Speaker, on a personal note, this is particularly important. 

Having worked as a teacher with students, I have witnessed the 

harmful impacts of bullying on our youth. 

 

Discrimination is a social disease that affects the way everyone 

lives, works, plays, studies, and treats one another. It creates 

barriers to success by fostering prejudice and hate. Pink 

Revolution is more than just a symbol against bullying. It’s a 

commitment to celebrating diversity, learning from one another, 

being understanding of our differences, and seeing the unique 

abilities that every person can share when we work together. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in thanking 

community partners and in promoting diversity, preventing 

bullying, and taking action to make our world a safer place as 

part of the Pink Revolution. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Clerk Celebrates 25 Years of Service 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased today to stand and recognize an individual who has 

served this Legislative Assembly for 25 years. That individual, 

Mr. Speaker, is none other than our Clerk, Mr. Gregory Putz. 

Greg joined the Legislative Assembly Service on April 1st in 

1987 as Clerk Assistant. In 1994 he became Deputy Clerk, and 

five years later he became the Clerk of this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you would certainly know that he also 

played an integral role in revising and redoing the rules of this 

Assembly and our committees. He was your adviser, and the 

former member from Regina South. The three of you visited a 

number of legislatures in the Commonwealth, and as a result of 

the good work done by the three of you, we now have our 

committee systems, we have a legislative calendar, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think, as all members would agree, this House 

operates much more efficiently and more effectively. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my short term as Deputy Speaker, I have 

learned that you should always take the advice of your Clerk. 

And he’s been very helpful and I think I’ll continue to operate 

in that fashion. 

 

Something that members of this Assembly probably don’t know 

is that Greg has a real passion for airplanes and airports. And he 

designs airports on computers with the help of a Microsoft 

program and is becoming quite well known in Canada, and I 

believe in North America. So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all 

members to join with me in thanking Greg Putz for 25 years of 

service and dedication to this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Tartan Day 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise today as a Canadian citizen of Scottish 

extraction in recognition of Tartan Day. To start, I’d like to 

offer a sincere vote of thanks to Chief McPherson and all the 

great Scots with Camp Balmoral of the Sons of Scotland for 

treating us to some fine pipes and drums earlier today here in 

the legislature’s rotunda. 

 

The significance of Tartan Day is that on April 6th, 1320 at 

Arbroath Abbey in the east of Scotland, the nobles, barons, and 

freeholders, together with the whole people of the realm of 

Scotland, pronounced the Scottish declaration of independence. 

This became known as the Declaration of Arbroath and it was 

proclaimed under the kingship of Robert the Bruce. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Tartan Day is an ideal way to highlight the unique 

cultural traditions of the Scots and to bring the world’s attention 

to their creativity, innovation, heritage, and canny business 

acumen, as well as the lovely Scottish people themselves, Mr. 

Speaker, and perhaps to even have a dram or two. I’d encourage 

that on April 6th people across Saskatchewan and Canada don 

their tartans and partake in local events to commemorate the 

contributions of the Scots and their descendants to the fabric of 

our society. To my colleagues and fellow citizens, as the Scots 

might say, lang may yer lum reek, or rather, may you live long 

and keep well. Slàinte mhath, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to 

recognize Tartan Day. Tartan Day is celebrated to mark the 



April 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 963 

signing of the Declaration of Arbroath in 1320, signed at 

Arbroath Abbey. This declaration marked the beginnings of 

modern-day democracy. And this model was used by 

Americans in drafting the Declaration of Independence. Tartan 

Day has been celebrated as a way to recognize all good things 

Scottish — the people, heritage, history, culture, and their 

amazing legacy to the world. 

 

Oddly enough, the first Tartan Day was celebrated in Canada. 

Then in 2004, Americans declared April 6th as National Tartan 

Day to recognize the contributions of Scottish Americans to the 

United States. Three years ago, Scotland joined in. Scots are 

very humble people. The celebration took on a life of its own 

and now is a national day of celebration in the home country. 

 

Celebrations begin on March 30th and last until April 8th, 

allowing people from all backgrounds to share experiences and 

inspire future progress. Tartan Day benefits many different 

groups and provides an opportunity for citizens to put on 

diverse events, network with friends and neighbours, and have 

some family fun. 

 

I would like to ask all members of this honourable Assembly to 

join me in applauding the great contributions of Scottish people 

all over the world and wish them well during their week of 

celebrations. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Distinguished Alumni and Awards Night 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week on 

Thursday, March 29th, I had the pleasure of attending the 

second annual Kinesiology and Health Studies Distinguished 

Alumni and Awards Night on behalf of the Minister of Health. 

This event recognizes the achievements of U of R [University 

of Regina] alumni and student achievement in the Faculty of 

Kinesiology and Health Studies. 

 

The students at the U of R who decide to enter this faculty take 

pride in wanting to serve the public and create healthy 

opportunities right here within their own communities. As one 

of the award recipients stated, “I’m constantly asked what am I 

going to do with a kinesiology degree.” Her reply is always, “to 

try and ensure that everyone within my own community lives a 

healthy life.” 

 

The winner of the Undergraduate Award, Chantal Poirier, 

commented on how she’s very excited to receive her education 

and then return home to make her small town a healthier place 

to live. 

 

This year’s recipient of the Distinguished Alumni Award is Dr. 

Gordon Walker who completed his studies from the U of R in 

physical activity studies in 1990. I had the opportunity to sit 

with Gordon and his family and friends, and his lifelong 

commitment to health and physical fitness is a great bar that we 

should all strive to live up to. 

 

In addition, the Outstanding Graduate Award was presented to 

Katherine McLeod, an outstanding undergraduate student who 

went on to pursue her master’s and is nearing her completion. 

This young lady’s commitment to health is truly inspiring. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to all the winners, congratulations. Thank you for 

your contributions to increasing the health of our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Saskatchewan Budget 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 

province of Saskatchewan has the distinct pleasure of being the 

only balanced provincial budget in the Dominion of Canada. 

Yesterday the Finance minister of Nova Scotia unveiled his 

2012-13 provincial budget, continuing on their four-year plan to 

bring their province back to a balanced budget — yet another 

Canadian province attempting to balance their budget. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan, this is not the reality. Here in 

Saskatchewan, the Canadian Homebuilders’ Association states, 

“2012-13 budget keeps the momentum going helping 

communities grow.” Here in Saskatchewan, Colin Craig of the 

Canadian Taxpayers Federation states, “Saskatchewan 

taxpayers will benefit from one of the best budgets in Canada 

this year.” Even the esteemed columnist Murray Mandryk 

stated, and I quote, “The Sask Party should be credited with 

presenting Canada’s only balanced budget this year.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan is not immune to 

uncertainties of global markets. But in times of uncertainty, 

having your financial house in order is of the utmost 

importance. Mr. Speaker, this government is focused on the 

present while preparing our province for the future. It is focused 

on keeping the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Funding for University of Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker. It was a packed house 

yesterday at the University of Saskatchewan’s town hall. 

Individuals in the university community are rightfully 

concerned about what is happening. First there is a significant 

gap in the request of the operating grant, which was 5.8, but 

what the actual increase was was 2.1. 

 

Second, Mr. Speaker, the university requested $104 million in 

capital projects but did not receive capital funding. Instead what 

we see, Mr. Speaker, is the Sask Party shifting debt onto the 

University of Saskatchewan’s books, especially for the health 

sciences project at a total of $72 million. 

 

I know the minister has problems answering direct questions in 

the Chamber as well as in scrum, so I’ll make my question very 

specific. To the minister: does he agree with the 

administration’s assessment of the debt being shifted to the 

University of Saskatchewan, that this will nearly max out their 

borrowing capacity? Yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 



964 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2012 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to report to the 

people of the province, including to officials at the University 

of Saskatchewan that we work very closely with, that over the 

course of our first five budgets, Mr. Speaker, this government 

has invested more than $1.5 billion at the University of 

Saskatchewan. In fact what we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, in this 

budget alone would be more than $304 million going directly to 

that institution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since 2007, the last year of the NDP’s [New 

Democratic Party] government, we’ve increased funding at the 

University of Saskatchewan by 46.3 per cent, Mr. Speaker. So I 

challenge the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, as far as the 

actual figures that he’s offering because what the University of 

Saskatchewan officials also said yesterday is they made specific 

reference, not simply to the 2.1 per cent, Mr. Speaker, but they 

also made specific reference to the additional dollars. All of 

this, Mr. Speaker, this kind of investment, record investment, 

all within a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the specific question was whether 

or not the borrowing capacity of the University of 

Saskatchewan will be nearly maxed out, and the minister did 

not respond to that part of the question at all. 

 

Yesterday also stated in the town hall meeting, Mr. Speaker, 

was that the debt per student ratio on campus will skyrocket. As 

the university said yesterday, they will soon be moving to the 

top half of the pack when it comes to the debt per student ratio 

on campus. My question to the minister: does he agree with the 

administration’s assessment on the impact of his decision that 

the university on a debt per student ratio will be moving 

towards the top of the pack? Yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, let me provide a little bit of 

information for everyone, Mr. Speaker, regarding a fundamental 

aspect of the University of Saskatchewan. I’d like to just 

highlight a little bit about enrolments. Mr. Speaker, what we’ve 

seen since 2007, since the NDP, the last government, Mr. 

Speaker, is that enrolments at the University of Saskatchewan 

have gone up by 1,200 students. Mr. Speaker, 1,200 students — 

500 at the undergraduate level, 700 at the graduate level. 

 

The significance of this, Mr. Speaker, is that while the members 

opposite were in power, at the University of Saskatchewan 

there were increases in tuition of the range of 99 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, when we look at enrolment figures 

between 2003 and 2007 we actually see that they dropped, Mr. 

Speaker. So under the members opposite, at the University of 

Saskatchewan enrolment went down. What we see, Mr. 

Speaker, enrolment continues to go up as investments have 

gone up on behalf of this side of this House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the specific question was about 

the debt per student ratio, and the minister did not answer that 

question. The university administration also said yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker, that the provincial government will be paying the 

principal and the interest on the $72 million of debt for the 

Health Sciences building. My question to the minister: is this 

true? Yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s important for us to get 

some comparative data, Mr. Speaker. In fact a Stats Canada 

report has recently come out and said that the University of 

Saskatchewan is ranked fourth — that is fourth best funded out 

of all Canadian universities, Mr. Speaker, in the medical 

doctoral category, Mr. Speaker. This is reflected and reinforced 

by the rankings of Maclean’s, Mr. Speaker, Maclean’s 2011, 

that also ranked the University of Saskatchewan fourth among 

15 medical doctoral universities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that the dollars have gone into the 

University of Saskatchewan. We know how hard the University 

of Saskatchewan administration is working to ensure that these 

dollars are used effectively and efficiently, Mr. Speaker. And 

from within our budgetary context, Mr. Speaker — the only 

balanced budget within Canada, Mr. Speaker, with these kind of 

investments in the post-secondary sector — $3.5 billion to date, 

Mr. Speaker. We know how important the success of our 

students will be, Mr. Speaker, in their studies but also in their 

careers right here in Saskatchewan with the fastest growing 

economy in the country. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member of Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the specific question was about 

whether or not the government will be paying the principal and 

the interest on the $72 million for the Health Sciences building 

that it is forcing the university to assume. Again from the 

minister, no answer. On the $72 million of debt for the Health 

Sciences building and paying the principal and interest, it’s the 

university’s understanding, according to the administration, that 

the province will be paying it. And I understand it in this budget 

there is some for one year perhaps, based on the comments the 

minister made at the end of a very lengthy scrum two days ago. 

 

The question remains however, Mr. Speaker: is the government, 

is this minister pledged . . . does he pledge today to pay the 

entire principal and interest on the entire amount of the $72 

million for the entire duration of the financing of which we 

don’t know whether it’s 10, 15, or 20 years. Does he commit to 

making that entire payment today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, as part of the $3.5 billion 

that this government has invested in post-secondary education, 

specifically at the University of Saskatchewan $1.5 billion in 



April 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 965 

five budgets, an all-time record, Mr. Speaker. We know this 

about the Academic Health Sciences building. We know that is 

was first announced by the members opposite in 2003. Mr. 

Speaker, they managed to get out a bit of a press conference and 

a photo op by 2007, Mr. Speaker. But that delay, Mr. Speaker, 

saw a project that was anticipated to cost $120 million, Mr. 

Speaker. We saw that window close. And as the cost continued 

to escalate, Mr. Speaker, we know what it’s meant for taxpayers 

in the province. We also know what it’s meant to the University 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

This government, Mr. Speaker, has invested more than $200 

million. Mr. Speaker, we’re pleased to work this year with the 

University of Saskatchewan to try an alternative funding 

mechanism, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to continue to work 

together to ensure that this is successfully concluded so that we 

can make sure that we continue to train doctors right here in the 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Again, Mr. Speaker, the very specific question 

was whether or not the minister and the Sask Party government 

pledges to pay the entire $72 million amount. And again we 

heard no answer from the minister. 

 

One of the individuals who was at the town hall meeting 

yesterday on campus sent me this message. And the person 

said: 

 

The mood in the room was sombre. It honestly felt like 

we live in a province that is in the midst of a drastic 

recession and undertaking sweeping austerity measures. 

What lies ahead for the university is worrisome: huge 

cuts, more debt, and higher tuition. And all this is 

happening in a province with record revenues? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s bad enough and challenging enough for the 

university to not get the operating grant increase that they 

requested, but what is most worrisome, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

fact that this government is choosing to put $100 million of debt 

onto the university’s books, nearly maxing out its borrowing 

capacity, having huge implications for the campus. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when they had the news release in September and 

pledged support for the Health Sciences building, there was no 

mention at all, Mr. Speaker, about forcing the university to take 

on $100 million of debt. My question to the minister: what 

could possibly be his reason to shift $100 million of debt onto 

the university’s books, if not only to make the provincial books 

look better? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we know how precious 

public dollars are, Mr. Speaker. We know the infrastructure 

deficit that we inherited as a government as we came in, 

whether we’re talking about highways or health care, whether 

we’re talking about education or post-secondary education, 

almost every portfolio, Mr. Speaker, you can point to specific 

examples. Mr. Speaker, what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker, is 

actually drawing on an instrument that was utilized, that was 

established and utilized in 2003 by the members opposite. Mr. 

Speaker, that is some debt financing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re working with the University of 

Saskatchewan. And regarding the specific project of the 

Academic Health Sciences building, Mr. Speaker, had the 

members opposite not simply made an announcement in 2003, 

we’d probably be cutting the ribbon, Mr. Speaker, and have it 

complete by now. But instead they didn’t do a thing, Mr. 

Speaker. They know that. This, Mr. Speaker, has seen costs 

climb, Mr. Speaker. More than $200 million have been 

transferred to the university. Progress is under way, Mr. 

Speaker. This is helping to secure and ensure that we’ll 

continue to train doctors for the people of this province right 

here at the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for the Film Industry 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week Mark 

Wihak, head of the department of media production and studies 

at the University of Regina, posted a letter on the official 

university blog site. The letter reads: 

 

The destruction of the Film/TV/Digital Media industries 

will have serious consequences for students and alumni of 

the University of Regina, who will be forced to leave the 

province to pursue careers in these industries. 

 

To the minister: he has had no good answers for people who are 

already involved in the film and television industry. What does 

he say to people who are currently enrolled in film and 

associated programs or to those who are about to enter 

programs offered right here in our province that they believed 

would lead to careers right here in our province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As 

members will know, we had a very productive meeting with 

representatives of the film industry a few days ago. And as a 

follow-up, Mr. Ron Goetz, SMPIA [Saskatchewan Motion 

Picture Industry Association] president, sent a letter to his 

members reporting on the results. Here’s an excerpt: 

 

Yesterday, I received notice that the tax credit application 

deadline would be extended until June 30 and that there 

was a desire to find a new funding program for the 

industry. There was a desire to look beyond just another 

tax credit model but a more comprehensive plan that 

would include industry control of the sound stage, 

non-refundable tax credits, SaskFilm and other issues. 

This extension helped two fold. First to give us breathing 

room to work on a new plan for our industry and second 

to ensure that as much of this year’s production season 

could be realized [as possible]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we agree wholeheartedly with Mr. Goetz’s 

sentiments, and we look forward to the results of his good work. 



966 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2012 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Cutting the legs out 

from under the film industry will affect more than just fine arts 

students and alumni at the U of R. A University of 

Saskatchewan grad has this to say: 

 

After receiving my B.Com. from the U of S, I chose to 

stay in Saskatchewan even though the majority of my 

fellow graduates were heading to Ontario and Alberta to 

work for Proctor & Gamble and other large 

multinationals. As luck would have it, I found a career in 

an industry that allowed me to use both my strength with 

numbers and my creativity — film and television 

production and finance.  

 

To the minister: did he consult with any post-secondary 

institutions here to find out what the impact of the elimination 

of the film tax credit would have on their students or on the 

long-term viability of the programming they offer? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have to 

recognize the context of that comment. That comes from a 

province with the strongest population growth and the strongest 

economy in the entire country, and the only one — and the only 

one — to deliver a balanced budget this year, coast to coast to 

coast. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a counterpoint to this particular discussion. 

Here’s a letter from a man called Brian Olson who lives in Fort 

Qu’Appelle. It appeared in the Leader-Post a couple of days 

ago. 

 

First of all, [he says] the film employment tax credit 

covered up to 45 per cent of eligible labour costs and up 

to 50 per cent of the entire production budget of a film. A 

better term is a government “grant” for the production as 

it was not tied to any corporate tax paid, if any. 

 

Film companies could and did set up shell companies in 

the province, received the government grant, shut down 

the shell company and left with our taxpayers’ dollars. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

Saskatchewan manufacturing shipments were $10.9 

billion in 2010 and $3.7 billion of these shipments were 

exported. In 2010, this industry employed 30,500 

hard-working [people] . . . 

 

I am sure all business owners would love to have the 

same government funding of 45 per cent of their 

employment costs . . . 

 

We agree with that statement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess the answer 

was no. There was no consultation with anybody, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The government’s decision to kill the film tax credit is 

short-sighted. It will result in job losses and a loss of revenue to 

the province in economic spinoff. And to quote again from the 

letter on the U of R blog, a generation of skilled talent will 

leave the province. The government has already backtracked 

and bought itself some time by extending the tax credit until 

June and has said it will work with the industry to come up with 

other options. But talk is one thing, Mr. Speaker, time is of the 

essence. 

 

To the minister: can he tell this House the concrete steps he has 

taken since announcing the extension of the tax credit until June 

to work with the industry on a solution to the problem his 

government has created? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again 

we welcome the member’s question. And we also welcome this 

opportunity, once again, to correct a very significant 

misunderstanding about this issue which has arisen. 

 

As we have said, all industries create economic activity and 

employment, but not all industries create significant tax 

revenues for our province. This is important, Mr. Speaker. Most 

of the film employment tax credit is paid out to companies that 

don’t even pay income tax in our province. In fact over 98 per 

cent of the funding is paid out as a direct grant and less than 2 

per cent is paid out as an actual tax credit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we have mentioned, our goal is a win-win 

program that supports the industry by reducing taxes for 

Saskatchewan film companies. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Tourism Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, last week when I questioned 

the minister about the government’s decision to turn Tourism 

Saskatchewan into a Crown corporation, he referenced a review 

from 2009 as the basis for his decision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, page 35 of that review says, “One of the key areas 

of agreement among all parties to this review is Tourism 

Saskatchewan should remain an arm’s length organization from 

government.” 

 

My question to the minister: why is he ignoring this statement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have 

talked a lot in this Assembly about the tourism review, and 

rightly so I think. My ministry has already responded to one of 

the tourism review’s key recommendations by funding Tourism 

Saskatchewan’s brand new quality assurance program. 

 



April 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 967 

The review also encouraged us to establish a single point of 

entry for tourism, within government, to develop a long-term 

strategy and a plan for major events as well. All of these 

activities will in fact become top priorities for the new tourism 

Crown. But even more important than that, Mr. Speaker, we are 

responding directly to the review’s question: is government in 

or out of the tourism industry? 

 

As mentioned in this House on several occasions, Mr. Speaker, 

we are most definitely in and are demonstrating leadership by 

turning an organization that already relies on government for 99 

per cent of its funding into a fully fledged Crown corporation 

that will take the tourism industry to the next level of 

performance. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the government decision 

caught members of Tourism Saskatchewan and the tourism 

industry off guard. Shortly after the budget, Tourism 

Saskatchewan sent out a survey asking for input. Within two 

days they received over 640 submissions from members, 

business people, and partners. Mr. Speaker, the results were 

crystal clear. Almost 70 per cent want Saskatchewan Tourism 

to remain an arm’s-length agency. My question to the minister: 

why does the minister have such a blatant disregard for input of 

the tourism industry and its members? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are of 

course aware of the survey that the member has referenced. Mr. 

Speaker, there will always be a number of people express 

concern about the implications of change. This is a natural 

human reaction. We understand that. But I’d like to assure the 

industry that, while the structure of the organization may 

change, the funding it receives, the services and programs it 

offers, and its relationship with the stakeholders will remain the 

same. 

 

This is simply an administrative change to allow our 

government to bring more focus to tourism as a driver in our 

economy. Mr. Speaker, it’s essential to recognize that virtually 

every other province in the country has already brought support 

for its tourism industry back into government, typically by 

creating a Crown corporation. We’re simply following their 

good example. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, members are clear. They have 

benefited from the involvement and input in Tourism 

Saskatchewan as an arm’s-length agency and they are worried 

about the change. The executive director of Saskatchewan Bed 

and Breakfast Association writes, “It seems that we and all of 

the industry partners of Tourism Saskatchewan are being 

evicted so that your government can take full control.” Mr. 

Speaker, why is the minister trying to take control of the 

tourism industry when it has successfully benefited its members 

and the province for so many years? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we 

have acknowledged, change always causes some concern and 

hesitation. It’s perfectly understandable. But you know, Mr. 

Speaker, it also inspires people who are looking forward to the 

positive results change can bring. Here’s what some visionary 

leaders in Saskatchewan’s tourism industry are saying about the 

creation of a new Tourism Crown: 

 

I would like to pass along the congratulations for the 

development of the new Crown corporation that will host 

Saskatchewan’s tourism interests. This is a very positive 

move forward for Saskatchewan, and it’s been a long time 

coming. Keep up the good work. 

 

Says Chris Brewer, president and CEO [chief executive officer] 

of the Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association. And this one 

from Mr. Greg Dionne, Chair of the northern Tourism 

Saskatchewan region. He says: 

 

I would like to pledge my support to the Government of 

Saskatchewan for the bold step they have taken and to 

help make tourism in Saskatchewan what it should be: a 

leader in economic growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what we’re doing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the government cut the film tax 

credit without consulting industry members. The government is 

taking over Tourism Saskatchewan without consulting with 

members. I have received several letters, emails from Tourism 

Saskatchewan members objecting to the takeover. Mr. Speaker, 

will the minister agree to leave Tourism Saskatchewan as an 

arm’s-length agency and work in good faith with the members 

to grow the tourism industry in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tourism 

Saskatchewan is already a government agency, Mr. Speaker. It 

receives 99 per cent of its funding from government. The 

change to a Tourism Crown will simply make that 100 per cent. 

With respect to the changes that we’re proposing, there will in 

fact be input from industry members as well as other key 

stakeholders. 

 

Tourism Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, has done great work on 

behalf of the industry over the years, but we need to provide 

more support for outdoor products like sport fishing. We need 

to focus more on events and festivals. Mr. Speaker, other 

provinces have realized that if they’re funding their tourism 

agency, they ought to have more ability to set priorities on 

behalf of their people. We certainly agree. That’s what the new 

Crown corporation will allow us to do on behalf of the people 

that we represent. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 



968 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2012 

Plans for Forestry Operations 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last July a massive 

windstorm caused serious damage across the North. Thousands 

of trees were blown down over a large area of land, including 

the Big River area. The mills have no economic interest in 

harvesting the felled trees, so it seems they will remain on the 

forest floor as a serious fire hazard. There are many innovative 

opportunities that present themselves, such as green biomass 

energy projects, if the ministry takes a proactive approach. 

 

To the minister: what, if any, plans are being developed to 

properly deal with the thousands of trees felled by that 

windstorm and any similar storms in the future? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m very pleased to take the question from the member 

and inform the House that the Ministry of Environment is 

currently looking at a number of different options to deal with 

the blowdown that occurred in parts of the forest area this past 

year, Mr. Speaker. We have had discussions with forestry 

companies to look at some of those options including, Mr. 

Speaker, options around providing credits against the dues that 

forestry companies pay. Mr. Speaker, we are also looking very 

closely, though, at what any of these options would have an 

impact on softwood lumber agreements, Mr. Speaker, and so 

those discussions are taking place right now. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A year ago this 

government put $2 million into a project to help develop the 

tourism sector in Big River. The problem is that now the 

government is being asked to approve tree-cutting plans that 

will negatively affect the tourism sector in the same area. It 

makes no sense to fund tourism on one hand and then damage 

its chance of success by allowing cutting on the other hand. 

 

Will the minister ensure that whatever cutting his ministry 

approves in Big River area will not waste the $2 million this 

government has already spent to support the tourism sector? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

in regards to the question, Ministry of Environment officials are 

engaged on this file, Mr. Speaker. We are consulting not only 

the community, but also the forestry company — Sakaw in this 

case. Mr. Speaker, we want to make sure that we involve the 

public. Public meetings are being proposed to facilitate further 

discussion with the local community. And my understanding, 

Mr. Speaker, is that the company that has the allocation to 

harvest this timber has put a hold on harvesting any of the 

timber until this takes place. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Congratulations to Clerk on 25 Years of Service 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would ask for 

leave of the House to make a statement of interest to the 

Assembly. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you. Today we have the privilege to 

convey our congratulations to a tremendously important 

member of the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Gregory Arthur Putz. 

Together we celebrate Greg’s 25 years of service to the 

Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. Greg was born in Moose 

Jaw, Saskatchewan and has resided in Saskatchewan for the 

major portions of his life. He obtained his post-secondary 

education at the University of Regina, convocating with a B.A. 

[Bachelor of Arts] with honours history in 1982 and an M.A. 

[Master of Arts] in history from the University of Ontario in 

1984. 

 

A very important part of Greg’s life are his two daughters 

Abigail and Emily and his step-children Laura, husband Mike 

Schmeling, Derek and Ryan, and of course his partner, Pam 

Scott. 

 

Greg’s legislative career in Saskatchewan started in 1987 when 

he was appointed as Clerk Assistant where he worked until 

1994, at which time he moved into the role of Deputy Clerk. 

And in 2007, Greg was promoted to the Clerk of the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Greg serves as a member of the Association of Clerks at the 

Table in Canada, and the Canadian Study of Parliament Group. 

He’s also a member of the Canadian Aviation Historical Society 

and is the former president of the Roland Groome chapter in 

Regina and a member of the national board of directors of the 

Historical Society. 

 

Greg has great respect for the institution of parliament and its 

rules and traditions. His advice is always about preserving the 

integrity of our system and about keeping the members out of 

trouble. Greg is an instrumental part of, was an instrumental 

part of the development of the new rules we operate with as an 

Assembly, and especially the new committee system. 

 

Andrew Thomson, Ron Osika, Greg Putz, and I made up the 

steering committee to develop the new Assembly and 

committee rules. Greg accompanied us as we investigated the 

rules and committee operations of various jurisdictions. The 

quality of our rules reflects Greg’s impact and involvement. 

Other jurisdictions are now looking to emulate our procedures. 

 

As Speaker, I get the chance to work every day with Greg. In 

the past, I have spent time with Greg on committee work. The 

troubling part of this is that when flying with Greg, you had to 

be at the airport at least two hours before everybody else. Not 

because Greg has trouble getting through security, but because 

he wants to take pictures of all the different airlines and get 

pictures of all the aircraft call signs. If you want to make Greg 

happy, if you want to make Greg happy, bring him pictures of 

obscure airlines. 

 

Greg tells me that in his aviation enthusiasm, he plays 

Microsoft Flight Simulator and likes to fly in and out of airports 

around the world. In fact, he creates his own airports for use in 

Flight Simulator. Just remember, Greg only does simulations, 



April 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 969 

so don’t let him near any real airplanes. 

 

Greg has served this Legislative Assembly in Saskatchewan 

well in the past, and I look forward to working with him in the 

future as he continues to provide Saskatchewan with good 

service, good advice, and keeping us all out of procedural 

quagmires. Thank you, Greg Putz, for your good work, and I’m 

sure we all look forward to continuing to work with you. Thank 

you. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Very well said. It really is a great honour to stand and be able to 

honour you, Greg, on 25 years of dedicated service to our 

Assembly. 

 

Greg is a great parliamentarian. I’ve only been here for five 

years, but in that period of time have come to recognize Greg as 

somebody who’s truly committed to this institution, truly 

committed to the institution of the legislature and the 

institutions and history of parliament. I know, talking to Greg 

on a number of occasions, he’ll say, well you know, back in 

1965 this ruling was made and you might want to consider that. 

This is just off the top of his head, Mr. Speaker. It’s really quite 

extraordinary. 

 

And, Greg, we really do honour you and thank you for your 

service. I actually didn’t know until Mr. Speaker indicated your 

passion for gaming. I know Mr. Speaker himself shares a 

similar passion, and perhaps the Clerk and Mr. Speaker could 

figure out how to actually fly some aircraft with enough 

practice. I’m not sure I’d want to be on those aircraft. 

 

But thank you so much, Greg. On behalf of the government, we 

really do want to congratulate you and thank you for your 

service to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 

and add a few words of congratulation to Greg as our Clerk. 

When I arrived in the legislature, Greg was at the Table. And 

much as Greg’s face doesn’t always register what’s going on, if 

you’ve been here long enough, you can usually figure out if 

there’s something wrong by looking at Greg. And that’s an 

important feature to have as a Clerk or even as a Speaker, but 

the Speakers change. Greg’s been there as a real solid person to 

provide this kind of advice. 

 

I also studied history, and so Greg and I have had some pretty 

interesting conversations about different things over the years. 

And I also studied historiography, which I know is part of the 

study of history. And it’s very interesting to get advice from the 

Clerk because of the fact that he puts it in context. And I think 

that the House Leader just made that point, that part of what is 

so valuable for us in this legislature is your ability to bring the 

stories about different events over many decades and sometimes 

over centuries to inform what we do here. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that we also need to say thank you to all of 

the people who work with Greg because he couldn’t do this job 

for 25 years without having a team of people both who he 

followed and also who are now following him, who provide the 

advice but, more importantly, provide the conversation. 

Because so much of what happens in this legislature is as a 

result of conversations where people try to sort out problems. 

And it’s much like a legal career in that way. And so I often am 

amazed about the kinds of advice that comes after a 

collaboration with all of your colleagues, including the Speaker 

of the day. 

 

So thank you very much, Greg. And we really appreciate 25 

years, and we’ll wish you many more years till you can get to 

some of your passions, as we’ve heard about. Thank you. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 36 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 36 — The 

Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to join in the 

debate on Bill 36 and give some, I guess, more comments that I 

wanted to share with the Assembly and some of the concerns 

that we’re hearing out there. 

 

Bill 36 will impact young people out in our province. Anyone 

under the age of 18 will not be included when the boundaries 

are being looked at, and we have a growing population out there 

of young people. We want to make sure that we involve the 

young people in the boundaries. 

 

For instance, you know — some of my colleagues have talked 

about it — you have some young people who are 14 years old 

right now. By the time it comes to an opportunity to vote, they 

will be 18 and will have a right to vote, but they will not be 

included as residents to look at the boundaries, as residents of 

our province. And I think some of my colleagues have 

expressed the concern, and they have put that through, Mr. 

Speaker, very clearly where their concerns are coming from. 

And we’re trying to make sure the government understands, to 

rethink this Bill, to make sure. 

 

Do we want more politicians? Is that what truly the people of 

our province are asking for in a time . . . And I understand that 

we’re trying to keep our finances under control and spending 

and, you know, we’ve had a large increase of spending. I think 

it’s 30-some per cent over the years that the Sask Party has been 

in power, you know, but we’ve also had record revenue — 

record revenue. No government has had an opportunity at the 

resources and the revenue coming in that this Sask Party 

government has had, whether it was the rainy day fund or 



970 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2012 

inheritance that they, you know, inherited money in the bank. 

There’s all these things that come into play. 

 

But I want to go back to why people are concerned and I think 

why my colleagues have expressed their concern with Bill 36 

and what it’s trying to do or what we’re perceived it’s trying to 

do, and how it will affect a lot of Saskatchewan residents and 

how it will impact them with not including them in boundaries. 

So we may have some areas after the boundaries are looked at 

that a large population will be 18 and over and allowed to vote. 

And you haven’t included those individuals in the boundaries. 

And again if something is not broken, why does this 

government constantly want to try to fix things? And people are 

wondering, why is that? And they’re starting to question about 

being consulted, about sharing their views and their input. How 

come they’re not asking? They just clearly go out and they have 

their agenda, and they’re pushing forward on that. 

 

Now the people of this beautiful province have made it very 

clear that they want to make sure that everyone’s taken care of. 

And that includes anyone under 18 years of age, young people 

in this province. And I want to make it crystal clear that those 

individuals should be counted, whether they’re my 

grandchildren, my friends’ grandchildren, or children out there 

in our province, anyone else’s grandchildren. They should be 

included. All residents of our province should be included in the 

boundaries. 

 

If it isn’t broken, why try to fix it — again I go back to that — 

unless there’s another plan? And some people are saying that 

maybe there is another plan. Maybe there’s something else in 

store for people out there. Maybe we want to make sure there’s 

an advantage for a certain party, whether it’s to stay in power, 

to make sure it’s beneficial for them. And that is very 

concerning to a lot of people. People are very clear. And there’s 

areas of our province are doing well, and they’ll say that. But 

there are citizens like our seniors, young people that will have 

increased costs for prescription drugs in the budget, ambulance 

costs. There are individuals who may see more tuition costs 

because of some of the stuff going on in the budget. 

 

What I don’t hear them saying, clearly, is that they want more 

politicians. And go back to some of the backbenchers. You’re 

out there. You’re talking to your constituents. You were out 

campaigning. And you got elected here to represent the 

province — not just your own constituency, not just the people 

who live in there, but they asked you to represent and do what’s 

best for our province. 

 

And to the members and the backbenchers, you may not be in 

cabinet but you must know for sure that people in our province 

are not asking for three more politicians who would cost them 

millions of dollars. I don’t believe that some of you members 

there believe this. I really believe that there are members on the 

backbench that don’t believe this. I know the nine members on 

this side don’t, but there is members on that side, I’m sure, 

know. It doesn’t sit well with them, more politicians when 

we’re asking people to do without, when we’re asking 

individuals out there, well we have to make cuts. 

 

I really think that people out there are watching this and are 

going to watch this. And if you go into the grocery stores . . . 

And I run into a lot of people. I listen to people’s conversation 

and they’re talking about it. More politicians, why do we need 

more? If we were expecting our Saskatchewan people, and they 

hear our economy, the advantage, and you know, that is out 

there; everybody talks about all the different things that are 

going on. Well if there’s such an advantage, how come so many 

are not feeling it? And those that aren’t are wondering, do we 

need more politicians to represent us? And I think some of my 

colleagues have shared very clearly that Saskatchewan 

population is represented. We have one of the smallest 

populations that are represented by MLAs compared to other 

provinces with larger numbers that they’re responsible to 

constituents. 

 

So I say to you, we have to question what’s going on here and 

what is the priority of this Sask Party government. Is it truly 

about our seniors, about our young people? There are so many 

issues that are facing Saskatchewan residents, whether it’s 

housing, whether it’s addictions. Why spend more money? 

Take that money and use it to assist people with suicides, 

mental health. Put the money to better use. That’s all the people 

are asking. 

 

There’s some sectors, whether it’s HIV [human 

immunodeficiency virus], whether it’s suicides, addictions, 

whether it’s seniors’ drug plan where they don’t have to pay the 

extra $5 prescription. Some of them cannot afford this. They’re 

already making it very clear. Some of my colleagues have made 

it very clear that some seniors are not receiving the proper 

medication because they can’t afford to purchase them every 

month. So you’re putting more on them. So what do they get? 

Less medication. What doesn’t get paid at the end of the day? 

And when you talk to some of the seniors out there, our elders, 

they are struggling. 

 

When we talk about a province and we talk about a 

government, a government should be humble. This government 

is not humble in the actions that it’s doing. And I know deep 

down that members opposite, some of them must be looking at 

this, wondering what’s going on. You must not all agree with 

what the ministers and around the cabinet . . . Speak up. Speak 

up for the individuals that are out there who have asked you to 

represent them. Go back home and ask them: do you want more 

politicians? Would you like more politicians? Do you think we 

should include all residents of our province, or do you think we 

should take out anyone under 18? I think you’re going to be 

getting a very surprising answer from them. You will know that 

they’re not happy. 

 

So that’s that area. So we go into the different areas. And 

there’s always been questions about the way, the way 

legislation is introduced. And we’ve seen how the past election 

went on. The minister introduced a Bill. We needed photo ID 

[identification]. And I mean that caused a lot of grief out there, 

Mr. Speaker, a lot of concerns for people. 

 

But I’m amazed that some of the leadership out there from the 

First Nations and the Aboriginal communities and the 

municipalities were very concerned and criticized the Bill about 

photo ID. And I was glad that the people that I represent, and a 

chief, came forward saying, no, this needs to be corrected. We 

have to allow our members to vote. An attestation was 

something that came forward. And I’m so happy and proud of 

our First Nation leaders to come forward and saying, it isn’t 



April 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 971 

right; let’s fix it. 

 

And a solution was found with the Chief Electoral Officer of 

our province. He seen the right thing and a way to fix this 

problem. And I’m very pleased to say it was good to see it was 

fixed. Was it perfect? No. It shouldn’t have been, this Bill 

shouldn’t have been introduced. But having said that, we see 

that. With no consultation, they introduce Bills, legislation.  

 

Bill 36 has been introduced. Who did they consult before the 

election? They didn’t put in their nice brochures, oh yes, we 

want an . . . [inaudible] . . . I’m sure none of them went on the 

door saying, we’re going to go after getting three more 

politicians, cost of millions of dollars. I don’t think any of them, 

then door knocking, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe any of the 

members opposite . . . I know I didn’t go around saying, do you 

want more politicians? They’re introducing . . . 

 

So it’s a little surprising, overwhelming. And if you think about 

the tourism sector, again, and I have been asking questions 

about it, and they’re concerned. There are so many groups, the 

film industry, there are so many groups that are frustrated 

because they are not consulted. Their input is not taken in. 

They’re not even asked for input. They’re blindsided. They’re 

feeling disrespected. They’re frustrated because they’re not 

being included in this province, and they have a right to be 

included. 

 

If you’re going to go and affect an industry that is doing so 

good, like Tourism Saskatchewan and the tourism industry, 

they are moving forward. They are doing positive wonderful 

things. If it isn’t broken, if a review is done and it says, do not 

mess with this, then why would a government do it? Well 

because I guess there might be some manipulating going on. 

They want to get a message. It’s a big advertising agency, I 

guess, doing amazing things. So maybe they want to have more 

control. I think that’s what the minister said. He wanted to have 

more control of the tourism sector. 

 

Well yes, he’s going to take . . . Truly I think he’s doing that, 

and we’re hearing that from the industry. Whether it’s members 

of the tourism industry, whether it’s from the industry or 

Tourism Saskatchewan, we are hearing they’re very concerned, 

very concerned, at the direction this government has taken 

without talking with them, without consulting with them. They 

just announce it. Here it’s going to go. 

 

It’s very concerning, Mr. Speaker, when you see situations that 

are developing because of a government that doesn’t consult, 

doesn’t take the input, doesn’t take the advice of the people it 

says it’s going to be in partnership with, Mr. Speaker — 

partnership. They talk about partnerships. Well I think they 

should make sure they understand a partnership means input. It 

means communicating. It says, consult with the group. 

 

When you’re going to make changes, all the industry is asking 

is to allow them to have some input. And, Mr. Speaker, we look 

at so many areas of this government. Yes, you got elected 49 

members on that side. And you know what . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . That’s right. That’s right. That’s right. Yes, 

you can very well . . . You can clap and cheerlead on that. 

That’s right. The people gave you 49 members. But remember 

this: do not take them for granted, what you’ve been handed. 

[14:45] 

 

And I’ll tell you something. They’re starting to question. 

They’re starting to see things. And we’ll wait and see what 

happens. Keep on, keep on treating people the way your 

government . . . without consulting, without making sure 

they’re giving input. Keep making decisions that are affecting 

our Saskatchewan people, and they will give you an answer. 

You may not like it, but you may get the answer. 

 

And you can talk about being humble, a humble government. 

Well excuse me. I’ve seen some things here when we talk about 

needs of people, of industry, changes that you’re doing without 

consulting. I know, I know that some members opposite, the 

members on this side, we may not always agree on everything. 

And that’s fine. I understand that. But at the end of the day, the 

people that elect us here expect us to do what’s right. Do the 

right thing. And I know the backbenchers back there, some of 

these things and decisions that are going on, cannot sit well 

with you. They cannot. You see a push, and you must hear it. 

 

So again I go back to saying, very clearly, people are frustrated. 

The industry are not feeling that they’ve been consulted. So 

there’s changes going on, that this government’s got its 

mandate and it’s going to push ahead with its plan, agenda, 

whatever you call. So let’s make it very clear. Why are we 

sitting here today even looking at a Bill that’s going to come 

like . . . that wants to look at adding more politicians when . . . a 

time when we don’t need more politicians. You have 49 

members. How many more members do you want on that side? 

Do you want 100? You want 100? Is that not enough? You will 

manage to do. 

 

So let’s be very clear. Yes, I know that the people have spoken. 

And I’ve said that before. We’re sitting here. We’re Her 

Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. We have a role to do and a job to 

do. And I’m proud of the nine members over here, nine 

members speaking up for Saskatchewan people, speaking up for 

the tourism industry, speaking up for the groups that this 

government will not listen to, will not take input. 

 

And you know, you talk about bullying. You know, here we all 

wear pink, and we’re all saying about bullying. Bullying 

happens in many different forms, let me tell you. And some 

people are scared to bring their concerns forward. Scared. Why 

would that be? Why would they be scared? You know, some 

are nervous. Some of them are concerned. They really don’t 

want to raise their concerns. Why is that? So you could sit there 

and say, well, I think the questions are very clear. So we talk 

about bullying. Well there’s different forms of bullying. So let’s 

get rid of the bullying. So let’s have input with people. Let’s 

open up the communication lines. 

 

So the government could open up the communication line and 

say, we want your input. We’ll protect you. I mean we’ve seen 

different things going on. We’ll make sure that no harm should 

come to anyone raising concerns, whether you have contract, 

whether you do business, whether you’re getting grants or 

anything else. People should be comfortable to say what it is 

they want. People should be able to say, it is a democratic right 

to speak and to say things that we want to say. We want to share 

our frustrations. If we agree with the government, we say the 

government can do a good job. That’s great. 



972 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2012 

But we also should allow residents and organizations to criticize 

a government and not to feel a backlash or to feel intimidated 

about bringing concerns forward to a government saying, we 

don’t agree with your philosophy. We don’t agree with the 

direction you’re going. We don’t agree with this. It isn’t right 

for us. It isn’t right for Saskatchewan people. It may be what 

you want as your agenda and your plan. I understand that. There 

is an opportunity to do that. But the government needs to start 

opening up its communication lines to people that it’s 

impacting. And that’s all they’re asking for. 

 

So again I go back to this, saying, Mr. Speaker, people want to 

be talked to. They want input. They want their government to 

listen. But listening doesn’t mean you listen and not act. They 

want meaningful conversations. They want a government that 

listens but then takes action on their advice. Leaders want that. 

Community members want that. Parents want that. 

 

There’s so many challenges out there in our province. And there 

are good things going on, Mr. Speaker. We know that. There 

are a lot of good things in our province. Our province is doing 

well. There’s a lot of areas that are doing well, and people are 

feeling happy about it. I have nothing wrong with saying that. 

But there’s a lot of areas that people aren’t happy and are not 

doing well. And they’re trying to get the government and the 

opposition to hear their concerns, and we are doing all we can. 

As Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, we have a role to play, and 

we are doing that role by raising the concerns, by talking and 

debating these Bills to make sure: is it good legislation? 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to, I have a motion that 

I would like to move. And so, Mr. Speaker, for these reasons I 

will move a reasoned amendment to this Bill which shall read: 

 

That all the words after the word “That” be deleted and 

the following substituted therefor: 

 

“this House declines to give second reading to Bill C-36, 

An Act to amend The Constituency Boundaries Act, 1993 

because 

 

The Bill excludes, in determining constituency 

boundaries, the count of the young people of 

Saskatchewan, who deserve to be counted to determine 

the representation within this Legislative Assembly; 

and further 

 

That the Bill increases the number of members of this 

Legislative Assembly by three, which is an unnecessary 

increase of politicians to represent the people of 

Saskatchewan.” 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Opposition Whip: 

 

That all the words after the word “That” be deleted and 

the following substituted therefor: 

 

“this House declines to give second reading to Bill C-36, 

An Act to amend The Constituency Boundaries Act, 1993 

because 

 

The Bill excludes, in determining the constituency 

boundaries, the counting of the young people of 

Saskatchewan, who deserve to be counted to determine 

the representation within this Legislative Assembly; 

and further 

 

That the Bill increases the number of members of this 

Legislative Assembly by three, which is an unnecessary 

increase of politicians to represent the people of 

Saskatchewan.” 

 

Is the Assembly . . . I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to also rise and offer a few comments on the proposed 

amendment. And certainly I want to say to the people of 

Saskatchewan, that’s exactly what is the desire of the 

opposition, is to hold this government to account on some of the 

issues that they’re trying to bring forward without the people of 

Saskatchewan knowing full well what’s at stake here, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Bill really talks about a number of issues that, I think, are 

really important though, like the primary issue in which they 

have excluded many of the children and the youth throughout 

Saskatchewan in counting how they would determine these 

boundaries. For those people that are listening, I’ll very quickly 

summarize what I believe, what I think is the problem here. 

Generally there’s jurisdictions throughout the country, the 

different territories, and the provinces. When they determine 

their boundaries, they usually take into account all people in the 

boundaries, the total population. And what happens, Mr. 

Speaker, is they include the youth and the children and so on 

and so forth, and that’s an important aspect in making sure that 

everybody counts in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when you see that the province of Saskatchewan through 

this Bill is saying, well hold it, we’re not going to include 

children, nor are we going to include youth in the Bill. What we 

want to do is just simply include those that are of voting age. 

And, Mr. Speaker, what that does, it clearly excludes many 

people’s children and grandchildren and youth within their 

family. And what you want to do as a government is not send 

the wrong signals to the youth and to the young children that 

they don’t count. 

 

So what this government is doing is they’re excluding the 

children, Mr. Speaker, and the youth of each of these areas 

when they do an assessment as to how many constituencies that 

they want, and it also allows them to also gerrymander a 

number of the constituency boundaries, certainly to their 

benefit, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve seen a lot of evidence of that 

over the past. It’s something that the Conservatives done with 

their federal ridings and something that the people of 

Saskatchewan ought to be very, very careful of and pay very 

close attention to. 

 

So I would point out that the primary purpose of the amendment 

and certainly the challenge to the Bill is to talk about why and 

what the logic is behind excluding all the children and the 

grandchildren and the youth of our province when they 

determine how many constituencies we have in the province 

and certainly how the boundaries are redrawn. 



April 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 973 

Now I tell the people of northern Saskatchewan when they talk 

about the boundaries in general, many people in the northern 

part of Saskatchewan always question why we are included in 

some of the communities. As a good example would be in my 

riding of Churchill, why we were included in places like 

Meadow Lake and certainly places like Big River. They’re all 

part of our federal riding, and why don’t we have our own 

northern riding? 

 

That’s some of the questions we got in terms of having a riding 

in northern Saskatchewan where we’d have one federal riding 

for the whole region known as the northern administration 

district, Mr. Speaker. And that was a question that I certainly 

researched. And people across the North are saying, why can’t 

we have our own federal riding? Because we respect the people 

of Meadow Lake area, we respect the people of Big River; these 

are great folks. But we have totally different lives, totally 

different issues. And there’s just a confusion in terms of how 

these federal boundaries were designed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what I tell them, it’s very important we pay attention to not 

only how the federal ridings are designed, Mr. Speaker, but 

more so how the provincial constituencies are designed because 

there are a lot of folks out there in politics that will try and do 

things differently for their advantage without the people 

knowing. And by the time all this comes into effect, then many 

people of course are not advised or not informed, and 

sometimes they do get upset. 

 

So what I’ll tell the folks out there that wonder why we don’t 

have our own federal riding in northern Saskatchewan is that 

process in terms of determining all the federal ridings, I believe, 

is going to be happening within the next short while. I would 

encourage people out there to begin to organize and to begin to 

petition and to begin to plan for that process so, when they do 

have these hearings, we can actually tell folks out there that 

there are differences. 

 

When you look at the federal riding of where I live, there are 

differences, and stark differences and a stark contrast of, say, an 

agricultural base out of Meadow Lake area versus a trapping 

base out of Sandy Bay — that there are significant language 

differences; there are significant socio-economic conditions. 

There are different traditions and customs. There’s just really, 

Mr. Speaker, a whole world of difference in terms of lives 

within northern Saskatchewan and those that are in the forestry 

fringe. 

 

So one of the things I would point out to folks out there is I 

would say to them, pay attention to the commissions that come 

your way that determine federal riding boundaries, and of 

course, with this particular Bill, the provincial constituencies 

commission that’s going to go around telling folks, this is how 

we’re going to design our constituencies. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what the Sask Party is trying to do is they’re 

trying to manipulate that process and, hopefully to their 

advantage, do two or three things, is to create a constituency 

that may add to their support base. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

contrary to democracy in general. 

 

Now I would point out that they have . . . This Bill talks about 

putting . . . 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — And what’s your point of order? 

 

[15:00] 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, there is a point of order 

with regard to the reasoned amendment moved by the members 

opposite. I would refer Mr. Speaker to Marleau and Montpetit, 

2nd edition, page 749, which reads: 

 

For a reasoned amendment to be in order, it must 

observe the following rules: 

 

. . . It must not be a direct negation of the principle of the 

bill. The procedure to be followed when a Member does 

not agree with the principle of the bill and wants to reject 

it is simply to vote against the motion for second reading 

of the bill. 

 

Another condition: “It must” . . . When “A reasoned 

amendment” . . . Sorry. 

 

It must not attach a condition to the adoption of the 

second reading motion. 

 

A reasoned amendment which is merely a statement of 

opposition to portions of the bill is not admissible. 

 

I would ask Mr. Speaker to review those provisions and rule 

whether that amendment is in order. I would submit that it is 

not. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Obviously 

I disagree with the Government House Leader. This motion was 

developed in close consultation with the Office of the Clerk and 

was tabled as such. We think that this is entirely in order and 

speaks to the need for the debate to continue on in this House. I 

would so submit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to thank the Government House 

Leader and the Opposition House Leader for their comments on 

the point of order. On pages 749 of second edition of Montpetit 

— O’Brien and Bosc — different book, and I will read this: 

 

Today, a reasoned amendment generally takes the form of 

a proposal that the House decline to give a bill second 

reading, for a specific reason. The reasons put forward in 

recent practice fall into two broad categories: 

 

The reasoned affirmation of a principle adverse to or 

differing from the principles, policy or provisions of the 

bill; 

 

Those reasons were provided in the amendment. There are three 

kinds of amendments that are possible: a reasoned amendment, 

the six-month hoist, and a referral to committee. The purpose of 

all three is a purpose to defeat the Bill. 

 



974 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2012 

So after consultation and examination of the proper procedures, 

this amendment stands acceptable. 

 

I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to again reiterate the comments I made earlier about making 

sure, making sure that the people out there are aware of how 

these constituency boundaries are drawn up, not only in the 

federal perspective, Mr. Speaker, but certainly in the provincial 

perspective as this Bill certainly would indicate that. 

 

Now the people out there that are listening, I think it’s 

important that they pay very close attention to what is 

happening here. What is happening, Mr. Speaker, is that this 

Bill is trying to determine constituency boundaries. Right now I 

think we have 58 constituencies. The Sask Party wants to 

increase those constituencies and therefore the number of 

MLAs in Saskatchewan by three, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what happens now is you’re going to have three more 

politicians. And the fundamental belief and the principle that 

we have in the opposition is that you don’t need three more 

politicians, Mr. Speaker, especially in light of the fact that that 

government is certainly cutting back on services and certainly 

cutting back on programs, programs that the people of 

Saskatchewan love dearly, Mr. Speaker. And we saw evidence 

of that with a number of groups and organizations coming this 

way and certainly coming to the Assembly to certainly protest 

what the Sask Party is doing to their respective organizations 

and industries, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again the motion that was made today by my learned 

colleague from Cumberland, I think it’s really important that 

people out there realize that this is going on and that they have 

to pay very close attention to what is happening. Now what 

we’re arguing about on the New Democratic side of the House 

is that this Bill certainly smacks, it smacks the face of 

democracy in many ways. One of the most significant ways is 

that they’re going to not only increase the amount of boundaries 

we have or the amount of constituencies in Saskatchewan; 

they’re going to also exclude people that are younger than 18, 

which is contrary to what was being done before, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when you have a population base, say in any region, you 

look at all the people within that region, and you determine, 

based on the fact that there’s many young families, there are 

many youth in these constituencies that are not 18 yet, but 

typically what the government does, it includes everybody 

when they do up a map to determine exactly how many 

constituencies we have. They have to look at the population of 

every area. And in the past, in the past they looked at all the 

different folks that were in that area, which included youth and 

children and so on and so forth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But not the Sask Party Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They have 

made an effort to say in this Bill that the children and the youth 

do not count under this plan. When they redraw the 

constituency boundaries, they’re going to only include those 

folks that are 18 and up, that are of voting age, Mr. Speaker. 

And that certainly is going to hurt a lot of people, and those are 

the people that we encourage, Mr. Speaker, to be part of the 

democratic process. 

Now this Bill obviously is going to be in effect. The next 

election, I’m assuming, is 2015 or 2016, and many 14-year-olds 

now today that would be excluded in the count to determine 

which areas would be a constituency, they would become 

eligible to vote, Mr. Speaker. But guess what happens? Today 

they’re not counted, yet they’re going to be able to vote when 

they’re 18. And that’s exactly our point, is how do you 

encourage young people to be part of the political process when 

you don’t count them? And the only time they have any value 

to you, when you’re a Sask Party member, is when they turn 18, 

and hopefully they’ll come your way, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 

something that I think is contrary to ethical constituency 

boundaries work. I don’t think it’s very fair, I don’t think it’s 

very proper, and I don’t think it’s democratic at all, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I think the amendment made today by the member from 

Cumberland certainly shows that there’s a lot of people out 

there that (a) didn’t want more politicians, that (b) did not pay a 

lot of attention to this Bill. And our job as the official 

opposition, as the member indicated, is to make sure that people 

knew exactly what the Bill was proposing to do. 

 

So I would say again, Mr. Speaker, that this is not something 

that we should proceed with without the conclusive support of 

the people of Saskatchewan. I suggested yesterday we have a 

referendum or if you want to have a public plebiscite on this 

particular issue to determine whether the people of 

Saskatchewan support having more politicians as opposed to 

more front-line workers. 

 

We challenged the Saskatchewan Party, the members, 

yesterday. That challenge was met with a great amount of 

silence and not too many words from that side, Mr. Speaker. So 

I think the fear of going back to the people on this particular 

Bill is something that they do not want to have happen. And 

again that flies in the face of democracy. And certainly people 

out in Saskatchewanland will certainly want to have a say on 

that. And this is the whole purpose of our debate today, is to tell 

them that you should have a say, and you should contact your 

Sask Party MLAs as they’re the ones that are advocating for 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other point I would raise is that, when I talk about the 

young people being excluded and the general public not being 

advised of this and the fact that they didn’t run on this particular 

issue during the campaign, that that all is unfair, Mr. Speaker. 

And that’s exactly our point that we’re telling people out there. 

We’re appealing to the people of Saskatchewan. When you 

have this kind of activity by a government, it should not be 

tolerated. It should be put in check, Mr. Speaker. And they 

should get the message. And that’s my point I am trying to 

make today while I stand here and support the amendment 

made by my colleague from Cumberland. 

 

Now yesterday I also indicated that I would encourage people 

to come to the Assembly, but we’d also encourage people to 

write letters. We’d also encourage different municipal councils 

or school boards or different organizations out there to actually 

bring forward a position, whether it be a petition or whether it 

would be a statement against that kind of activity. I think that 

municipal councils can indeed do that because it’s not 

something that we would say is not your responsibility. 



April 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 975 

If you feel, as a municipal leader or as a school board leader or 

as an organization leader, that this is not good for the people of 

Saskatchewan, that this is not what you wanted, then I 

encourage you to speak up. Speak up by way of going on the 

radio and make sure that you let these folks know exactly what 

is happening with this Bill and exactly how they feel, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It’s important to note that when you look at the constituency 

boundaries per se, that there is a lot of discussion back home, as 

I mentioned when we talked about the federal boundaries. 

People did not take advantage of those opportunities, Mr. 

Speaker. They did not take advantage of the opportunity to tell 

people out there that they shouldn’t have these kinds of 

breakups in terms of the federal ridings. There’s many 

examples of how this was gerrymandered throughout time. 

 

And you look at the examples, and I would use my example, 

Mr. Speaker, in northern Saskatchewan. We’ve long advocated 

for having our own federal riding. You know, you look at the 

old DNS [Department of Northern Saskatchewan] line, the 

northern administration district of Saskatchewan, that we’d 

have our own federal riding. 

 

Because we are, whether it’s in Cumberland House or whether 

it’s in Turnor Lake, Mr. Speaker, or whether it’s in Camsell 

Portage or whether it’s in La Ronge, we all have a similar 

lifestyle in terms of being active within the community, in terms 

of having Aboriginal people in and around your community, of 

being really part of the land and being a northerner. It means a 

lot, Mr. Speaker. It means a lot to people in the northern part of 

Saskatchewan to be called a northerner because we understand 

each other, and many of our communities are very similar. 

Some may be more economically advantaged than others, but 

others are more culturally advanced than others. But there’s a 

lot of respect between all these communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s why it’s important for people to know, it’s important 

for people to know that when the federal ridings were 

determined, what happened was we got lumped in with some of 

the communities to the forest fringe and south of us, places like 

Meadow Lake, as I mentioned at the outset, and Big River, Mr. 

Speaker. And you can see that we wonder who draws up these 

boundaries. Like how are these boundaries designed? And who 

influences them? Who has the final say as to who is going to be, 

who is going to be doing all this work, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And quite frankly, I tell the people in my area that there was not 

enough attention paid to the detail of how that federal riding 

commission, when they came out, and who was involved and 

who done what and when, where, how. All these questions were 

not answered, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what this Bill is prepared 

to do as much to inform people in terms of letting them know 

exactly what is happening. This Bill doesn’t articulate that in 

any way, shape, or form. So once again we’re at that stage. And 

I tell the people of northern Saskatchewan is, you’ve got to pay 

a heck of a lot more attention to how they’re designing our 

federal boundaries. 

 

[15:15] 

 

And now with this particular Bill, how the Sask Party is trying 

to design new constituencies to their advantage, and, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re going to make sure we yell this as high and as 

loud as we can from the highest mountaintop in northern 

Saskatchewan to the radio stations and certainly to all the 

regions of Saskatchewan because this is important. 

 

And so I would tell the social media folks out there and the 

media, the daily newspapers and the weekly papers, to pay 

attention to this Bill, Mr. Speaker, to pay attention to this Bill to 

see exactly what is being proposed here, Mr. Speaker, because 

this is really, really important to the future of Saskatchewan. 

It’s so vitally important that they read all the details and they 

look at this Bill to see exactly what is happening here, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s the important message that I have today. 

 

And once you begin to see what is being done, the exclusion of 

our young people, Mr. Speaker, the gerrymandering of what I 

think is going to happen under their watch under this particular 

Bill, and, Mr. Speaker, most importantly is the fact they’re not 

advising people exactly what is going on and what is happening 

to this particular process in this Bill. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to again inform the Assembly, and 

certainly the people that are watching, what the amendment, 

what the amendment to the Bill shall read. And the amendment 

is: 

 

That all the words after the word “That” be deleted and 

the following be substituted therefor: 

 

“this House declines to give second reading to Bill C-36, 

An Act to amend The Constituency Boundaries Act, 1993, 

because 

 

The Bill excludes, in determining constituency 

boundaries, the counting of the young people of 

Saskatchewan who deserve to be counted to determine 

representation within this Legislative Assembly; and 

further 

 

That the Bill increases the number of the members of 

this Legislative Assembly by three which is an 

unnecessary increase of politicians to represent the 

people of Saskatchewan.” 

 

So this amendment, I think, Mr. Speaker, is really important 

that the people of Saskatchewan pay attention to that, Mr. 

Speaker. And that is something I think overall that we need to 

make sure we tell folks out there why this Bill is so unnecessary 

and what the motives are for the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I also want to read out again for the record — and I know I 

done this yesterday, and I’m going to continue doing it ad 

nauseam — in terms of the rationale for more seats. That’s what 

the Bill says. The Bill says that. 

 

And the people out there that are listening to this particular 

debate should know that in the number of provinces that have 

similar processes in place, I want to point out — and I just need 

to make sure I get this right — that our province of 

Saskatchewan, as I mentioned yesterday, has an average of 

17,817 voters per riding. The neighbouring province of 

Manitoba has 21,198 per riding. And when you look at Alberta, 



976 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2012 

it has 43,919 voters per riding. BC [British Columbia] has 

51,765 voters per riding. And Ontario, as I mentioned 

yesterday, has 120,120 voters per riding, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

how the number of people out in these particular ridings, or 

these particular provinces, those are the ones that have the 

higher numbers than Saskatchewan. 

 

And yet the Saskatchewan Party is advocating for more MLAs 

and more constituencies when they have the lowest amount of 

voters per constituency compared to Alberta, compared to BC, 

compared to Manitoba, compared Ontario, Mr. Speaker. And all 

the Western provinces, Mr. Speaker, all the Western provinces 

are much, much further in terms of the numbers of people that 

they have in each of the ridings. Saskatchewan is not even 

close, and yet this Saskatchewan Party government is trying to 

increase the seats based on their rationale that they need more 

MLAs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to run through those numbers again. You know, 

folks back home, remember these numbers. These are really 

important. Saskatchewan had 17,800 voters per riding. 

Manitoba, 21,198 per riding. And look at Alberta with 43,900 

voters per riding. BC, 51,785 voters per riding. And of course 

Ontario, 120,110 voters per riding, Mr. Speaker. And those are 

amazing numbers. Those are amazing numbers. And the people 

of Saskatchewan are saying, well what’s going on here? Like 

why are we asking for more MLAs? Is there any reason behind 

this? Is there any purpose behind this? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what I think is important is to tell the people 

of Saskatchewan, if these guys, if the Saskatchewan Party begin 

to exclude the young people in their assessment as they’re 

proposing to do, how do these numbers go down? Will the 

17,000 go down dramatically, Mr. Speaker? And I would 

suggest to you that they perhaps will. These are numbers from 

the history perspective in terms of what has been done so far. 

Well what these guys want to do from the past, what these guys 

want to do, Mr. Speaker, is they now want to exclude 

everybody under the age of 18. So those numbers will be going 

even more dramatically down in terms of the voters per riding 

here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And it was with a great amount of chagrin and certainly 

laughter from the opposition side when they made a reference 

to PEI [Prince Edward Island]. This is how Prince Edward 

Island does it, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they said. And of 

course all of us on the opposition side started almost bursting 

out laughing. And some of us just couldn’t believe they’re using 

PEI as an example — I think it was PEI — and yet they 

wouldn’t use their neighbouring provinces as an example. And 

that goes back to saying to what we believe, Mr. Speaker, that 

this is more of a political agenda at work than trying to be fair, 

Mr. Speaker, and trying to make sure that this is done properly. 

 

Now I think what’s important if you look at the example that 

we used over time, Mr. Speaker, is the notion of excluding 

young people. And I know some of my colleagues spoke about 

this, which I think is really, really important, that all the points 

that we keep reiterating are points of fairness and certainly 

points that need to be expressed. 

 

And people ought to know what this Bill is all about. And I 

would say, Mr. Speaker, you look at some of the points that 

were raised in terms of one of my colleagues suggesting that the 

impact on First Nations communities could be negative as well. 

Because many of the First Nations people in the communities in 

Saskatchewan, or in the First Nations communities, and they 

have a large proportion of young people. Some of the amount of 

young people under the age of 16 is probably maybe 40, maybe 

50, maybe 60 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Are they arbitrarily saying, 

the Saskatchewan Party saying to these young people and to the 

First Nations leaders, that when we do our politics that your 

young people on First Nations land do not count? That’s what 

they’re saying in this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s not what the Saskatchewan NDP stand for, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s why we’re standing up today to tell you 

that this is wrong. It is wrong. It is not something that should 

have been done at all, Mr. Speaker. Why would they do that? 

Why would they do that? Why would they exclude young 

people, Mr. Speaker? What is the logic behind all that? 

 

And if they don’t explain to the public, if they don’t explain to 

the people of Saskatchewan why they’re doing this, the NDP 

will certainly take their opportunity to explain what we think 

and the reason why they’re doing this, Mr. Speaker. And we 

think that it is all about gerrymandering the next election, Mr. 

Speaker, and working with those numbers to do a constituency 

boundary redesign, Mr. Speaker, so they can take more of what 

was done federally, take the lessons from the federal riding 

work to certainly do that. So the advantage would be in their 

court if they’re excluding First Nations youth, Métis youth, and 

the non-Aboriginal people’s youth in terms of looking at the 

numbers as to which areas deserve more constituencies. And 

thus the population, I think overall, would be poorly served if 

this government continued down their path, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again I would, I would point out. They made a reference 

today which was kind of nice in terms of what they perceive as 

the ever-astute media folk, person, Murray Mandryk. They 

made reference to him. And Murray Mandryk wrote an article 

here. And Mr. Mandryk . . . The headline screams, as I 

mentioned out yesterday: “Do we really need three more 

MLAs?” Big question mark, Mr. Speaker, big question mark. 

And according to Mandryk’s article, and I’ll read this out. And I 

quote: 

 

No, as a matter of fact, I [meaning Murray] haven’t met 

anyone outside the premier’s inner circle who thinks 

adding more MLAs is a good idea. And, no, I have no 

idea why he didn’t mention all this [during] the 

November election. But that’s a good question, too. 

 

So I have a lot of information that I want to go through here for 

the next several hours to make sure people out there know. And 

I’m going to say this over and over again so they know these 

numbers. Because according to a number of media folk that we 

deal with, they tell us that if we don’t mention these numbers 15 

to 16 times, people will not register it in their minds until you 

go through that process that many times. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in many ways I’m going to mention those 

figures from time to time to tell you why this Bill is a poorly 

designed Bill and why the people of Saskatchewan are going to 

be getting angrier and angrier over this Bill. And the big 

question is, why are the Saskatchewan Party government, why 



April 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 977 

is the Saskatchewan Party government doing this at this time? 

What is the logic? What is the reasoning? And we’ll certainly 

give you our perspective, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I notice that you look at some of the points that we would 

raise from the perspective of being fair, about being a 

democratic province. I think Saskatchewan is one of the great 

provinces in terms of leading a lot of national efforts, Mr. 

Speaker. We are famous throughout the land, and we’re very 

proud of our history. And you look at the birthplace of 

medicare. That was, of course, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We 

brought the whole notion of medicare to the country of Canada, 

and Saskatchewan has been known as the birthplace for that 

particular effort. And that’s something that we should be proud 

of. 

 

Now when you see activity of this sort, that certainly takes 

away from that pride, Mr. Speaker. It takes away from that 

pride, and that’s unfortunate. And what I want to point out as 

well is that when you look at the examples that we use, and we 

look at the New West Partnership that this government touts, 

and they talk about being on par with Alberta, they talk about 

working with BC and continuing building this new West, but 

when it comes to their political posturing and their political 

mandate, they make references to PEI — well, PEI does this. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, you can’t pick and choose the 

arguments that you have to your advantage. The people in 

Saskatchewan are a heck of a lot more intelligent than that. And 

when you put Bills forward of this sort, when you put Bills 

forward of this sort, you’re insulting the people of 

Saskatchewan’s intelligence because they know exactly what 

your plan is. And, Mr. Speaker, that is not fair. That is not 

proper. And I think that’s unbecoming of a government, Mr. 

Speaker, because people out there need to be told exactly what 

is going to happen with this Bill, and I don’t believe that they 

have been told properly. 

 

And I think what’s happening was the Saskatchewan Party were 

hoping that they would be able to sneak this through, 

gerrymander the process, go through the process of having this 

commission in place, and at the end get what they want, and all 

the while taking apart the whole principle of including young 

people, Mr. Speaker, when they do that assessment. And that is 

not fair. That is not proper. And every single member of the 

Saskatchewan Party government needs to wear that. And that’s 

something that I think, at the doorstep, people will certainly 

begin to bring those issues forward. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think, from our perspective, when I said 

we would give you our point as to why we think they would do 

this, I think the point is clear. When we look at some of the 

points that were raised during the elections, I think one that the 

Premier talked about, a fixed election date. I don’t think he said 

fixed election process — I think he said fixed election date. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what we’re saying in the NDP, now we’re 

seeing evidence that there’s going to be fixed elections in the 

future. And this Bill lends credence to that argument, Mr. 

Speaker. Because what they want to do is they want to 

manipulate the process and the constituency boundaries to try 

and add three more MLAs at millions of dollars of cost, and 

they’re going to do this and they’re going to fix the process so 

that they are the benefactors of any redesign and certainly any 

redistribution of voters to make sure that they get their way. 

 

So I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that there is a lot of 

problems, Madam Speaker. There’s a lot of problems with this 

particular Bill, and we are going to make sure that we continue 

holding this government to account. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to do another quote from Murray 

Mandryk’s article, and I think it’s important to note that the 

media in general, the columnists that I’m talking about, is not 

part of the NDP. They’re not part of the Saskatchewan Party. 

They certainly sit up in the press gallery and they monitor what 

goes on in the Assembly. There are some days that Mandryk is 

kind to us and other days he’s kind to the Saskatchewan Party. 

But in general, media are viewed as being very, very neutral 

and just simply trying to report the facts as they see it and to be 

as neutral and professional as they can, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And that’s something that I think people out there ought to 

know because when they make comments as to what this 

particular Bill is all about, they’re not doing it to be politically 

influential. They’re doing it from the perspective as they see it 

and they certainly put it down to pen and paper. And I’ve 

learned a long time ago that you can’t argue with somebody that 

buys ink by the barrel, and certainly with the media you have to 

work very closely with them. 

 

But then again, I want to make sure I also quote from Murray’s 

article. And I go on to quote: 

 

What’s that? You say . . . [you] need . . . [more] MLAs to 

be closer to their constituents is a particularly ridiculous 

argument because your MLA lives in Regina anyway. 

Well, I can’t argue with you there. 

 

This is Mandryk’s article: 

 

What’s that you say? You also can’t figure out why they 

are adding five per cent more Saskatchewan MLAs at a 

time of “austerity” and when they’ve already set targets to 

reduce the overall civil service size by 16 per cent in four 

years through attrition. Yes, you’re right, this wouldn’t 

. . . make much sense given that you are far more likely to 

need the services of a government employee than that of 

an MLA. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that’s the other point I think is really 

important. And I think Mandryk hit the nail on the head. How 

could you ask for more MLAs at a time that you’re preaching 

austerity? How could you ask for more MLAs at a time that 

you’re firing civil servants, and I think the amount is 15 per 

cent over time. How could you ask for more MLAs when 

you’re cutting programs and services that people so desperately 

need, Mr. Speaker? It just doesn’t make any sense. And that’s 

what this Bill is proposing to do and that’s what the people of 

Saskatchewan ought to know. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, I think whether it’s the media that are 

making comments on this . . . And I go again, I go again on 

Murray Mandryk’s article when he says, he makes a point: 



978 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2012 

No, it can’t be that Saskatchewan MLAs are busier than 

their counterparts in other provinces, either. With the 

possible . . . [exemption] . . . of P.E.I. and maybe one or 

two other Atlantic provinces, Saskatchewan MLAs 

already represent fewer per-capita voters than virtually 

any other provincial politicians in the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so again, they’re using PEI as an example. And 

that was what the most amazing part of this particular Bill from 

our opposition perspective because we were arguing about the 

Bill saying, you don’t need more MLAs. And wasn’t the 

Premier talking about this New West Partnership with BC and 

Alberta, and we’re going to really build and go on and look 

forward to the future and this continued prosperity — all that 

great language, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Oh, but hold it. In terms of our political agenda and this Bill, 

we’re going to go see PEI, you know, out on the East Coast. 

And of course the people on the opposition benches say, what’s 

that about? Well that’s exactly the point, is that this is an affront 

to democracy. And it’s amazing that the Minister of Justice is 

proposing this Bill. That’s what is most incredible about this 

process, Mr. Speaker, is the Minister of Justice is proposing this 

Bill. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what pre-empts the Minister of Justice from 

making sure that this is a fair and just process, Mr. Speaker? 

And that of course is the political plan and the political 

directives that he has been given, Mr. Speaker. And that is 

unfair. That is unfair not only to his post but to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So again I go back to my particular point that the people of 

Saskatchewan did not want three more MLAs. They have a 

resounding message to this government: they don’t want more 

MLAs, especially if you’re laying off civil servants that could 

be working and helping people in general in everyday life, 

especially when you have programs, especially when you have 

services being cut, Mr. Speaker. And how could you justify, 

how could you justify adding more politicians to the payroll at 

millions of dollars of cost, and at the same time talking about 

austerity and at the same time cutting programs left and right, 

Mr. Speaker? It just doesn’t make any sense, Mr. Speaker. It 

doesn’t make any sense to the average person. It doesn’t make 

any sense to the principal of democracy, and it certainly doesn’t 

make any sense to the official opposition. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a bit about my grandchildren 

if I may. I’ve been blessed with some really good 

grandchildren. You know, I’m a lucky guy because I’ve also 

mentioned that in my family I’ve got, you know, a really nice, 

supportive wife and who I nickname as gorgeous. You know, 

she’s a very nice-looking lady, but she’s also very in charge of 

her family. God blessed me with three wonderful daughters, and 

every day I hear people back home saying they were so glad 

that they look like their mother, and I silently second the 

motion. And certainly from my perspective, Mr. Speaker, I am 

also glad that they look like their mother. 

 

And two of the older girls gave me four beautiful grandchildren. 

And I think this is important that the Assembly know this as 

well, and the Assembly should know that those four children 

are Métis children. You know, they are born in a Métis family 

and they’re all . . . There’s one that’s seven, another that’s six, 

one that’s two, and one that’s 10 months. And, Mr. Speaker, 

those four grandchildren of mine are not counted under this 

particular Bill. 

 

And I find that very, very shameful. They’re not counted under 

this particular Bill, and yet they’re Saskatchewan residents, and 

yet they live and work and they’re proud to be a part of the 

province. And those four children are not included in this 

particular Bill, as many other children and grandchildren 

throughout the province are not included as well. Why is that 

happening in this day and age, Mr. Speaker? It is for a political 

agenda. That’s what it’s all about. And from our perspective, 

Mr. Speaker, as an opposition, we want to make sure that 

people out there know that that is not fair. That flies in the face 

of democracy. And everywhere you go, every person under 18 

under this particular Bill doesn’t count, and that’s compliments 

of the Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This has not been done before. It has not been done before in 

the history of Saskatchewan where young people are excluded 

when you do the electoral boundaries, Mr. Speaker. Every 

person counted before, and now today under this Bill, 

everybody over 18 are the only ones that count. They’re the 

only ones that count, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And while we’re excluding the kids, we’re also going to fire 

some people that have worked for the province for years. We’re 

also going to cut programs, and yet this is an austerity budget. 

This is all what this is all about, Mr. Speaker, is a political plan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I want to point out as well that . . . as I talk about my 

grandchildren, as I speak about my grandkids. There’s the 

oldest one. Her name is Meika, and Meika is seven years old. 

She’s in grade 1, and she’s a very astute and good-looking girl. 

And guess what? When Meika turns 18, she wants to vote. But 

she wants to be able to be counted now as a person, as a person, 

a Canadian person, as a Saskatchewan resident, as a Métis 

person. Meika wants to be counted, Mr. Speaker, she says, 

because she has to know that she counts. 

 

And then you have Brodey. Brodey’s six years old, and 

Brodey’s a handsome guy. He looks more like his grandma than 

his grandpa, and thank goodness for that. I’ll second that 

motion as well. And Brodey’s also a very proud Canadian 

citizen. He’s also very proud to call Saskatchewan his home, 

and he’s also very proud that he’s Métis. And, Mr. Speaker, 

Brodey wants to be counted too. And that’s what’s really 

important; he wants to be counted as well. 

 

And now we go down to Nixon. Nixon is two years old, and 

Nixon’s a handful, Mr. Speaker. And Nixon Taylor Phillip 

Magnus is going to be one solid guy when he gets bigger 

because he’s got that temper, of course, but he’s also got that 

humour, Mr. Speaker. And guess what? Nixon is two years old. 

He doesn’t know that he’s proud to be a Canadian but as he gets 

older, he’ll be told he’s proud to be a Canadian. And he’ll 

certainly be happy with that. He’ll be proud that he’s a 

Saskatchewan person and, Mr. Speaker, what’s important is 

he’s also going to be proud that he’s Métis. But guess what? 

I’m pretty sure Nixon at his age of two years old wouldn’t mind 

being counted in, you know, in terms of being part of 



April 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 979 

Saskatchewan, that he should know that he counts. 

 

And the final one I want to speak about is little Mila. Mila’s 

only about eight, nine months, you know, and she’s just a 

handful. And she’s a really happy little girl, and she’s what I 

think is going to be one of the biggest blessings in the province 

of Saskatchewan. She’s going to be one fantastic grandchild 

and, Mr. Speaker, the only problem with her is she’s got these 

really big cheeks, you know, and that’s where she stores all her 

food. So we’re trying to get her on a cheek diet because that’s 

all you see when you look at Mila is just pure cheeks. And she’s 

very pretty and she’s very astute and she likes to smile, but 

we’ve got to work on those cheeks to make sure that they’re 

proportionally the size they should be when it comes to the rest 

of her pretty face. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we know that those challenges exist. But, you 

know, Mila is at that age where she’s just looking. She’s 

looking at things and picking up things. And one of these days I 

hope Mila knows that she counted, even the day that she was 

born, that she counted in Saskatchewan, that she counted in 

many, many ways, but more so from the political, the economic 

perspective, and just building Saskatchewan as a whole. 

 

And what you have, Mr. Speaker, with the four grandchildren, 

and I speak of them fondly because I love them all and I love 

them very, very evenly. And I share a lot of opportunity and 

times with them to explain what the value of life is, and I’m 

blessed in that regard because whether it’s Meika or whether 

it’s Mila or whether it’s Nixon or Brodey, I’m one lucky 

grandpa because I get to spend a lot of time with them. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think as a parent too, if I had children 

under the age of 18, I would also be very, very concerned 

because what’s happening under the Sask Party Bill, this 

particular Bill, is that any child and any youth under the age of 

18 don’t count when you look at determining the makeup of our 

constituencies. This government has changed that rule. 

 

When you do an evaluation of your population to say how many 

constituencies we have and should need, they’re saying, uh-oh, 

hold it. We’re not counting the children. We’re not counting the 

youth. Anybody under the age of 18 do not matter, you know. 

And they’re not saying that they don’t matter, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re saying they’re not being counted in this regard. And to 

me I think that does a great disservice to not only my 

grandchild or my grandchildren, but all of the grandchildren 

throughout the province, Mr. Speaker, and more so to the youth 

that are of that age where four years from now they get to vote. 

But right now in determining the constituency boundaries, 

which is part of their political agenda, that young person 

doesn’t count, Mr. Speaker, that they have no value to the 

Saskatchewan Party unless they’re 18 years of age and over. 

And that is very, very shameful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So not only is this an affront to democracy in many ways. It is 

also very disrespectful to our families, to the grandchildren, to 

the children under the age of 18. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s all 

compliments of the Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

all compliments of the Sask Party government, and people 

ought to know that. 

 

Now I want to do those numbers again for the different 

jurisdictions. I want to do the numbers again for the 

jurisdictions throughout the country. And for those that just 

joined us, Saskatchewan has an average of 17,817 voters per 

riding compared to Manitoba that has 21,198 voters per riding. 

Alberta has 43,919 voters per riding. BC has 51,785 voters per 

riding. And Ontario has 120,110 voters per riding. And out of 

all these provinces, there’s only one that wants to increase the 

amount of politicians they have. And guess which one that is, 

Mr. Speaker? That is the lowest amount of voters per riding, 

and that, Madam Speaker, is the province of Saskatchewan led 

by the Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we spoke about some of the challenges in terms of why 

would you need more MLAs. We spoke about how they have 

excluded grandchildren like mine, grandchildren like the many 

other grandparents that enjoy out there . . . that have 

grandchildren, that enjoy these grandchildren. They don’t seem 

to count to the Saskatchewan Party. 

 

And the whole purpose of that, the reason why they’ve 

arbitrarily excluded those children and those grandchildren in 

your lives is because they have a political agenda at stake. They 

want to be able to gerrymander the numbers to create more 

constituencies, to again to look at how they’re able to weaken 

some of the constituencies with larger families, with more of a 

family base, so they can put more of their support base in that 

same constituency. You can start seeing how, you can begin to 

see how they want to have the process become very, very 

cloudy and confusing. And at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, 

what they want to do is, quite frankly, position these three new 

MLAs and position these three new constituencies to 

accommodate their political agenda. And they’re doing that in a 

most unfair manner, Mr. Speaker, in a most unfair manner. 

 

I look at the process for the commission, the commission itself. 

I understand what’s supposed to happen is they’re supposed to 

get people that are neutral, people that don’t have any vested 

interests in how they’re going to design these constituencies, 

Mr. Speaker. And that’s another principle that we think that 

they’re going to fall flat on their face on. They’re going to be 

very aggressive. They’re going to make sure that they have 

friends of theirs on these provincial commissions to make sure 

that they’re able to influence those friends and say, look, this is 

what we need done, this is what we need done. Can you work 

within the parameters of this Act to make sure it happens? 

 

[15:45] 

 

So the guy goes and he says, okay, I’m neutral. But then all 

these rules and regulations of this Bill pretty much dictates to 

what that person can or cannot do in terms of their 

recommendations of new constituencies. You know they’re 

looking at the numbers. And that’s why the numbers in this Bill 

are really, really important. Because they’re going to make sure 

that, based on what we say in this Bill, the commission that 

they’re going to establish, which they’ll claim is going to be 

independent . . . Guess what? That independent commission 

will not have any room to do anything independent, based on all 

the rules and regulations and the obstacles that this government 

put in place. 

 

So you might as well have, you might as well have three folks 

that are probably going to be very, very astute people and going 



980 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2012 

to be very, very impressive people. Well those three folks will 

all of a sudden quickly realize that their work is also being 

gerrymandered, Mr. Speaker, and that their work will be 

compromised an incredible amount based on all the rules and 

regulations of this particular Bill. 

 

This Bill will indicate the fact that we’re going to have three 

more constituencies and where they want those three more 

constituencies made and organized and drawn up. They will get 

their way, Mr. Speaker. So this whole process of having this 

independent commission, the opposition don’t buy it. We don’t 

buy it, not because we question the integrity and the abilities 

and the skill of the commission members, Mr. Speaker. We 

don’t buy it because the Bill itself dictates and indicates what 

exactly the parameters of their work is. And the parameters of 

that work is going to fulfill their political agenda, not rely on 

the independence nor the ethics nor the professionalism of those 

committee members, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that again in itself is an affront to democracy. And people 

out in Saskatchewanland, they know what is happening. And 

that’s why, from the opposition perspective, we’re going to 

continue harping on these numbers. We’re going to continue 

harping on the process. We’re going to do all we can to educate 

the people of Saskatchewan. It’s the same principle behind the 

federal ridings when these were designed a number of years 

ago. The same principle applies now, today, Mr. Speaker, with 

this Bill and with this provincial constituencies boundaries Act 

that’s being introduced by the Minister of Justice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I want to put my attention again to the whole notion of the 

First Nations communities and the Métis communities. As we 

know, Mr. Speaker, as we know, this government is on the 

attack. They’re going to war with the First Nations and Métis 

people and the Aboriginal people in general. They are going to 

war. This is another shot, Mr. Speaker, another shot against the 

First Nations and the Métis people. Why? Because this Bill 

recognizes, those folks over there know, that the vast majority 

of people that live on First Nations lands or the Métis 

community, the huge amount of those people, the huge amount 

of those people are under the age of 18. 

 

And I go back earlier to my statement of 40, 45, 55, 60 per cent 

of the First Nations and Métis communities are all young 

people, Mr. Speaker. There’s a ton of young people in First 

Nations lands and a ton of young people in the Métis 

communities, Mr. Speaker, all under the age of 18. There’s a 

huge amount of people. This Act does not include them. This 

Act does not include them. So if you look at that, at their 

perspective, and you’re a chief or a band councillor or a mayor 

or a Métis leader, and you’re being told by this Act, look, 

you’ve got 100,000 First Nations and Métis people — if they’re 

not 18 and over, from this Act’s perspective they don’t count. 

They don’t count. 

 

So what you’ve done is that you made it more of a problem for 

the First Nations and Métis community because of the huge 

amount of young people that they have within their 

communities. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a greater number than in 

the non-Aboriginal community. If you look at the makeup of 

Saskatchewan in general, the First Nations and Métis people 

have a ton of young people that are under the age of 18. And the 

numbers are just phenomenal, Mr. Speaker. Sometimes they’re 

as high as 60 per cent under the age of 18. And this is an 

amazing amount of young people, Mr. Speaker. And this Bill 

has a more dramatic negative effect on the First Nations and 

Métis community because of those numbers than it does on the 

non-Aboriginal community. And we’re not saying that it’s 

lesser, Mr. Speaker. It has a more dramatic effect on both 

groups and that’s very shameful and that is very, very unfair. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would go on to say that we have had a 

discussion in terms of how we approach this particular Bill as 

an opposition caucus. And we’re seeing that a lot of folks are 

really relying on trust and faith and confidence when they 

approach politicians to deal with issues that they want dealt 

with. And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you right now, a lot of folks 

out there don’t want any more MLAs, especially the manner in 

which the Sask Party’s hoping to achieve the advantage when it 

comes to those three new MLAs. They don’t want to see this 

process unfold at all. They know that it’s unfair. They know 

that this is not the proper way to do this. They know that when 

they make reference to PEI as one of the other areas that do it 

. . . And yet we want to be partners with Alberta and we want to 

be partners with BC. You see the difference in numbers 

between those two provinces. They aren’t doing what 

Saskatchewan is doing. And the moment we challenge the Sask 

Party on that, they say, oh look, this is what PEI is doing. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that is just plain silly. You don’t do those 

comparisons in that fashion, in that manner, and that obvious. 

That’s the point, that obvious. So the people of Saskatchewan 

aren’t going to scratch their heads and say, okay we buy that. 

The vast majority of people are saying, that’s shameful, that is 

almost embarrassing and, Mr. Speaker, that is downright 

foolish. 

 

And that’s the point I would raise with a lot of people out there 

that are listening to this particular Bill and getting information 

on this particular Bill, is that the NDP opposition don’t like this 

for a number of reasons. And one of the biggest reasons, Mr. 

Speaker, is that we know that we don’t need more MLAs. We 

know that, especially when we see what the government has cut 

and what the government has done to hurt a number of 

industries and programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me talk a bit about those programs, if I may. 

The film employment tax credit, you know we talked about that 

today. And we listened to the minister, his answers, the Minister 

of Culture. And, Mr. Speaker, as far as I’m concerned, the 

answers that he gave were very, very, very . . . answers that 

were just monotone. There was no responses in them. There 

was nothing articulate about the answers. And it was more like 

a robo-answer than anything else, Mr. Speaker, and just going 

through his notes and reading what he was told to read and 

don’t deviate from the script because this is our plan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And that’s exactly, that’s the whole notion, that the film 

employment and tax credit that we’re talking about, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s one of the programs that were cut. That was one 

of the programs that were cut, and that was made by the 

Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker. And we sat there 

and we listened to the answers and, Mr. Speaker, the monotone 

answers and there’s nothing exciting at all. And that’s why from 

our perspective we can pretty much read in opposition in the 



April 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 981 

next cabinet shuffle who is going to be in, who is going to be 

out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think what’s going to happen to a few of those members 

over there, that their post is toast because the fact of the matter 

is, is they’re told to do this. And you’re going to be thrown 

under the bus, Mr. Speaker, in terms of if there’s a problem 

with that file and we make a decision as a government and you 

have to wear it for a few months, after that we will fire you as a 

cabinet member and then you will go back to being a 

backbencher. And they’ll put somebody new in there and 

hopefully try and fool the people again by saying, oh, that was a 

bad guy and we fired him from cabinet. So here’s a new cabinet 

member; he might be better. But the reality is the program is 

gone. 

 

Now, Madam Speaker, I think one of the things that people out 

there ought to know in terms of the amendment is we have a . . . 

And I think it’s important we read what the amendment says. 

And the amendment made by my learned colleague from 

Cumberland: 

 

That all the words after the word “That” be deleted and 

the following substituted therefor: 

 

“this House declines to give second reading to Bill C-36, 

An Act to amend The Constituency Boundaries Act, 1993 

because 

 

The Bill excludes, in determining constituency 

boundaries, the counting of the young people of 

Saskatchewan who deserve to be counted to determine 

representation within this Legislative Assembly; and 

further 

 

That the Bill increases the number of members of this 

Legislative Assembly by three which is an unnecessary 

increase of politicians to represent the people of 

Saskatchewan.” 

 

So I think what’s important is that the points that we raise under 

Bill C-36 is that you shouldn’t exclude the young people. That’s 

really, really important. And secondly is that you shouldn’t 

increase the amount of MLAs when nobody is asking for more 

MLAs. I haven’t heard a single, single person phone my office. 

And I asked my colleagues if they phoned . . . Nobody in Prince 

Albert phoned. No, nobody has called. 

 

And some of the members say, well nobody’s called me to 

complain about three more MLAs. No, but the point is they 

didn’t call you to ask for more MLAs. And that’s our point over 

here: that wasn’t a pressing issue. When we answer the phone 

in our office, we don’t say, hello, do you want more MLAs? 

You know, and that’s the point, Mr. Speaker, is that they didn’t 

do that. 

 

And they get it all wrong because one of the points raised by 

one of the members: well I never got any calls on this. Well of 

course you’re not going to get any calls because they’re upset 

with you, first of all. And secondly the point is, did they phone 

you to say, hey, there’s about 100 of us out here that think 

having more MLAs is a great idea? You never got those calls 

because people don’t think it’s a good idea. They don’t want 

more politicians. They don’t want more politicians when they 

see the environment being compromised, Mr. Speaker, when 

they see programs being cut, when they see services being 

threatened, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s an amazing amount of work that I see on the other side 

in which they’re managing people, not the issues. And that is 

unfair, Mr. Speaker, again, to what’s important here in the 

Assembly. 

 

So I want to again add some of the comments that I think is 

really important, that when we talk about the population — this 

is an important point that I would raise that we got from a 

gentleman out in the East Coast — and they talked a lot about 

how the First Nations people would be negatively impacted. 

And it’s something that I spoke about earlier, and I just ask the 

people of Saskatchewan to understand one thing. As you look 

through the makeup of your community, whether it be a First 

Nations or Métis community or whether it’s a village or 

whether it’s a city or whether it’s a section of the city, you look 

at the families enjoying the parks. You look at the people that 

are out having supper together. You look at people playing 

sports. Many of those young kids and children that are out in 

your community and the families that we’re talking about, they 

won’t count, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They won’t count under this 

Bill. Why? For one simple reason. Before this Bill comes into 

effect, they would have counted in terms of determining how 

many people are allowed to live in any constituency. They 

would have counted. 

 

This Bill is saying, oh hold it here. We’re not going to include 

those young people that are playing softball. We’re not going to 

include those youth that are putting together a drama 

presentation. We’re not going to include the children and the 

grandchildren of some of the grandparents that are watching 

them participate in community activities. Why? Because it 

doesn’t fit our political agenda, Mr. Speaker. That’s why. 

That’s why. 

 

And that’s why, from our perspective in the opposition, this is 

an important amendment that they’re making to this Bill by 

telling the people of Saskatchewan that absolutely every young 

person in this province, whether it’s a grandchild or a youth 

member or a young adult in your family, that they should count 

when you look at constituency boundaries and when you 

determine the boundaries, Mr. Speaker. 

 

How more blatantly obvious can the Sask Party get when they 

put together this Bill to exclude young people so that their 

political agenda could be fulfilled. And that is a shameful act, 

Mr. Speaker. It is a shameful act, and people across 

Saskatchewan simply don’t want to see that happen. 

 

So the NDP are quite clear as to what is important: (a) we reject 

the notion of having more MLAs. We don’t think that’s a very 

good idea, Mr. Speaker, primarily because of the numbers I’d 

spoke about earlier, Mr. Speaker, primarily because you look at 

places — and I need to go through those numbers again and I 

will — and I think the numbers here are quite clear. I think 

people have to know those numbers, and I’ve got them right 

here. Again, the numbers are quite clear. We don’t want to see 

more MLAs because in Saskatchewan we have an average of 

17,000 voters per riding compared to 21,000 in Manitoba, 



982 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2012 

compared to 48,000 in Alberta, compared to 51,000 in BC, and 

120,000 in Ontario, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:00] 

 

So you can see that the people of Saskatchewan, and the NDP, 

from our perspective, do not need more MLAs. If Alberta 

doesn’t need any more based on those numbers, if BC doesn’t 

need any more based on their numbers, if Manitoba doesn’t 

need any more based on those numbers, and Ontario doesn’t 

need any more based on those numbers, where is the logic that 

Saskatchewan needs more based on their 17,000 voters per 

riding? Where is the logic behind that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And again some of the members are chirping from their seats. 

And yesterday I said, well let’s have a plebiscite. Let’s have a 

public vote. If you agree to having a public vote, then say so. If 

not, let’s have the chirping stop. Mr. Speaker, that’s the 

important point. They can chirp from their seats. They can chirp 

from their seats, Mr. Speaker, but the moment you mention 

plebiscites on this particular Bill, it is very, very quiet. It is 

very, very quiet. 

 

And I challenge, and I challenge the member from 

Martensville— keeps chirping, chirping from her seat — I 

challenge you to go to each of your doors that you knocked on 

and say, guess what? I fulfilled a promise. You wanted more 

MLAs. I got you more MLAs. And I would see what kind of 

response that she would have, even given the fact that she’s 

enjoyed good support in that area. I can almost guarantee you 

most of the people in that riding probably didn’t say, excuse 

me, but can you go to Regina and fight for more MLAs? And in 

the process of getting more MLAs, could you try and 

gerrymander the Boundaries Commission and exclude the 

young people? And then all of a sudden, at the end of day, we 

achieve our political agenda. 

 

The people of Martensville didn’t want that, Mr. Speaker, and 

the people of Athabasca didn’t want that. The people of any 

provincial constituency didn’t ask for that. So why is the Sask 

Party so defensive when we talk about this particular Bill? 

Because, Mr. Speaker, we know on this side, as well as they 

know, that they have a political agenda in play here. And the 

people of Saskatchewan are gradually hearing that this is 

something that they had planned. And, Mr. Speaker, that is 

totally unfair. 

 

And as they chirp more from their seats, as they chirp more 

from their seats, Mr. Speaker, what’s going to happen is that 

they are actually advocating for that process to unfold. They’re 

actually sitting in their chairs saying, yes, it’s a good idea. We 

support that idea. We think it’s a great idea. And yes, if it’s 

meant to get us a better advantage, we’re all for that. The word 

democracy, Mr. Speaker, it’s secondary to their agenda. And 

that’s an unfair process. 

 

As I sit in this Assembly, I shake my head some days as to why, 

why in God’s green Earth would this activity be allowed to 

unfold in Saskatchewan in 2012? In 2012 this kind of activity is 

happening, Mr. Speaker, and this certainly smacks of political 

opportunism. And the Saskatchewan Party, every single 

member will wear this, Mr. Speaker, will wear this Bill as their 

signature Bill in 2012 in terms of making sure that they’re able 

to politically interfere with the process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not right. This is not right in any way, 

shape, or form. And we’re asking the members, the backbench, 

as I mentioned yesterday, the backbench over there to speak up 

and say, this is not how you do it. This is not how you build a 

fair Saskatchewan, an inclusive Saskatchewan. You don’t 

gerrymander the process and try and disguise it because of the 

population growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is not what this is all about. This is not about 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And the member from wherever 

he’s from — Cypress Hills — he’s chirping from his seat. He’s 

part of this process. He’s part, and he’s going to stand up, Mr. 

Speaker, during the Bill reading. He’s going to stand up, and 

he’s going to vote for that. And he knows all the while, he 

knows all the while, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Members, I’m having 

some difficulty hearing the member from Athabasca, even 

though he’s quite close. I know there’s a number of 

conversations happening across the floor. I would suggest that 

you take those conversations behind the bar. I recognize the 

member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what’s 

important here, Mr. Speaker, is at the end of the day on this 

particular Bill, I’m going to watch which members up there 

stand up and proudly vote in support of this Bill. And I’m going 

to watch that, Mr. Speaker, even though they know what the 

agenda is and what’s at play here. I’m going to watch, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’m going to smile as they each stand up. And 

they’ll vote because they’re told how to vote, and that’s the 

bottom line. When you get home . . . The idea is not about 

representing your constituencies — absolutely not. Once you 

get to Regina, you’re going to be told what to do and how 

you’re going to vote, and that’s it. 

 

So the point I’m trying to raise is that out there, out there in 

Saskatchewanland, people are saying, we don’t want more 

MLAs. And they stand up in this Assembly on this particular 

Bill and say, yes we do, Mr. Speaker. And they’re going to have 

to explain that to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And it’s more confusing and it’s more conflicting for people out 

there when they talk about this, saying, okay, well it’s not just 

an issue of having more MLAs. That’s the point that we want to 

raise, Mr. Speaker. The issue is that how they’re going to go 

about doing this, they’re going to go about this, costing the 

province millions of dollars for these three new MLAs, millions 

of dollars, Mr. Speaker, for these three MLAs. And where that 

money’s coming from, Mr. Speaker, is from programs and cuts 

to employment and programs that people of Saskatchewan like. 

 

Now if the people out there think this is going to be a simple 

$225,000 cost per year, you’ve got to really start to think. It’s 

going to be a heck of a lot more than that, Mr. Speaker, as you 

look at transportation, as you look at support services, as you 

look at a number of other factors. It’s more than the salary of an 

MLA, and it’s more than just a salary of a CA [constituency 

assistant], Mr. Speaker. There are a significant amount of costs 

attached to each MLA’s office. 

 



April 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 983 

And the fact of the matter is, the fact of the matter is, if you 

look at the process in general, it’s not only about the cost, it’s 

also about the manner in which they’re going to determine the 

constituency boundaries. That is where the real problem lies, 

Mr. Speaker, because each of those members, including the 

member from Cypress Hills, he’s going to stand in this 

Assembly saying to all the families in his riding and other 

ridings that if you’re under the age of 18, our political agenda is 

more important than your participation in this democracy, so 

therefore you are not going to be counted when we do the 

boundaries. You’re going to be excluded. You’re going to be 

excluded. 

 

And we think that is unfair, and it’s patently wrong. It is an 

affront to democracy. That’s our point on this side. That’s our 

point on this side. This is the first time, this is the first time 

they’re doing that, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan’s history. 

Why? Why? Because the Saskatchewan Party wants to 

manipulate, wants to manipulate the process. But you look at 

that, Mr. Speaker, and you look at that process and you say, 

why are they doing this? Why are they doing this? They’re 

doing this, Mr. Speaker, because, Mr. Speaker, they have a 

political agenda at stake here. That’s what they have. That’s 

what they have. They have a political agenda at stake, and that’s 

unfair, Mr. Speaker. That’s unfair, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And to add insult to injury, as I mentioned at the outset, Mr. 

Speaker, as I mentioned at the outset, you look at all the 

numbers we spoke about. And I’m going to read those numbers 

out again. These numbers are important. People of 

Saskatchewan ought to know that. These are the numbers. 

Saskatchewan has an average of 17,817 voters per riding — 

people are going to hear the numbers — 17,000 voters. You 

look at Manitoba, 21,198. Look at Alberta, 43,919. Look at 

British Columbia, 51,785 voters per riding; and Ontario, 

120,110 voters per riding. Ontario has 120,000 voters per 

riding. The Saskatchewan Party has 17,000 per riding, and they 

want more MLAs, Mr. Speaker, more MLAs. 

 

So as we talk about that, we say, well explain to us why you 

want to do this. Explain to us why you want to do this. And of 

course we get up and we hear about PEI. I think Prince Edward 

Island’s got to be the smallest province in Canada, got to be the 

smallest province in the country, and yet they make reference to 

Prince Edward Island, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the insulting 

process attached to this Bill. The people of Saskatchewan can 

see right through it. And the fact of the matter is that if you 

begin to insult the intelligence of the Saskatchewan people, Mr. 

Speaker, you begin to certainly see that that kind of activity 

does have repercussions and problems. 

 

And it’s not just about the right thing to do, and that is vote 

against this particular Bill. It’s to allow the process to unfold, 

sitting on your hands and doing what you’re told to do. Because 

this is an affront to democracy. It is not fair. It is not right, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s why this Bill is so poorly thought out, and 

that’s why the people of Saskatchewan need to learn more 

about this Bill and hear exactly what this Bill is hoping to 

achieve for the political agenda of the Saskatchewan Party. 

 

So I guess the question that I would ask every one of the 

members of the Saskatchewan Party, why have you excluded, 

why have you excluded Meika; why have you excluded Brodey; 

why have you excluded Nixon, and why have you excluded 

Mila — my grandchildren — from your grand plan? Why have 

you excluded them, Mr. Speaker? Because they just don’t 

count. And they talk about their grandchildren and their 

children under the age of 18. Well, you can include them. And 

all you’ve got to do is vote against that Bill, and that’s how you 

include them. Vote against that Bill; then you include them. If 

you don’t vote against that Bill, then you exclude them. It’s as 

simple as that. 

 

But most of the members there are told, this is how you’re 

going to vote. No questions, no arguments. This is how you’re 

going to vote. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re waiting for that 

opportunity. And I’m going to see the member from . . . 

wherever he’s from. I’m going to see what he does, see if he 

stands up for those people that he’s excluding right now, Mr. 

Speaker. And we’re going to see, we’re going to see. He’ll 

stand up and he’ll do as he’s told. You’re going to stand up. 

You’re going to vote for that Bill even though it excludes your 

children or grandchildren. And that’s the important message, 

Mr. Speaker, is they’re allowing that process to unfold. And I’m 

going to stand here and I’m going to watch them and I’m going 

to see how they vote — the member from Martensville, the 

member from Melfort, I think he’s from. 

 

Yes, we’re going to see as they chirp from their chairs. We’re 

going to see. We’re going to see what they’re going to do, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re going to see, and that’s the important part. 

That’s the important part. And you look at all the other 

jurisdictions, and guess what? I don’t think Ontario is asking for 

more MLAs. They’re not asking for . . . They have 120,000 

voters per constituency, Mr. Speaker, 120,000 voters. That’s at 

least six times what we have right now in Saskatchewan. Six 

times more than what we have right now, and they’re not asking 

for more politicians in Ontario, Mr. Speaker. You know, they’re 

not asking for that. They’re not asking for that, and that’s the 

most amazing thing — 120,000 voters per riding in Ontario, 

120,000. And I don’t hear from any of the . . . I think it’s the 

MPPs [member of provincial parliament] or MLAs? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes, MPPs. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — MPPs, which are similar to the MLAs here. 

Not one of them are calling for more MPPs in Ontario. They’re 

not calling for more MLAs in Alberta. They’re not calling for 

more MLAs in BC. They’re not calling for more MLAs in 

Manitoba. They’re not even calling for more MLAs in PEI. 

They’re not even calling for more MLAs in any jurisdiction that 

I know of in Canada, Mr. Speaker. The only jurisdiction that’s 

asking for more MLAs is Saskatchewan, led by the 

Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. They’re the only ones that 

are asking for more MLAs, and that’s what this Bill does. 

That’s what this Bill does. 

 

And I go back to Ontario again. You know, 120,000 voters per 

riding, 120,000 voters per riding. And nobody wants more 

MLAs in Ontario, despite having six times the amount of 

people that they have to represent in that province than what we 

have in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, on the Saskatchewan Party side they’re 

saying, oh, we need more MLAs. That’s what this Bill is 

saying. We need more MLAs. And we’re not going . . . 



984 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2012 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes it does. That’s what the Bill 

says here. It says the Bill asks for more MLAs. That’s exactly 

what you said. And the Bill asks for more MLAs and that’s 

exactly . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . If you don’t want more 

MLAs, vote against the Bill. But they won’t vote against it, 

because they’re told what to do. That’s the bottom line, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think that the process as I mentioned, six, seven, 

six times the amount of people, Mr. Speaker, that are being 

asked . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the 

whole point, you know. And you’ve got to be very careful here. 

Because Ontario is saying they don’t want more MPPs, which 

are similar to MLAs. Ontario’s not calling for that, but 

Saskatchewan Party MLAs are saying we need more; we need 

three more politicians. And that’s not too good, Mr. Speaker, 

because not only are they doing that, but what they’re doing is 

they’re firing highways workers. They’re cancelling a lot of the 

film industry’s opportunities in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re firing northern forest fire workers, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re gutting some of the housing programs for people that 

live in isolated communities. Conservation officers are being 

fired or their offices being shut down. 

 

And what they’re going to do is the money that they’re saving, 

the millions that they say they’re saving, they’re going to use 

that to prop up three more MLAs. That’s where the money’s 

going — for three more MLAs. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 

we’ve got 58 MLAs in this province. I think that’s enough — 

58 MLAs. I think that’s enough, Mr. Speaker. That’s the bottom 

line. We have enough MLAs in Saskatchewan given our 

population base. 

 

[16:15] 

 

And you look at what Ontario does, and I go back to Ontario. 

They’ve got six times the amount of people in each riding than 

we have, and I haven’t heard one MPP get up — which is an 

MLA in Ontario — and say, we need more help. We need more 

MLAs. Not one of them has got up to say that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And yet in Saskatchewan, in Saskatchewan, we have the 

Saskatchewan Party MLAs saying, yes we do. Yes we do. And 

the worst part is, the worst part is, Mr. Speaker, is not only are 

they saying, yes we do; yes, we need more MLAs. They turn 

around and they gut programs and they fire people. That’s 

what’s the most absurd process that we watch from our end. 

They turn around and they gut programs and they fire people, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And not only that, they are now excluding all the young people, 

Mr. Speaker, from the process of determining where these 

constituencies are. And they’re hoping that nobody pays 

attention to this Bill. That’s what they’re hoping. And I don’t 

care what anybody says in terms of the process. It ought to be 

explained very clearly and very plainly to the people of 

Saskatchewan. And I think, Mr. Speaker, once the people of 

Saskatchewan get that explanation, they’re not going to be a 

happy bunch. They’re not going to be very happy in 

Martensville. They’re not going to be very happy in Melfort. 

They’re not going to be very happy in any of those areas. 

 

And I dare, I challenge the Saskatchewan Party members, any 

one of them, today to agree to a plebiscite on this issue, Mr. 

Speaker. And all you hear is silence. The fact of the matter is 

they don’t want to have that. They don’t want to give the people 

of Saskatchewan that opportunity to publicly vote on this 

because the answer would be a resounding no. 

 

We don’t need more MLAs if my neighbour who is a highways 

worker got laid off. We don’t need more MLAs if my 

conservation office has been shut down. We don’t need more 

MLAs if one of my fire protection workers has been fired, or 

we don’t need more MLAs if the seniors have got to dig in their 

pocket more for money for drug costs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The list goes on as to why this has got to be the most silliest 

notion that this Bill is being supported by the people of 

Saskatchewan. It is the Saskatchewan Party political agenda at 

play here, Mr. Speaker, no matter how you cut it, and that’s 

unfair to the people of Saskatchewan. This is unfair to this great 

hall of democracy. 

 

And we spoke about the amount of respect, the amount of 

respect we had to the Armed Forces, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

another issue that’s also important that needs to touched on. It’s 

a fact that today we honoured a lady whose father served in a 

great war, and whose father served her country well. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I respect her and I certainly admire her father’s 

contribution to this country. As many other veterans’ families 

will know, it is a bond that brings many of the families together. 

And we know the sacrifices. You talk about Dieppe; you talk 

about the World War II and the amount of casualties we had as 

a country. There were many good men and women that suffered 

and perished in those wars and many other wars in many other 

conflicts throughout the world, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know there’s half, less than half of the countries in the 

world enjoy democracy. Most of the countries are being ruled in 

many ways that are contrary to democracy and the freedoms 

that we enjoy. We are very lucky as a country, Mr. Speaker. 

And we honour those people, which we should. We should 

honour them at every occasion that we have. Because without 

them, without the foundation of their sacrifice, we wouldn’t 

enjoy the country that we have today. 

 

Now I talk on many occasions that I had a great opportunity to 

spend some time with my father before he passed, and he spoke 

of great love for his country. He was very patriotic. And he had 

many, many opinions as well. And one of the most amazing 

things, Mr. Speaker, is that no matter what you said about him, 

what overrode everything in all his emotions, was the fact that 

he served his country. And that’s important. And he often said, 

he often said that it’s important that you use that properly and 

that you respect the people that afforded this opportunity, and 

don’t waste it. 

 

Now those are some of the words that we spoke about over the 

supper hour and during the celebrations we had in our 

community. Now that is what is at play here, Mr. Speaker. He 

also said that we don’t need to use that process, nor my service, 



April 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 985 

or any of the other sacrifices made in any political arena. That’s 

why sometimes we have great difficulty in speaking about it. 

It’s not because we don’t want to or we’re not proud of some of 

the service and some of his stories and his memories — we are 

proud of that — but not to play on that too much, but to respect 

them and to hold them in good regard. But that being said, Mr. 

Speaker, they afforded us a democracy and they afforded us 

freedom. And I want to respect that and I want to park that 

particular process aside, because it’s not what I want to do here 

today, to politicize the process. 

 

But I’ll say this, that given that in that vein of thought, in that 

process of what we think is important for democracy, is that we 

don’t have any kind of political agenda at play. This is really 

important to the people of Saskatchewan. This is important to 

many, many people who have been influenced by many great 

leaders and great warriors of our time. And the whole notion is 

when you start having that kind of interference and that kind of 

blatant political agenda is at play, that is an affront to 

democracy. And that’s where I use my language when I say this 

is not proper. This is not fair. This is not what was intended to 

be, Mr. Speaker. This is not what was intended to be when 

people went out there to fight for our freedom, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You should not have the manipulative process as indicated by 

this Bill. It is simply not right. It is not proper, Mr. Speaker. 

And you shouldn’t be excluding the young people. And I’m 

talking about all grandchildren, the Sask Party members’ 

grandchildren or children under the age of 18 and my children, 

all of our children or grandchildren under 18 years of age. They 

should not be excluded in this process. It is simply 

fundamentally wrong, because every other jurisdiction includes 

their families that we make reference to in this Bill. Every 

single one of them include their kids, grandkids, and children 

under the age of 18. 

 

When I talk about those matters, Mr. Speaker, it’s really 

important that the people out there understand what I mean 

when I say an affront to democracy. It’s not just a fancy little 

phrase. It really means something to a lot of people out there 

when we tell them to be fair, open, honest, and above all else, to 

be inclusive of every person of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I heard a line one time being made by a 

federal politician and I really like that line and I sometimes use 

it. But I want to make sure people don’t think that I’m going to 

use it and not give this person credit. It wasn’t my line, and it 

wasn’t Saskatchewan that this politician was specifically talking 

about. But the phrase . . . And I kind of change it a bit, but the 

phrase that really hit home for me which was really key, was 

the notion that this is not a good province for any of us unless 

it’s a good province for all of us. And that fundamental belief is 

something that’s really important. 

 

So my Meika should count; my Nixon should count; and my 

Brodey and my Mila should count. From the day they are born, 

they should be counted. This Bill does not count them as 

citizens of Saskatchewan, so this Bill doesn’t value them as far 

as I’m concerned. And no, we’re not saying that this is an attack 

on the children. That’s too far-fetched. What we’re saying is 

that you want to do an assessment, a proper assessment to 

include all the people of Saskatchewan — that includes the 

youth and the children as well. 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask for leave to introduce a 

guest. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am pleased to introduce 

Craig Ashbourne who is here sitting up with Kyall Glennie 

from our office. Craig Ashbourne was just recently in the last 

number of days appointed as the new provincial secretary for 

the New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan. Craig is replacing 

Dale Schmeichel who is retiring. 

 

And Craig has been working with the New Democratic Party 

for just over a year as an organizer. He comes to us from the 

University of Victoria where he’s been working on a master’s 

degree in professionalization of the organizing and 

communications practices of political parties. He brings many 

skills that are important for us, but it’s also clearly a recognition 

that we have many, many young, capable people in the country 

who are available to work for political parties. 

 

And so we’re very pleased to have Craig here in Saskatchewan 

working for the New Democratic Party. So I ask all the 

members here from both sides of the House to welcome 

somebody who will be a friend to us all. And at certain points 

we’ll obviously be in contest, but let’s be in contest with people 

that we know. So I would ask all members to welcome Mr. 

Craig Ashbourne to the legislature of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 36 — The Constituency Boundaries 

Amendment Act, 2011 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

want to make sure that I continue that train of thought when I 

talk about the importance that we look at the whole Bill in its 

entire nature of what is being planned and how many children 

that we’re going to be excluding. And I talked about my four, 

and certainly it’s something that fits across the way as well. 

 

And I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, to look at some of the 

numbers that we’re looking at right now, in 2006, the last 

census of Saskatchewan — just to give you an idea when I say 

there are many Milas out there, there are many Meikas, and 

there are many Brodey and Nixons and other children of people 

of Saskatchewan — but in 2006, Mr. Speaker, there was 

233,905 people in Saskatchewan under the age of 18. So it’s 

almost 25 per cent of the provincial population that this Sask 

Party is excluding, 25 per cent of our provincial population in 



986 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2012 

this particular Bill. And that’s the worrisome thing, Mr. 

Speaker. It is not for any particular reason that they’re 

excluding all these young people other than a political agenda at 

play, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That’s the part that’s really, really disturbing. That’s the part 

that really has a lot of people in Saskatchewan shaking their 

heads because that’s not the reason why many of their 

supporters voted for them, Mr. Speaker. That’s not the reason 

why many of those supporters voted for them. If the many of 

their supporters that voted for them thought that you’re going to 

have more MLAs and you’re going to exclude my family and 

you’re going to exclude my grandchildren and you’re going to 

do this in this odd fashion, then I bet you, Mr. Speaker, there’d 

be a lot of people changing their minds at the doorstep. And no 

matter how many times you stage a photo op in some mall, you 

know, to look like you’re friendly for a lot of folks, that’s not 

going to fly any more in the future because people of 

Saskatchewan will have found out the truth behind this 

particular Bill of how dastardly this whole process is when you 

talk about trying to fulfill a political agenda. And that’s just 

pure shameful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again those numbers are 233,908 people . . . or 905 people. 

That’s almost 25 per cent of our provincial population that have 

been arbitrarily cut by the Saskatchewan Party when 

determining the Constituency Boundaries Commission or the 

constituency boundary areas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now again you would have to ask the question. The plain 

question, Mr. Speaker, is, why would you exclude the young 

people? Explain to me why you would exclude the young 

people when you’re doing these provincial constituency 

boundaries, something that wasn’t done before, Mr. Speaker. 

Why would you do that? Why would you do that, Mr. Speaker? 

That’s a big question we have on this side, a very simple 

one-word question: why? Why would you do that? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, from our perspective, we know exactly why 

they’re doing it, Mr. Speaker. It is a larger political agenda at 

play. And I think the people of Saskatchewan are really starting 

to pick up on this issue, and a lot of them don’t like it, Mr. 

Speaker. A lot of them don’t like it at all. And I think what’s 

important is that, if you look at what the media are saying, the 

media don’t buy it as well. The media are saying, we don’t need 

more politicians. Absolutely not. We don’t need them any way, 

shape, or form. 

 

And you look at all these processes. Mr. Speaker, it is clear to 

me, it is as clear to me that this is something to do with their 

politics and nothing to do with fairness, nothing to do with open 

and accountable and to being transparent to the people of 

Saskatchewan. And that is a very, very sad day for democracy 

in general and a very sad day for Saskatchewan when you see 

that kind of activity occurring on that end, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’m going to see how some of their members vote on this 

Bill. I’m going to see how some of the members vote on this 

Bill and to see them standing up, to see them stand up, Mr. 

Speaker, and to prop up, to prop up a Bill that is contrary to 

fairness, Mr. Speaker. I want to see if they stand up and vote for 

this Bill. I want to see whether the member from Melfort or the 

member from Kelvington-Wadena or the member from 

Meadow Lake or the member from Martensville, I want to see 

if they stand up and vote for a Bill that excludes 25 per cent of 

the provincial population, namely the children and the youth, 

which are our future for tomorrow. I want to see if they stand 

up. I want to see if they stand up. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they aren’t going to stand up because they’re 

told what to do when they get here, and their constituents’ 

issues are second, second in the priority list when it comes to 

this particular Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. And this is 

something that is clearly designed to manipulate the process, 

and absolutely everybody and their dog knows that’s the plan, 

Mr. Speaker. Even my dog back home knows that’s the plan. 

Him and I have some good discussions on politics, Mr. Speaker, 

and he knows what’s at stake here. He’s a pretty sharp dog. So I 

think I’ll point out that he knows, he knows, Mr. Speaker, 

what’s going on. And as I mentioned to you, everybody and 

their . . . and all the families in Saskatchewan knows what’s 

happening. 

 

So the matter is very, very clear to us from our perspective. We 

have to pull this Bill. We have to pull this Bill. And we appeal 

to the Sask Party backbench to at least stand up and say, this 

Bill is wrong. Why are we doing it this way? Why are we doing 

it this way? And I’ll tell you one thing, Mr. Speaker. They’ll be 

told to be quiet, stand up when you’re told, and sit down when 

you’re done voting. That’s exactly what will happen. 

 

So we’re asking the backbench to have a backbone over there 

and speak to their front bench and say, come on, you guys, this 

is not right. This is not fair. This is not how you do it. This is 

not how you do it. You can fundamentally disagree on things. 

I’m not arguing that you should do this every day. But on the 

process that really gerrymanders a political plan for the Sask 

Party, you should have the decency to stand up and say, this is 

wrong. You should stand up and say, this is wrong. Because 

this is not the reason why we’re here. And, Mr. Speaker, they 

won’t do it. They won’t do it. 

 

And that’s why it’s important on this side of the House. We 

look at that, and we watch how they conduct themselves. We 

watch very clearly, carefully what they do, what they say, what 

they do, Mr. Speaker, and we watch. We watch. And they’re 

standing there and they’re saying, okay, we’re just going to 

blindly follow. Whatever we’re told to do, we’ll do. It’s 

important to have faith, but not blind faith. You’ve got to be 

able to ask questions in how this affects things overall, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And the backbench over there is not saying a peep. They’re all 

hoping, well maybe if I’m quiet and I do this and I sacrifice my 

integrity under the altar of being in government and I might be 

in cabinet, so I’d better be quiet and I’d better do as I’m told. 

And, Mr. Speaker, all you’ve got to do is wait another 30 sleeps 

and you’ll find out whether you’re in cabinet or not, Mr. 

Speaker. But in the meantime, if you’re not in cabinet, if you’re 

not in cabinet, then what you should do is get up and speak your 

mind. Because obviously there’s only one reason you’re there, 

and that is to fill the backbench, stand up when you’re told to 

stand up, and vote for Bills that are contrary to what you 

fundamentally believe in, and that’s the issue of fairness. And 



April 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 987 

this Bill is contrary to that. It is contrary in many, many ways 

and, Mr. Speaker, in many, many aspects as well. 

 

So I point out to the young children out there, a quarter of a 

million of our future of our young kids and our youth are being 

excluded from this Bill. And the reason they’re being excluded, 

let me reiterate. The reason why they’re being excluded is 

because there is a plan to gerrymander the boundaries and the 

provincial constituencies to hopefully benefit the Saskatchewan 

Party government by adding three more MLAs. That’s the only 

reason they’re doing that. 

 

And what do they make comparisons to, Mr. Speaker? As the 

Government of Saskatchewan, what do they make comparisons 

to? PEI is doing it. That’s how Prince Edward Island does it out 

on the East Coast. That’s their answer. And people out there are 

sitting there just absolutely astounded. How could they make 

that comparison here? And yet when we talk about the 

economy, oh, we’re new West. When it comes to the 

constituency boundaries, oh, we’re PEI now. 

 

Why don’t you show some leadership and some gumption by 

saying this is wrong? Let’s go back and let’s not have the three 

more MLAs. Let’s rehire the workers we fired. Let’s refinance 

the programs that are important for the people of Saskatchewan. 

Let’s do things right. Let’s do things right. That’s what they 

should say, Mr. Speaker. They should get up, and they should 

speak. And they should certainly articulate to the people of 

Saskatchewan why they think this is wrong. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, because they all are hoping to have a chance 

to get in cabinet . . . I can tell you guys there’s probably going 

to be about maybe five or six changes. That’s it. My money’s 

on Bjornerud . . . I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker. My money’s on the 

member from Melville that he won’t be back in cabinet, Mr. 

Speaker. And I’m pretty sure of that. But all the rest of the guys 

are all hoping for positioning, Mr. Speaker. They’re all hoping 

for positioning, and that’s why they won’t speak out against this 

Bill. They won’t speak out against this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

because it’s all about positioning. 

 

And that’s unfair to the people of Saskatchewan. Why it’s 

unfair is you don’t position yourself based on how much you 

sacrifice on the altar of democracy. That’s not what that’s 

about. You can still keep your inner qualities and your strong 

beliefs. And yes, you can lose arguments, and majority always 

wins. We understand that. 

 

But there are some things you may not fundamentally believe. 

And some of those things, I think, are really tugging at your 

beliefs is this Bill, because the Bill excludes young people. The 

Bill asks for more MLAs. And the worst part of this Bill, the 

worst part of this Bill is simply the fact that it’s all part of the 

gerrymandering process attached to the political agenda of the 

Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker. That’s why this 

Bill should be defeated. That’s why this Bill should be tossed in 

the shredder or garbage can, never to be seen again. Never to be 

seen again, Mr. Speaker. And that Sask Party . . . The Sask 

Party members opposite will have the opportunity to actually 

take this Bill and kill it, Mr. Speaker. They can kill this Bill and 

say, we’re going to do something right. Let’s do it right. Let’s 

not try and, under the guise of what’s correct, put something 

forward when we know clearly it is the wrong thing to do. 

Now I want to talk a bit about the commission members itself, 

Mr. Speaker, because as an opposition party, we don’t want to 

challenge any of the qualities nor the integrity nor the merit of 

some of the commission members that the Sask Party might 

choose to sit on this particular process. They might want to 

have these commission members announced, and there may be 

some very good commission members. I hope that they’re as 

neutral as can be. So I don’t think that the NDP opposition is 

going to question the merits of any of the commission members. 

We’re not going to argue about those points because I think, at 

the very least, these people will come forward with some very 

good ideas and very good concepts, but above all else they 

come there with some very good merit. 

 

But the problem we’re going to have, Mr. Speaker, is the 

parameters in which they have to do their work. That’s where 

the problem lies, Mr. Speaker. And the Bill is very clear. It 

explains here, look, we’re going to make sure, we’re going to 

make sure that you have these parameters to work with. The 

Bill is quite clear. So why would you have those people that 

have that great integrity and great history be part of this 

commission when clearly the agenda has been drawn out for 

them, and they have very little room to work with? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to use the analogy I used before. It’s 

not to make light of this issue, but it’s the same process I 

always use when we talk about, whether it’s the Crowns or 

whether it’s different groups that this group works with. It’s 

much with the Boundaries Commission as the movie, The Jerk. 

You know the movie. I talked about this before. And again, The 

Jerk, starring Steve Martin. And Steve Martin is this, he’s this 

guy works at this circus. And he’s out there and he’s actually in 

this concession, not concession booth, but this prize booth. And 

of course people come there, and you put a ring on this bottle to 

get these . . . you win a prize. So the people say, what kind of 

prize? And what Steve Martin does in his movie role, he says, 

well if you get a ring on that bottle, you win everything this side 

of the stuffed animals, everything above the dolls, everything 

on this side of the money prize, and everything below the 

ornaments. Well, Mr. Speaker, in that little box were some 

erasers and pencils, you know, and that’s what the people won 

as prizes. 

 

Well what’s going to happen, Mr. Speaker? It’s going to be the 

same process that the Sask Party has with these commission 

members. They’re going to say, here’s all the rules. This is what 

you can’t do, and you can’t do this either, and you can’t include 

these people, and you can’t do this either. So what happens is 

you’ve got a very confined box in which you are able to operate 

with. And they’re going there with their integrity and the desire 

to do things well. If they are indeed neutral, they’re going to go 

there with good intentions, and all of a sudden they find 

themselves in a box. Well, we’re not allowed to do anything 

here because (a) we cannot include the young people, (b) we’ve 

only got a defined time to do this. The Act spells out what the 

parameters are, so what the heck are we doing here? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s why I think what’s going to happen, 

we suspect that there’s going to be more interference in this 

whole process because I don’t know if they’re going to allow 

certain people that can make a significant value to this thing to 

be able to sit on this commission. I think you’re going to see 

more political interference on the appointment of that 



988 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2012 

commission, Mr. Speaker. I suspect that’s what’s going to 

happen, Mr. Speaker. We are waiting to hear who’s going to be 

on the commission, Mr. Speaker. And we’re also going to see, 

we’re also going to see who they have put on there, Mr. 

Speaker. And if any of these members have Sask Party ties in 

any way, shape, or form, Mr. Speaker, then again it goes to beg 

the question, what is this all about? What is this all about? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we suspect that’s what’s going to happen 

with this particular Bill. And that’s the whole point, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re going to find out exactly who these commission 

members are. And, Mr. Speaker, I fear for the worst. That’s my 

particular position. I fear for the worst. Because there’s no way, 

there’s no way you’re going to do a number of things, Mr. 

Speaker; there’s no way you’re going to do a number of things 

and not do the final step, not do the final step. 

 

You’re going to have a Bill that’s going to exclude young 

people, so that really confuses a lot of different groups and 

organizations out there. And then you’re going to have a 

defined time in which this Bill has to be discussed. And 

absolutely every one of the Sask Party MLAs, you’re going to 

vote for this whether you like it or not. That’s a done deal, 

right? That process has been taken care of. Now we’re going to 

make sure we have the Bill that defines what they’re able to do 

or what they’re able to say or what they’re able to decide. So 

that part’s done. And the final step, I think, is to make sure they 

have commission members that they can politically influence in 

some way, shape, or form. 

 

So we’re waiting for that final coup de grâce on that particular 

Bill, and we’re going to pay very close attention, Mr. Speaker, 

to how these members are selected. And if there’s any 

affiliation at all with the Sask Party, it will lend argument to our 

point that this is all about gerrymandering the next election and 

make sure that this is going to be a . . . [inaudible] . . . process. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think overall that we’re going to watch 

very carefully how this is handled. We’re going to watch very 

carefully. And we ask the media, we ask the media that buys 

ink by the barrels to make sure they pay attention to this. 

Because I guess again, as we’ve pointed out, there are 

significant problems with this Bill. We’re going to ask the 

media to pay attention to this and expose the plan, to show that 

this is exactly about gerrymandering and the manipulation of 

the electoral process, Mr. Speaker. That is something I think is 

really important, that the people of Saskatchewan really have to 

watch. 

 

And the second point is, why are they excluding all the young 

people? That’s the second point. And the third point is, why do 

they bring in these more MLAs that cost millions of dollars 

more, millions of dollars more, at the expense of programs and 

people working for this government? It doesn’t make any sense, 

Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t make any sense. 

 

But from this Assembly’s perspective, the nine of us are going 

to watch how the 49 of them vote. And we’re going to see how, 

whether they stand up for democracy or whether they stand up 

for fairness or whether they stand up for the principled thing to 

do on this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker. This is all about values. 

This Bill will represent their values for years to come. This Bill 

will test their values, Mr. Speaker, as to where they stand as 

men and women of the Saskatchewan Party caucus, as to 

whether they believe this Bill is fundamentally wrong. They’ll 

either skip the vote or they’ll sit down, and they will make sure 

that they do the right thing. 

 

And that’s one of the things, one of the points I would raise, 

Mr. Speaker, is I implore the members of the Saskatchewan 

Party to stand up and speak up and say, you know, this is not 

fair. This is not right to exclude kids. And yes, okay, if the 

endgame is to have more MLAs, then that’s fair. We shouldn’t 

interfere with it, you can say. But there’s a lot of interference 

with it, and you’ve got to make sure that interference is taken 

away completely, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the other thing you’ve got to ask is whether the 

constituents that supported you really wanted more MLAs. 

They’re not going to phone and say, we didn’t want more 

MLAs. You’ve got to ask them: did you guys want more 

MLAs? And the resounding answer would be no. And the sad 

reality is not one Saskatchewan Party member across the way 

consulted with any one of their constituents. They didn’t, they 

didn’t consult with any one of their constituents. And that’s the 

unfairness, Mr. Speaker. That’s the unfairness. And not one 

person was asked about this. 

 

And in the last election, I wouldn’t mind to have heard their 

Premier get up and say, oh our plan is, in growing 

Saskatchewan, we want to grow the number of MLAs. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, he didn’t say that. And not one member of their 

cabinet nor their team said that once anywhere. Had they said it 

once: we want three more MLAs, and guess what, people of 

Saskatchewan? We’re going to exclude your family members. 

Your children and your grandchildren are not going to count in 

this process. They didn’t say that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And furthermore we’re going to make sure we draft the Bill up 

where we’re able to determine the outcome of this Bill. And yet 

we’re going to try and have what we think is going to be an 

independent commission to determine how this thing is going to 

work, which is a process that we’ll go through, but probably at 

the end of the day won’t change what our desired plan of action 

is. That’s exactly what’s going on here, Mr. Speaker. And 

everybody in Saskatchewan knows that, clear as day. They 

know that, and that’s the whole point. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would point out again, what people want 

to know out there, what the numbers are, what the numbers are 

of young people that we’re actually excluding. And the 

numbers are, Mr. Speaker, 233,905 people that this Bill 

excludes, that are under the age of 19, and that’s according to a 

2006 census. So I think the rationale of excluding young 

people, to that amount of young people, is absolutely ridiculous, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to again . . . I have a lot more I want to say on this 

particular Bill, but I want to say the numbers again, the numbers 

again of the provinces that have the MLA system in place — of 

course we all have them but the ones that have the greater 

numbers, again — Saskatchewan has 17,000 voters; Manitoba’s 

got 21,000 voters per riding; and Alberta’s got 43,000; BC’s got 

51,000 voters per riding; and Ontario has 120,000 voters for 



April 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 989 

every constituency or riding they have in that province. And yet 

not one of them, not one of them are asking for more MLAs. 

The lowest amount of voters per constituency is in the province 

of Saskatchewan, and the Saskatchewan Party’s saying, guess 

what? We need more MLAs. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan . . . We know in 

opposition, but the people of Saskatchewan clearly know this is 

all about political gamesmanship. This is all about 

manipulation. And when they talked about fixed election dates, 

I didn’t mean rigged election dates. I didn’t think it was, you 

know, to that extent. But today now, they talk about fixed 

elections. It has a whole different meaning to the people of 

Saskatchewan and especially to the opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s why this Bill is so poorly thought out and the people 

of the government think that this Bill, on Bill C-36, is going to 

zip under the radar and the people of Saskatchewan don’t know 

about it. We will see, Mr. Speaker. We will see. We have a long 

ways to go on this Bill and it’s not something that the people of 

Saskatchewan want. I don’t know how many more different 

ways I can say this. Perhaps in Cree I can explain very quickly. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

And very quickly the word in Cree is, if you wanted more 

MLAs, the Sask Party should’ve said that during the election. 

And not one person that ran for the Sask Party ever told people, 

guess what, if we get in we’re going to have more MLAs. 

Imagine, imagine the response you would’ve got, Mr. Speaker. 

I don’t think you would’ve even staged a positive 

meet-and-greet at the mall. Even that wouldn’t have worked 

after that. So I think it’s important to point out that this really 

flies in the face of democracy and talks about the value of the 

Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I know in northern Saskatchewan there was a lot of 

promises made in the last election. And I don’t remember, I 

don’t remember any of the opposition candidates, the 

opposition candidates saying to people . . . I don’t know if it 

happened in Cumberland, but I didn’t hear it in Athabasca. I 

didn’t hear it in Athabasca saying, guess what, you guys? If you 

elect the Sask Party MLA, we’ll have more MLAs. You know, I 

don’t think I heard that, Mr. Speaker. The member from 

Cumberland says he never heard that either. So, well mind you, 

there was nothing ever said, Mr. Speaker, but I don’t think that 

was a specific comment nor was it was a specific promise that 

was made by the Sask Party candidates in our area. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I think a few of the Sask Party supporters, 

not only in Cumberland but in Athabasca, are mad at this 

government because they’ve done away with the enterprise 

regions, you know. And that was a kind of a confusing thing, 

and that’s one of the casualties of the last budget, Mr. Speaker. 

And this, we’re taking the money from the enterprise regions, 

the money they’re spending there, they’re taking that money 

and they’re going to be hiring more MLAs now. 

 

So the plan that they have for growing the economy in northern 

Saskatchewan is, oh the enterprise regions — where we start 

coordinating the economy and training people in working and 

doing all these things — well they’re going to pull the pin on 

that one and we’re going to give you more MLAs, you know, 

and there’s going to be about three of them. 

 

So the people of Saskatchewan are saying, well how does that 

work? How does that work? Well it works because they do it in 

PEI. So we say, okay, it happened in PEI, that’s how you do it. 

And oh, by the way, all the Aboriginal youth in your 

community, we’re not going to count them either. Yes, they 

don’t count anymore. And oh, by the way, we’re all going to 

vote for this. They were told how to vote. 

 

You see, Mr. Speaker, how wrong-headed this Bill is. It is 

absolutely something that people of Saskatchewan should take 

notice of. The federal boundaries commission is the same 

principle, Mr. Speaker. It’s the same principle. There’s a lot of 

manipulation then when those boundaries were determined. 

 

And I go back to northern Saskatchewan. I think the member 

from Cumberland and I can agree that the northern part of 

Saskatchewan should be one federal riding. But somewhere 

along the lines, they kind of manipulated the riding to include a 

forestry fringe in some of the larger centres like Meadow Lake, 

Big River. And we respect the people of those communities, 

but, Mr. Speaker, there’s a totally different language, totally 

different economy, totally different customs. And we should 

have our own federal riding. But somewhere along the line 

there was that manipulation. And I think there’s a few other 

places involved — Saskatoon, Humboldt — another good 

example. And people can see throughout the province that the 

manipulation occurred. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s unfortunate, 

and it really flies in the face of democracy. 

 

Now what I think is important as well is that we have more 

discussion on this matter. And something that I think is really 

important, that people begin to research what the Bill really 

implies. We have to begin to research what the Bill really 

implies. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think I want to also point out to my 

learned friend here that we have to get people motivated. I think 

there’s no question from my mind that people out there begin to 

understand what exactly is going on. That if they come out to 

the Assembly, that we make sure that their voices are heard. 

Because the thing about it, if people really try to get active, they 

really try to get active and they start paying attention to this, I 

think overall that if you look at the strength of the people — it 

doesn’t matter where they come from — if you look at the 

strength of the people, they have to be able to come here and 

flex that strength to show them that they mean business when it 

comes to this Bill and that the Saskatchewan Party government 

shouldn’t be able to manipulate, manipulate the process to their 

advantage, because that’s not fair. And not anybody in the 

conservative corners or the reform corners from where they 

come from, and nobody in those corridors that really want to 

see manipulation to the extent that it is happening. 

 

So I think what the point that we would raise, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to just quickly go through some of the stats as I mentioned 

again. If you look at the editorials, we talk about a person like 

Murray Mandryk. And Mandryk certainly speaks about 

fairness, and he’s supposed to be neutral and he certainly is. 

Sometimes I get upset with him. I mean, one time he gave me a 

C minus as a minister. But I like him today. I notice how they 

all smile and wave at him until his next article, and then all of a 



990 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2012 

sudden he’s not getting smiled or waved at. 

 

But what happened, Mr. Speaker, is him as well, he’s got to be 

neutral. And he pointed out that there’s nobody in 

Saskatchewan that ever called for more MLAs. And I think 

that’s going to be a very, very difficult sell for the people of 

Saskatchewan, and certainly the Saskatchewan Party is going to 

be very, very upset when they find out that the people of 

Saskatchewan didn’t want more MLAs. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important, these numbers once 

again. I think this is my 11th time. Saskatchewan has 17,000 

voters per riding. Manitoba’s got 21,000. Alberta’s got 43,000. 

British Columbia’s got 51,000, and Ontario has 120,000 voters, 

Mr. Speaker, per riding, per riding. And Saskatchewan’s got 

17,000. And not one of the jurisdictions throughout the country 

of Canada are asking for more MLAs, or in the case of Ontario, 

more MPPs. Not one. 

 

In fact, the province that they made reference to or made 

comparisons to, Mr. Speaker, was PEI. And last I checked on 

the news wire, PEI is not asking for more MLAs, Mr. Speaker. 

The smallest province in the country is not asking for more 

MLAs. And it’s just shameful that the Sask Party is contrary to 

all the other jurisdictions by asking for more MLAs, and yet 

they have one of the lowest or the lowest voter per riding in the 

country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I would point out that if you look at the costs of having 

three more MLAs, Mr. Speaker, it is something that I think that 

people need to pay close attention to. They shake their heads 

when we in opposition say millions of dollars. Well don’t 

forget, over this next four terms, you’re looking at between 2 

and $3 million of the costs that are going to be happening over 

this term. And shouldn’t that 2 or $3 million be used elsewhere? 

Maybe they could have helped fund the enterprise region. 

Perhaps they could have put the money back into the seniors’ 

prescription plan. Oh, maybe they could have kept the 

conservation offices open up in Pelican Narrows and Sandy 

Bay. Or maybe they could have kept the firefighters on. 

 

There’s so many different ways you can spend that 2 or $3 

million. And the Saskatchewan Party government is going to 

simply say, no, the people of Saskatchewan, we’re not going to 

listen to you. We’re going to add more MLAs. We’re going to 

make sure that we fire all these people so we can have more 

politicians in the province. And, Mr. Speaker, that is not 

growing the future of Saskatchewan in a sustainable way. That 

is just pure politics in the worst form, Mr. Speaker. It’s pure 

politics in the worst form, and that’s a shame, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s why this particular Bill, that’s why this particular 

Bill is so problematic for the Sask Party, because it really 

denotes value. It denotes their beliefs as human beings. And if 

we stand here today and we watch how they vote when this Bill 

comes out, when it comes up for the vote, Mr. Speaker, we are 

going to find out where their value system is right at that 

moment. We’re going to see if they’re going to stand up for the 

constituents and how they’re going to determine whether 

there’s more points as they should try and represent the people 

properly, whether there’s more premise on that, or whether 

there’s more points to be made with the cabinet in terms of 

trying to be a member of cabinet. We’re going to see where 

their priorities are and how they’re going to respond to this 

challenge to not vote for that Bill and to let the Bill die a good 

death. Because that’s what it should die — a good, sudden 

death, because that’s exactly what this is all about. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know nine MLAs on this side of the 

Assembly know that it flies in the face of democracy. And all 

nine of us will pick up that Bill. We’ll wrap it up neatly in a 

nice little package. We’ll tie a big rock to it, and we’ll go throw 

it in the deepest part of the Churchill River system, never to be 

seen again. And that’s exactly where that Bill should be, Mr. 

Speaker. That should be right amongst the loon droppings, 

never to be seen again, Mr. Speaker. That’s the most important 

message. 

 

So again I would point out to the people of Saskatchewan, 

we’ve got tons more to say about this particular Bill, because 

this is only one family and one perspective from one MLA. 

We’ve got tons of other people that are going to join in the 

debate. Because, Mr. Speaker, we are going to make sure 

people know that this Bill is contrary to the good, solid 

foundation that was built by the veterans and the many people 

of this country, Mr. Speaker. And that foundation believes in 

one principle, and that principle is having a solid democracy. 

And this Bill is totally contrary to democracy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again I want to point out those numbers. Saskatchewan has 

an average of 17,000 voters per riding; 21,000 in Manitoba. 

Alberta has 43,000. British Columbia has 51,000 voters per 

riding, and Ontario has 120,000 voters per riding, Mr. Speaker. 

It is absolutely amazing the staggering amount of voters, 

especially in Ontario, and not one MPP or not one MLA is 

asking, we need more MLAs. But in Saskatchewan under the 

Saskatchewan Party, that’s all they seem to talk about, Mr. 

Speaker, and that is shameful. That is not the reason they were 

sent here, to ask for more politicians, when they’re cutting 

programs and they’re killing jobs for people that have worked 

for this government for years and years and years, Mr. Speaker. 

So I think it’s important . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The time now being after the hour of 

adjournment, this House stands adjourned to 10 a.m. tomorrow 

morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Huyghebaert .............................................................................................................................................................................. 959 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 959 

  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 959 

  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 960 

  Parent ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 960 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 960 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 960 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 985 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 961 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 961 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 961 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 961 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Remembering Vimy Ridge 

  Moe ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 961 

 Pink Shirt Day 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 962 

 Clerk Celebrates 25 Years of Service 

  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 962 

 Tartan Day 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 962 

  Stewart ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 962 

 Distinguished Alumni and Awards Night 

  Steinley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 963 

 Saskatchewan Budget 

  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 963 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Funding for University of Saskatchewan 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 963 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 964 

 Support for the Film Industry 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 965 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 965 

 Tourism Saskatchewan 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 966 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 966 

 Plans for Forestry Operations 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 968 

  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 968 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Congratulations to Clerk on 25 Years of Service 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 968 

  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 969 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 969 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 36 — The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 969 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 972 

  Harrison (point of order) ......................................................................................................................................................... 973 

  McCall (point of order) ............................................................................................................................................................ 973 

  The Speaker (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................... 973 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


