




















































Hansard: November 27, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 19A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 27, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2215 

 November 27, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all the members of this Legislative Assembly, I introduce a 

fine group of two grade 10 classes in the west gallery 

accompanied by teacher Perry Ostapowich and Mr. Scott Wallis. 

 

These students are again students of Mr. Ostapowich’s, and I just 

want to thank Perry for bringing these students year after year to 

the Legislative Assembly. The work that he does in his class to 

engage them in the provincial legislative system is truly 

commendable, and he’s just been a great person to be doing that. 

 

Along with these people there’s some . . . I’d like to mention a 

couple specific, Mr. Speaker. They’re all a great bunch of kids and 

quite a few of them I do know. Two I want to point out. One is 

Kayla Perkins. Kayla, you want to wave? I’ve known Kayla for 

quite a while since she moved to Yorkton. Her mom and dad 

actually took over our old business in Yorkton and she’s quite an 

accomplished singer. She actually won the same competition, 

the GX Junior Star Search that my daughter, youngest daughter 

won a number of years back. And she’s very talented and I 

welcome her to her Assembly. 

 

Along with her is Gabrielle Thomson who is the daughter of, 

again, good friends of ours, the youth pastors of Prairie Harvest 

Christian Life Centre. Gabrielle, give us a wave. And again, 

great family, great friends, and Gabrielle’s just a fine young 

lady. I’m happy to welcome her to this Legislative Assembly. 

So I ask all members to welcome them to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Earlier 

this morning while we were, I was still in Swift Current, I 

received a tweet from one of the classmates that have joined us 

in the gallery there. It reads as follows: “@PremierBradWall 

Hello again . . . can you introduce me in the legislature #please 

and thank you.” 

 

So to you and through you, Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce 

Clyde Mariano seated in the gallery there and welcome him to 

his Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

honour for me to stand today and introduce someone who is a 

great leader in my constituency, and that would be the mayor of 

Humboldt, Malcolm Eaton. Malcolm works tirelessly and he 

thought he might be able to retire this last round of elections but 

the city of Humboldt was having none of it. And so we’re great 

to have him back in the leadership role for the city of 

Humboldt. So I want everyone to join me in welcoming 

Malcolm to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join the minister in welcoming Mayor Eaton to his legislature. I 

know he plays a huge role in Humboldt and right across the 

province bringing fresh, new ideas to the urban issues that face 

people right in our province. So on behalf of the opposition, I 

join the minister in welcoming him to our legislature. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to this Assembly, I’d like to join with the Minister 

of Crown Investments Corporation and the member opposite in 

welcoming Mayor Eaton to the Assembly. 

 

Mayor Eaton is not only the mayor of the great community of 

Humboldt, but he is also currently the Acting Chair of the city 

mayors’ caucus, a part of the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association or SUMA. Had an opportunity to 

chat with him earlier. I thank him for all the good work he’s 

been doing and I look forward to a great relationship with him 

down the road. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, seated in your gallery we have a number of guests 

who are here this afternoon and who will be joining us for an 

MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] reception after the 

proceedings end this afternoon. And hopefully there’s a good 

turnout among members of the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a number of guests from the Alzheimer 

Society of Saskatchewan, and I would be pleased to introduce 

them: Diane Lemon, the president of the society; Therese 

Jelinski who’s a board member; as well as other board 

members, Dr. Marla Davidson, Fiona Adams, Ken Rasmussen; 

a family caregiver, Edna Parrott; Joanne Michael, the program 

service manager for the Alzheimer Society; as well as Joanne 

Bracken, the CEO [chief executive officer] of the Alzheimer 

Society. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to welcome 

them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming the individuals from the Alzheimer 

Society of Saskatchewan. Thank you so much for being here. 

To Diane Lemon, president of the board, thank you for being 

here as well as Joanne Bracken, CEO. And to all of the board 

members and family members, we’re so happy that you’re here 

today, and thank you for the work that you do throughout the 

year for many Saskatchewan families here in the province. 



2216 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2012 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I would like to introduce someone that’s very special in 

my life. Seated in your gallery is my sister and my friend, Edna 

Irwin. And Edna’s making her sessional visit to this Chamber 

so she is really no stranger. But I think the Minister of Finance 

put it very well when he said it looks like there’s going to be a 

lot of PST [provincial sales tax] dollars in the government 

coffers after we do a little bit of shopping up here. So I would 

like everyone to join me in welcoming Edna to her Legislative 

Chamber. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 

Policing. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like 

to introduce a constituent of mine, Ms. Barb Butler. I met Barb 

a few years ago when she invited me to the Positive Steps 

Walkathon which is hosted by the Saskatchewan Brain Injury 

Association. This association began in 1985 and helps 

individuals and families deal with the effects of traumatic or 

acquired brain injury. Barb herself is a survivor, and over the 

years has donated selflessly to this worthwhile cause. She also 

serves as vice-president of Brain Injury Association of Canada. 

 

Something that has been on Barb’s bucket list for a while now 

has been to meet the Premier. She will have the honour of 

meeting him today following question period. I would like all 

members to join me in welcoming Barb to her Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

offer two sets of introductions. First and foremost we have 

some distinguished guests that are joining us, and I’d like to 

introduce Mr. Rajat Nag, a two-time graduate from the 

University of Saskatchewan in engineering and business, and 

who is now the managing director general of the Asian 

Development Bank. He’s joined by his colleague Mr. Das 

Narayanan who is with the department of external relations for 

the Asian Development Bank. 

 

As well they’re joined by Len Edwards, no stranger to this 

province. Len is originally from Melfort. He is a strategic 

adviser for Gowlings. He is a former deputy minister of Foreign 

Affairs, former deputy minister of Agriculture and Agri-Food 

Canada, former deputy minister of International Trade, and 

former ambassador to South Korea and Japan. And they’re also 

joined by Dr. Douglas Goold, who is a director with the Asia 

Pacific Foundation. Mr. Speaker, these individuals today have 

met with the Premier and work tirelessly to ensure that Canada 

and Saskatchewan continue to be connected to the Asia Pacific 

region and well beyond. And so I’d ask all members to 

welcome them to their legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I could, just briefly and importantly, I’d also 

like to introduce . . . Pardon me. First I’ll catch the pass. I’d like 

to introduce Anne Fitzgerald, the chief legal officer for 

Cineplex, and with her is someone who needs no introduction 

in this House, Mr. Doug Richardson. Both have worked 

tirelessly to ensure that Saskatchewan continues to be a site of 

investment and interest and activity for Cineplex and many 

other entities. So to both of those individuals, I’d ask all 

members to help me welcome them to the legislature of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, just very quickly to add to the 

hon. member’s welcome of our guests from ADB, from the 

Asian Development Bank. We did have a great meeting this 

morning. We also welcome Mr. Goold from the Asia Pacific 

Foundation and Mr. Edwards. 

 

This is an area of the world that’s very important for 

Saskatchewan, increasingly important as we seek to diversify 

our export interests away from too much of a dependence on 

our friends to the south. And we welcome their counsel and 

advice as we try to do this, Mr. Speaker. So I join with the 

member in welcoming these gentlemen to the Legislative 

Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — At this time I would like to take the 

opportunity to introduce guests that we have sitting behind the 

bar and in the gallery from the Midwest Legislative Council 

Exchange, which is an exchange between Saskatchewan and 

US [United States] Midwest jurisdictions. 

 

Seated on the floor behind the bar, we have Senator Mike Vehle 

of South Dakota. He also has some family connections into the 

Saskatoon area. We have Senator John Nelson of Nebraska, 

who had an aunt and uncle living at Drinkwater; Senator Ed 

Charbonneau of Indiana, whose father was born at Simpson; 

and Representative Deborah Berry of Iowa, and she’s looking 

for someone to adopt her from Saskatchewan. 

 

Seated up in the Speaker’s gallery we have Mrs. John Nelson; 

Mr. Brian Herman from the Canadian consulate in Chicago; 

Mr. Brian Shipley, Canadian consulate in Minneapolis; and Ms. 

Ilene Grossman, assistant director, Council of State 

Governments for the Midwest. Welcome to the Saskatchewan 

legislature. 

 

I’d also like to take the opportunity to introduce, seated in the 

Speaker’s gallery, 20 grade 10 students from the Gordon F. 

Kells High School in Carlyle, in the best constituency in 

Saskatchewan. Accompanying them are teachers Bryce Birch, 

Audra Reeves, chaperones Christina Canart and Dan Reeves. I 

would ask that you welcome them to the legislature as well. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

proud to stand today to present a petition on cell service. And 

the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel delivers 

cellular service to the Canoe Lake First Nation, along with 



November 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2217 

the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans Bay; 

Buffalo River First Nation, also known as Dillon, and the 

neighbouring communities of Michel Village and St. 

George’s Hill; English River First Nations, also known as 

Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch Narrows 

First Nations along with the community of Turnor Lake, 

including all the neighbouring communities in each of 

those areas. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are 

primarily from Dillon but they also have petitions signed from 

all the other communities in the area. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise to petition on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to our provincial finances. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada, in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide sustainable, responsible, and trustworthy 

financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 

people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 

taxpayers, and businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

LeRoy, Saskatoon, and Yorkton. I so submit. 

 

[13:45] 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

A Beacon of Hope 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, several years ago, our former 

Governor General, Michaëlle Jean, wrote about her mother’s 

experience with Alzheimer’s disease. I remember being deeply 

moved by her words. She wrote: 

 

My mother became my sick child, my dependent child 

facing an irreversible countdown. 

 

Everything faded away and was lost: her ability to read, 

her ability to walk, her mastery of language, her memory 

of my name, her memory of who I was. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are moving words about a deeply 

heart-wrenching experience of a very long and very slow 

goodbye to a precious loved one. And for thousands of 

Saskatchewan families, those words hit very close to home. 

 

For all of those families, Mr. Speaker, the Alzheimer Society of 

Saskatchewan is a much needed beacon of hope. The society 

offers both help for today in the form of support and education 

for those with dementia and their caregivers, and the society 

offers hope for tomorrow by searching for the cause and the 

cure, including support for existing research that is happening 

at the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in expressing 

our sincere gratitude to the Alzheimer Society of Saskatchewan 

for their vital contribution to our province. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Christmas Kettle Campaign 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s that time of year again. The holiday season is upon us. 

Christmas is beginning to show its colours. Carols are playing 

throughout the city, and the familiar sound of the Salvation 

Army kettle campaign is ringing throughout the city. 

 

This past Saturday I had the opportunity of manning a 

Christmas kettle in my constituency of Regina Qu’Appelle 

Valley. I had the pleasure of visiting with many Regina 

residents as they stopped by to generously donate to such a 

worthwhile cause. Mr. Speaker, Canada’s first kettle was used 

in St. John’s, Newfoundland in 1906. Today the familiar kettles 

are seen in more than 200 locations nationwide. Mr. Speaker, 

the kettles are set up in 14 different malls and stores around 

Regina to raise money for those less fortunate. Kettle locations 

include all the major malls, liquor stores, and large retail stores. 

 

In 2011 the Salvation Army was able to raise 180,000 in 

Regina. Mr. Speaker, this year the Salvation Army hopes to 

raise over 200,000 for those who are less fortunate. I am 

positive that the Saskatchewan spirit of generosity will have no 

problem in passing this goal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members, if they see a kettle, 

please don’t hesitate to donate. It doesn’t matter how large or 

how small; everything helps for people who are less fortunate 

to have a wonderful Christmas. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

St. Andrew’s College Centennial 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This summer St. 

Andrew’s College at the University of Saskatchewan celebrated 

its centennial with renewed faith and a vision for the next 

century. 

 

Founded in 1912, the Presbyterian Theological College in 

Saskatoon was proclaimed by an Act of the Saskatchewan 

legislature in 1913. First located in a large family home on 

Albert Avenue, the college began its academic training in the 

fall of 1914 with an enrolment of 37 students. With the 

formation of the United Church of Canada in 1925, 



2218 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2012 

Presbyterian Theological College was renamed St. Andrew’s 

College in honour of its Presbyterian founders, the discipleship 

of Andrew, and the commitment to the newly formed Canadian 

church. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the current principal and former premier, 

Reverend Lorne Calvert, says St. Andrew’s has graduated 635 

students over the years. These students were all invited back to 

the celebration weekend in July that included a gala banquet 

and tours of the college and the old barn. 

 

Mr. Calvert says in many ways the college is still the same as it 

was in 1912. I quote: 

 

From the beginning, the college has believed in the 

integration of theological studies with all other areas of 

study. We believe theological study should be done in the 

context of other disciplines and in the context of the 

world. That has always been the ethos of St. Andrew’s: To 

prepare people for ministry but in the context of society 

and the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in 

congratulating St. Andrew’s College on their 100th year. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Phones for a Fresh Start Program 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 

today to commend an outstanding charitable initiative by one of 

Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations. SaskTel’s Phones for a 

Fresh Start program, through a partnership with the provincial 

association of house and services of Saskatchewan, helps 

victims of domestic abuse by providing phones and prepaid 

phone cards to 19 Saskatchewan women’s shelters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, often women who flee to shelters leave their 

abusive situation with nothing. Having a cellphone can provide 

them with a way to keep in touch with family and friends as 

well as a valuable asset in an emergency situation. They can 

also use it once they leave the shelter to help them get 

established again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Phones for a Fresh Start program will accept 

any type of hand-held wireless device regardless of whether 

they are working or not. The phones are then refurbished and 

donated to the Provincial Association of Transition Houses. If 

the phone is unable to be repaired, it is then recycled. The funds 

raised from recycling these phones will go towards the purchase 

of prepaid phone cards for PATHS [Provincial Association of 

Transition Houses Saskatchewan]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to date there have been over 35,000 phones 

recycled. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking 

SaskTel and the Provincial Association of Transition Houses of 

Saskatchewan for this outstanding community partnership. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

New Affordable Housing in Prince Albert 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise in the 

House to talk about a new affordable housing development that 

opened in Prince Albert on November 23rd. This four-unit 

development will provide much needed housing in this 

community for seniors caring for dependants. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government, through Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation, is proud to partner with Prince Albert Community 

Housing Society Inc. to make this project happen. The total cost 

of these homes is estimated at $744,000. Of that amount, I’m 

pleased to announce that SHC [Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation] contributed $520,500 to this project. The 

remaining funds were provided by P.A. [Prince Albert] 

Community Housing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is heartwarming to have so many people come 

together to help more Prince Albert seniors find housing that 

they can afford. This initiative is a fine example of our shared 

commitment to putting people first and helping them to secure 

their futures through affordable housing. I am pleased to note 

that since November ’07, our government has assisted in the 

development of 132 affordable rental units in Prince Albert, 

including 26 units for seniors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

commending Prince Albert Community Housing for joining 

with us to take action on the need for additional rental housing 

to accommodate seniors and their dependants. Now four more 

families have a safe, quality place to call home. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Fighting Alzheimer’s Disease 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 

today to bring awareness to a disease that impacted many 

families throughout Saskatchewan. Alzheimer’s disease is a 

fatal and progressive degenerative disease that destroys brain 

cells. It is the most common form of dementia, accounting for 

64 per cent of all dementias in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Alzheimer’s disease is not a normal part of aging. 

Symptoms include having difficulty remembering, making 

decisions, and performing everyday activities. These changes 

can affect the way a person feels and acts. There’s currently no 

way to stop the disease, but research is improving the way we 

provide care. With a growing number of seniors in the province 

that already has a significant older population, our government 

recognizes the importance of providing support to those dealing 

with Alzheimer’s disease. A good example of this is the First 

Link program. 

 

This program is a referral system designed to directly link 

individuals who are newly diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease 

and their families with the Alzheimer Society for services and 

support at the time of diagnosis and throughout the duration of 

the disease. It is a great joint effort among health care 

providers, the Alzheimer Society, patients, and family 

members. This program ensures better quality care and 

enhances a quality of life for those diagnosed with the disease. 



November 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2219 

Mr. Speaker, the Alzheimer Society is here today, and I ask all 

members to join me in thanking them for their contributions in 

the fight against Alzheimer’s. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

University-Industry Research Partnership Celebrated 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On November 

16th I had the opportunity to attend a significant event at the 

University of Saskatchewan College of Engineering. This event 

celebrated a university-industry research partnership featuring 

Venmar CES Inc. and the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] 

College of Engineering. Venmar CES specializes in the 

commercial air-to-air energy recovery ventilation. Their 

products aim to protect the environment and lower costs in 

HVAC [heating, ventilating, and air conditioning] systems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the company was started by a U of S researcher, 

Robert Besant, in the 1970s. They are leaders in the industry, 

Mr. Speaker. They continue to pioneer new technology and 

innovations here and around the world. This local company has 

been involved with the construction of what will be the tallest 

building in the western hemisphere — One World Trade 

Centre. Because of their drive to raise the bar on innovation, 

Mr. Speaker, they are participating in this internationally 

renowned project. This is a prime example of a Saskatchewan 

success story, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This type of university-private research sector collaboration 

benefits students and the company alike. To date Venmar CES 

has helped fund 20 U of S master’s and Ph.D. [Doctor of 

Philosophy] student projects. Research done by the engineering 

students will help shape the future of how buildings worldwide 

are heated and cooled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 

Venmar CES and the College of Engineering as they continue 

their partnership. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

State of Provincial Finances 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard optimistic 

budget predictions from this government before. The sad reality 

though has been deficit — three consecutive years verified by 

our Provincial Auditor. 

 

The Sask Party has lots of spin and PR [public relations], but its 

words don’t match the budgetary reality. Clearly this budget’s 

off track, confirmed in today’s mid-year report: a debt increase 

of more than $1 billion in this year alone; a $50 million draw 

from the rainy day fund, our savings, with another $150 million 

to be drained next year planned already, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why at this time of prosperity is the Sask Party 

increasing debt and draining our savings? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I was honoured to present the update to the 

Saskatchewan financial picture this morning, Mr. Speaker. The 

mid-year was presented early this morning, Mr. Speaker, and it 

shows something that the NDP [New Democratic Party] would 

not understand. It shows that we have a balanced budget in the 

General Revenue Fund. It shows that we have a balanced 

budget on the summary financial basis, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

understand full well that this budget is a balanced budget. It is 

one where revenue exceeds expenditures, and it will remain that 

way, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, a word that sums up this 

mid-year statement is deferral. The Sask Party is punting school 

projects in education instead of investing and building the 

schools and repairing the schools that we need. 

 

They’re punting projects in the Crown sector, over $200 

million, instead of investing to make the improvements needed 

for families and in our growing communities, all of this to paint 

a picture that supports that public relations line. And the 

deferrals, the punting of projects, were only identified in the 

technical briefings instead of that government being straight 

with the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the schools and infrastructure 

we need, how does punting needed and planned projects to next 

year do anything other than defer reporting a financial problem 

for next year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On budget 

day we said we would have a balanced budget. Today we have 

a balanced budget. On budget day we said our economy would 

be leading the nation. Today our economy is leading the nation. 

We said Saskatchewan would continue to grow. Today 

Saskatchewan continues to grow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, unfortunately some forecasts are not quite so 

accurate, like the NDP forecasts of gloom and doom. That 

member forecast a deficit. Wrong. That member forecast our 

economy going in the tank, Mr. Speaker. Wrong. That member 

forecast huge program cuts. Wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the economy is strong. The budget is balanced. 

The province is on the right track, despite all the NDP’s 

predictions of gloom and doom. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, actions of government 

speak louder than words, and in the case of that minister, that’s 

difficult. And this government is scrambling, making 

short-sighted decisions and sell-offs. It’s punting needed 



2220 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2012 

projects to next year. It’s selling off assets like ISC 

[Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan], land, and 

affordable homes. It’s draining millions from our savings. It’s 

putting the public at risk with a costly privatized approach to 

our infrastructure. It’s making cuts in health, education, and 

more. 

 

With such a time of opportunity in this province with all of our 

natural resources and our growing population, why is the Sask 

Party deferring schools and infrastructure, cutting services, 

selling off assets, draining savings, and racking up debt? It 

doesn’t make any sense at all. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Before that member starts to look at 

something else, he should look at what goes on within his own 

campaign budget, Mr. Speaker. And it’s not just the 

Saskatchewan Party who says that that member’s numbers 

don’t add up. Here’s what NDP candidate Erin Weir said on 

October the 18th, Leader-Post. And I quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wotherspoon’s policy is a “wish list with no indications 

of how much any of it would cost or how to pay for it.” 

Wotherspoon admitted that.  

 

Only the NDP would have a Finance critic who can’t cost out 

his own campaign platform, can’t balance his own budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan budget is balanced. It’s 

balanced on the General Revenue Fund side. It’s balanced on 

the summary side. This is good news for Saskatchewan, and the 

only people who don’t seem to get it are the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Support for Dementia Patients and Their Caregivers 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the recent Taking 

the Pulse survey conducted by the University of Saskatchewan 

and the CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation], nearly 44 

per cent of Saskatchewan people identified dementia such as 

Alzheimer’s disease as a problem within their own family. 

That’s a huge proportion of our population that is directly 

affected by this disease. 

 

My question to the Minister of Health is this: does he agree 

with me that Alzheimer’s disease and related dementia ought to 

be a key priority for the provincial government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Certainly this is a significant issue that is in our province, Mr. 

Speaker. We know that roughly 18,000 people in Saskatchewan 

have been diagnosed with Alzheimer’s or other related 

dementias. We know that this has a significant, takes a 

significant toll, not only on their life but also their family life, 

Mr. Speaker. And we also know that, the way the trends are 

going, that by 2030 the number of people that will be diagnosed 

with Alzheimer’s and other related dementias will be double 

what it is today when you look at those that are diagnosed on a 

yearly basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we appreciate the good work of the Saskatchewan 

Alzheimer Society. I look forward to continuing our working 

relationship that we have between the Ministry of Health and 

the Alzheimer Society. And, Mr. Speaker, I suspect there’ll be a 

follow-up question. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to hear that 

the minister sees this as a priority. Let’s look at some of the 

dollar figures from province to province. Manitoba provides 

about $210,000 per year to their Alzheimer Society. British 

Columbia provides $1 million per year and Alberta provides 

nearly $1.4 million per year. Yet despite the fact that the 

Alzheimer Society of Saskatchewan provides crucial support to 

those affected by dementia, they receive just $50,000 in 

government funding. That’s 3.5 per cent of what the Alberta 

society receives. 

 

My question to the Minister of Health is this: does he agree 

with me that $50,000 in funding is not nearly enough for an 

organization that provides such vital services to Saskatchewan 

families? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, I and this government recognizes the 

good work of the Saskatchewan Alzheimer Society with the 

funding that they are allocated by the provincial government. 

We know that the First Link program has done significant work 

to enhance the quality of life for those that suffer from 

Alzheimer’s and related dementias, Mr. Speaker. It helps to 

build those, bridge those gaps in terms of providing that 

referrals and that assistance that people and their families who 

suffer from this disease, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we do know, Mr. Speaker, and I acknowledge that the 

Alzheimer Society has put forward a proposal that would see an 

expansion of this program. Of course that will be taken in 

consideration with all of the competing priorities of our budget, 

our budget discussions, Mr. Speaker. And I look forward to that 

furthering that work. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Dementia has a 

horrendous effect on caregivers: 75 per cent of caregivers, the 

majority of whom are seniors themselves, develop 

psychological illness as a result of the challenges of caring for 

their loved ones. These caregivers desperately need support. 

One program that is helping is the First Link program as 

mentioned by the member in a member’s statement and the 

minister in his response. 

 

The First Link program is so effective and so well-used, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Canadian Consensus guidelines on dementia, 



November 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2221 

developed by 45 medical experts, recommend that primary care 

providers refer patients and their families to the Alzheimer 

Society immediately following a diagnosis of dementia. We 

know that the First Link program is a good response by the 

society but, Mr. Speaker, the $50,000 is not an adequate 

amount to fund the program. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not 

surprising to me, hearing the good stories about the First Link 

program. I recall recently speaking with a woman, Mr. Speaker, 

who lost her loved one, and she said that the program was an 

absolutely essential lifeline for her. 

 

My question to the minister: if the program is good, if 

government commitment to it is not adequate, will the ministry 

be providing more funding for the First Link program? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we certainly know that this 

is a program that has been well-received, Mr. Speaker, and one 

that is seen as being a significant benefit to those who suffer 

from Alzheimer’s as well as their families. Mr. Speaker, that’s 

why after the initial, I believe, three-year agreement 

approximately five years ago completed, there was additional 

money in the following year budget. But, Mr. Speaker, that 

funding was made . . . It was annualized in the 2010 budget as 

ongoing funding within our ministry budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said in my previous answer, this is something 

that we will consider in the work that needs to take place in 

discussing and finalizing a budget for the 2013 year, Mr. 

Speaker. And certainly we will take into consideration the 

proposal that’s been put forward by the Alzheimer Society in 

seeking additional funding to not only enhance the service that 

is currently provided but also in seeking to expand the service 

beyond the existing regions that it currently serves. And we’ll 

continue with that work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we’ve discussed 

in question period before and in committee with the previous 

minister, providing supports for caregivers to care for their 

loved ones who are suffering from Alzheimer’s makes sense. It 

makes sense from a perspective of compassion but also makes 

sense for the health care system. We know, Mr. Speaker, when 

people have the proper supports, we’re able to keep loved ones 

out of care facilities on average 557 days longer than those who 

do not have the adequate supports. So we know that this 

program makes sense, Mr. Speaker, and we know that it 

certainly needs more funding than the $50,000 that it is 

currently receiving. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these supports are vital for people who are caring 

for their loved ones in their homes in order that people can have 

a higher quality of life. My specific question to the minister: in 

the 2013-14 budget, does he firmly commit, Mr. Speaker, to 

increase the amount of funding for the First Link program so 

that the Alzheimer Society can do the good work that it does in 

this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to 

thank the member for this question. Certainly, as I have 

indicated in my previous answers, the proposal that has been 

put forward by the Alzheimer Society is part of the 

consideration that will take place for our budget. I certainly 

wouldn’t want to write the Finance minister’s budget here on 

the floor of the Assembly four months early, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That being said, we support and honour the good work that is 

being done by the Alzheimer Society. I’ve had the opportunity 

to meet, early on in my tenure as Minister of Health, with the 

Alzheimer Society to get an understanding of not just the First 

Link program but some of the research that’s being done 

around this field. I’ve had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, as well 

as many people in this province have had a family member who 

has suffered from Alzheimer’s and have heard first-hand the 

toll that it takes on a family and on that individual, Mr. Speaker. 

And so while I will not be committing today to an additional 

increase, Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly something that we’ll 

consider in the context of the 2013-14 budget deliberations. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Changes to Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

been two weeks since the Minister of Labour told a paid 

luncheon audience of friends what’s in his massive overhaul to 

our labour laws. People were surprised about what he talked 

about because they weren’t the ideas that the Sask Party 

campaigned on, and they certainly weren’t the things that 

people voted for. Now people are still left waiting as to when 

they’ll hear about the bill, and they’re wondering if they should 

have bought a lunch ticket because that’s the only way the Sask 

Party lets the province know what it’s doing these days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after a summer of no public consultations, many 

people are wondering what exactly the minister’s planned 

because his first leaks of the bill to his friendly crowd weren’t 

reflective of the needs of Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, 

there’s only six more sitting days of this session. When is the 

minister going to table the massive overhaul to Saskatchewan 

labour laws? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 

question. We’ve talked about this piece of legislation as we’ve 

gone through the summer months. There was over 3,800 

responses to the call for consultation. A lot of those papers were 

very substantive and detailed. And we’ve taken those, we’ve 

incorporated them. And, Mr. Speaker, I can advise the member 

opposite that it will not be long and there will be a bill being 

introduced. We’ve indicated it was going to be introduced this 

session. That in fact is going to take place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind the member opposite that 

he was the one that said: 

 

In May when we saw this [this is a direct quote] coming 

forward there didn’t seem to be a reason why this was 

coming forward. That was the big gap in this. There was 



2222 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2012 

no common sense reason for this. 

 

But the NDP’s submission said exactly the opposite: 

 

Governments should always be ready to improve labour 

legislation. That readiness is an important part of a 

common sense commitment to a better future for the 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — I always appreciate being quoted in the House 

here, Mr. Speaker. The minister has told the reporters he’s 

working his staff on overtime to get the bill complete. After he 

spilled the beans to his paying audience on the bill, he showed 

that respect for workers and fairness and overtime hours could 

be a thing of the past. And that’s the opposite of progressive 

labour legislation that this province needs, and it tips the 

balance away from working people and erases the 40-hour work 

week with 8-hour work days as we now know it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these policies deserve to see the light of day for 

they certainly weren’t what the people voted for in the last 

election. Mr. Speaker, why did the minister reveal these 

controversial changes to a paid luncheon instead of defending 

them in the public eye? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve raised these issues 

in a variety of different formats and forums including the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, including the minister’s 

advisory committee which includes the president of the SFL 

[Saskatchewan Federation of Labour] and executive members 

from CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees]. Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve gone through an extensive consultation. 

 

We think that we’ve got a bill that’s going to address a lot of 

concerns that are there. Mr. Speaker, we have in the past had a 

very good relationship with labour in the province. And I want 

to quote the Leader of the Opposition, who said in a October 23 

scrum: “Our economy has been moving along quite well with 

relative labour peace for many, many years.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want to continue that. Even the Leader of the 

Opposition acknowledged the labour peace we’ve had. When 

we brought in essential services, they said it would end 

collective bargaining as we know it. Well it didn’t. When we 

brought in secret ballots and freedom of speech, they said it was 

an attack on unionization. Well it didn’t change the world, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, one of Justice Ball’s requirements 

in the last time the Sask Party’s labour legislation was thrown 

out and declared unconstitutional was for this government to 

hold actual consultations, real public consultations with the real 

. . . with people when it comes to labour law. But now his 

government’s laws are sitting before the courts once again. And 

the minister says he’s already drafting essential services 

language into this new massive overhaul of labour legislation. 

Mr. Speaker, the courts have already ruled on the last time the 

Sask Party passed essential services legislation. And the Justice 

was quite clear that the Sask Party’s one-sided approach was 

one of the key reasons their legislation was completely 

unconstitutional. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, why would the Sask Party ram ahead with 

the new massive labour law overhaul without public 

consultation? And why won’t he bring this bill to the legislature 

for us to debate? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, one of the commitments 

that we made to the people of this province was that we would 

have essential services legislation in our province. We want to 

ensure that when there’s a blizzard or unfavourable weather that 

highways get cleared. We want to make sure that when 

operating rooms continue to operate during periods of labour 

strife that we are able to continue to provide those services. 

That’s a commitment that we made, Mr. Speaker, and that is a 

commitment we intend to keep. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can add as well, we value and respect the 

contribution and hard work that the women and men in our 

province make. We want to ensure that this piece of legislation 

respects and values that. And, Mr. Speaker, to the people in our 

province we want to say that this piece of legislation will 

protect and enshrine the rights that they have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, neither members on this side of the House or on 

that side . . . [inaudible] . . . ought to be commenting on 

something that’s before the courts as we speak. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Prince Albert Bridge 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 

week the Minister of Highways spent more time backpedalling 

and spinning and spinning than finding a solution for the P.A. 

bridge. In question period the minister said, “. . . our 

government is fully behind those repairs even though they 

weren’t originally our responsibility.” 

 

That’s very strange, Mr. Speaker, because right after the last 

election the former minister said very clearly in a press release, 

and I quote, “The province will fund 100 per cent of the cost to 

repair the Diefenbaker bridge.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, a report in 2010 showed exactly how much 

funding was needed to repair that bridge to a safe standard. So 

my question to the minister: did the minister fund all of the 

repairs identified in the 2010 report as critical for the safety and 

security of the Diefenbaker bridge in P.A.? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If you look 



November 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2223 

back at the history of the Diefenbaker bridge, how it was 

constructed and the agreements that were put in place, the 

provincial government at that time, many, many years ago, 

picked up the cost of the bridge with the city or the 

municipality being responsible for any repairs moving forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, fast forward many decades to where we are now. 

That responsibility still should be with the city, but we realize 

that there were major structural deficiencies with that bridge. 

That’s why our government, in the repairs that are going on 

right now, are picking up 100 per cent of the cost, as the 

minister said. Not that it was our responsibility, but we also 

realized the situation. And we put over 4 million — and I 

quoted last week, I believe, it was 3 million — it’s over $4 

million, Mr. Speaker. And I would say to the member opposite 

that as you are doing repairs on the bridge, we found some 

more structural damage. That’s why the cost has gone up from 

$3 million to $4 million. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we’re covering 100 per cent of the repairs, 

which is unlike the NDP that covered a portion of it and then 

put the rest of the responsibility back on Prince Albert 

taxpayers. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the costs aren’t between 3 and 

$4 million. We know that the full costs of all the bills identified 

in 2010 were an additional $7 million, not the $3 million that 

the minister is bragging about. And that study found that the 

repairs needed . . . before the additional support beam repairs 

were needed, Mr. Speaker, the city said there are more, there’s 

more work that is needed to fix the bridge. And last year’s 

agreement shows that that cost should be covered by the Sask 

Party government at 100 per cent. 

 

The Prince Albert people should not be stuck hoping and 

praying that the bridge doesn’t take on more damage, thereby 

compromising safety. But the Sask Party won’t do all the work 

that is needed and they won’t even talk about a second bridge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister get with the program and fully 

fund all the repairs that the city says are needed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m aware that a report 

said that there are other issues, Mr. Speaker, but not emergency 

issues, not structural issues, Mr. Speaker, with the bridge. Mr. 

Speaker, the city can apply to the urban connector’s program 

that’s available for other communities for highway 

infrastructure that passes through their community, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is picking up $4.2 million. This 

bridge will be structurally sound, moving into the future. The 

member opposite says they’re not even talking about a second 

bridge. Mr. Speaker, when he was the minister of Highways, 

Mr. Speaker, he so poorly funded the highway infrastructure, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s taken five years of over $3 billion, Mr. 

Speaker, and we still have more work to do because of the 

deficiencies from that minister himself. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the people of P.A. need 

answers, not spin. The city council, the RMs [rural 

municipality], the chamber of commerce, and people from all 

over the Prince Albert area know the importance of building a 

second bridge. The P.A. economy has grown. The population in 

the North is also growing, Mr. Speaker, but the second bridge is 

nowhere to be seen from the Sask Party. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

question that we’re going to ask in the Assembly is to ask the 

minister for once to answer the response from his perspective as 

a Sask Party member. 

 

Is the Sask Party not building that bridge in Prince Albert 

because they’re broke, or because they are simply turning their 

backs on the great city of Prince Albert? Which is it, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that the 

two MLAs sitting on this side in government, Mr. Speaker, as 

well as other MLAs around the Prince Albert area, have done 

more to raise issues in that Prince Albert area, Mr. Speaker, and 

the infrastructure than that member ever did as a northern 

member for the NDP when they were in government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a report being done, Mr. Speaker. There is 

a report being finalized that we hope will be released in the near 

future. The parties that are part of that report are finalizing the 

report so that it will be introduced into the future, Mr. Speaker. 

But what I would say is that when you look at the demands of 

infrastructure around the province in a growing province, which 

the NDP never did experience for 16 years, a growing province 

of over 80,000 more people in this province in the last five 

years, you look at some of the infrastructure in Saskatoon, some 

of the infrastructure around our major cities — Regina — there 

is need. Certainly there is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some of our bridges are carrying up to 80,000 vehicles a day 

compared to the Diefenbaker bridge at 200. We need to priorize 

all those responsibilities and move whatever bridge hits number 

one forward, Mr. Speaker. But I can tell you that the response 

for Prince Albert will be much greater under this government 

than under those members previous. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, 

it is my pleasure to submit supplementary estimates 

accompanied by a message from Her Honour the Lieutenant 

Governor. 

 

The Speaker: — Would you please rise for a message from the 

Lieutenant Governor. The message is as follows: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits Supplementary 

Estimates — November of certain sums required for the 

service of the province for the 12 months ending March 



2224 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2012 

31st, 2013 and recommends the same to the Legislative 

Assembly. The Honourable Vaughn Solomon Schofield, 

Lieutenant Governor, province of Saskatchewan. 

 

You may be seated. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 73 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of Bill No. 73, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 

2012. Mr. Speaker, this Act provides the legislative framework 

through which Saskatchewan’s towns, villages, resort villages, 

and rural municipalities exercise their powers and provide 

services. Today, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second 

reading of The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 which 

refines and updates the legislation to ensure it continues to meet 

both the province’s and the municipal sector’s needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments will serve to strengthen 

the legislation. The proposed amendments support the intention 

of the legislation to grant municipalities not only greater 

flexibility, but also greater accountability in dealing with local 

matters. 

 

Many of the amendments will also help to ensure consistency 

of intent among the three municipal Acts. Mr. Speaker, 

although many of the amendments in this draft bill are the same 

as those proposed for The Cities Act and The Northern 

Municipalities Act, 2012, it’s appropriate for me to highlight the 

more significant changes that the bill proposes, particularly in 

the context of smaller urban and rural municipalities in the 

southern part of the province to which this bill applies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments proposed in this draft bill serve 

the following purposes. First, they will improve processes 

related to the boundary alterations or annexations for the 

municipalities involved for the Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

and to support government’s growth strategy. Second, they 

respond to specific requests from the Saskatchewan Association 

of Rural Municipalities and the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association. Third, they support the intent of 

agreements such as the New West Partnership Agreement and 

the Agreement on Internal Trade in areas such as business 

licensing and municipal procurement. And finally, they address 

other requests from across the municipal sector to clarify 

wording and improve consistency among the municipal Acts 

regarding primarily administrative matters and make other 

changes identified by the ministry to clarify areas such as 

education property tax reporting, licence fees, and purchasing 

policies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will expand briefly on the amendments in each 

of these areas. First, the amendments related to the process for 

boundary alterations in The Municipalities Act include the 

following: a new time limit on how long a municipality must 

wait for response to a proposed annexation application from the 

other affected municipality before the process is considered 

disputed and can proceed to the Saskatchewan Municipal 

Board; requiring mediation before the SMB [Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board] hears and decides an application for 

annexation on which the affected municipal councils cannot 

reach agreement; providing clear authority for the approval of a 

portion or parts of an application by the board, for example, the 

portions on which agreement has been reached among the 

councils; making the ban on similar applications going to the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board consistent among the three 

municipal Acts at one year; and clarifying that an application 

may be amended or withdrawn at any time up until the board 

completes its review, after which the board’s decision shall 

apply. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments I just mentioned are consistent 

with amendments proposed to all three municipal Acts and the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board Act this session that we believe 

will improve and expedite the boundary alteration process. 

Again, government encourages municipalities to work 

co-operatively to resolve differences and to plan for and support 

the growth and development occurring in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second main area of amendments in this bill 

responds to specific requests from the municipal associations. 

 

The first request relates to SARM [Saskatchewan Association 

of Rural Municipalities] and the authority for RMs to establish 

additional service areas. Many rural municipalities are seeing 

the development of areas that require more urban-type services 

which are different than the typical agricultural areas. 

Residential developments are more common now throughout 

RMs, as people wish to relocate to an acreage or a pocket of 

developed lots. Presently the ratepayers throughout the RM 

may be paying for services in these residential developments 

that most of the RM ratepayers do not access or require. 

 

Mr. Speaker, legislation currently provides for areas to be taxed 

and serviced at different levels only when municipalities 

restructure. RMs have expressed an interest in having the 

authority to develop an additional service area or areas at other 

times. An additional service area would be a defined 

geographic area established in the RM that would provide 

residents living in that defined area with incremental services 

that they require but are not needed in the rest of the RM. This 

new authority would allow the municipality to fund and deliver 

such services that are needed or requested by residents within 

these geographic areas. 

 

I’d like to point out that the proposed provisions related to 

additional service areas also establish important safeguards 

within the legislation. For example, additional service areas 

cannot be established to specifically target an individual, 

residential, commercial, industrial, or agricultural property or 

be specific to a business or business activity. 

 

The second specific request relates to SUMA and involves 

greater flexibility to address issues related to municipal debt 

limits. Mr. Speaker, current provisions related to municipal debt 

limits were requested at the time The Municipalities Act was 

developed. That said, given the growth and development that is 



November 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2225 

occurring in Saskatchewan, issues with respect to municipal 

debt limits may have changed. The ministry is aware of the 

discussions that SUMA has initiated within the sector as to 

what constitutes own-source revenue as it relates to determining 

a municipality’s debt limit. As a result, amendments are 

proposed to ensure authority to define own-source revenues and 

regulation for municipal debt limit purposes and establish 

alternate procedures for determining a municipality’s debt limit. 

This flexibility will be helpful in implementing the outcome of 

discussions among SUMA, the Saskatchewan Municipal Board, 

and others in the sector to address issues related to borrowing, 

debt limits, and borrowing approvals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the next category of amendments includes 

enabling municipalities to establish and enter into the voluntary 

intermunicipal business licensing arrangements and the 

common issuance of overweight vehicle permits with other 

municipalities. The amendment enabling intermunicipal 

business licensing will provide municipalities with 

discretionary authority to recognize business licences, permits, 

and approvals issued by other municipalities, including those in 

other jurisdictions. The amendment supports the province’s 

commitments under interprovincial, national, and international 

agreements such as the New West Partnership Agreement and 

the Agreement on Internal Trade. This will encourage 

municipalities to reconcile their various business licensing 

regimes. They are voluntary provisions and ensure that 

municipalities have the legislative authority to agree on such 

regimes. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Amendments related to overweight permits clarify the ability 

for municipalities to voluntarily develop a system that allows 

for the common issuance of overweight permits. Amendments 

will provide municipalities with the authority to enter into an 

agreement that would allow for an overweight permit issued by 

one of the municipalities that is part of the agreement to be 

recognized in the other municipalities that are involved in that 

agreement. Mr. Speaker, these proposed amendments are in 

response to the efforts of government to remove barriers 

impeding economic growth. 

 

The last main area of amendments addresses other requests of 

stakeholders to clarify certain administrative matters such as the 

signing of council meeting minutes, consistent terminology 

regarding service or filing of assessment appeal notices, and 

adding contact information for appellant agents to assessment 

appeal notices. These were initially requested by the cities as 

proposed amendments to The Cities Act. To ensure consistency 

among the municipal Acts, these amendments are also included 

in this bill and also The Northern Municipalities Amendment 

Act, 2012. 

 

My ministry also identified amendments to clarify certain 

provisions, for example, those regarding education property tax 

reporting. These reports will now go to Government Relations 

instead of the Ministry of Education. As well, other 

amendments clarify that fees for issuing a permit, inspection, or 

approval not exceed the cost of administration and enforcement, 

similar to the present situation regarding licence fees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the ministry has consulted extensively on these 

amendments with municipalities individually as well as with 

SARM, SUMA, and both municipal administrators’ 

associations. In addition, the Canadian Association of 

Petroleum Producers and individual resource companies were 

consulted on a number of their proposals, for example, relating 

to the common issuance of overweight permits and the 

establishment of additional service areas. These consultations 

began in mid-February 2012 and concluded at the end of 

August and involved sharing draft side-by-sides of all the 

amendments for review and comment. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

take this opportunity to thank all those individuals who took the 

time to provide input, advice, and feedback. 

 

In conclusion, the amendments to The Municipalities Act 

address issues identified by the municipal sector, the ministry, 

and others to improve and streamline processes. They 

encourage and support intermunicipal co-operation, 

consultation, and forward-looking planning. We feel the 

amendments will assist in meeting the needs of municipalities, 

the public, and businesses to support the continued growth of 

the province. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 73, 

The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The question before the 

Assembly is the motion by the Minister of Government 

Relations that Bill No. 73, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 

2012 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

First of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to first of all thank the 

minister for some of the notes that he’s forwarded to me on Bill 

73. We obviously have to go through this fairly thick document 

to really understand some of the processes that he wants to 

implement as a result of this bill. But more so, Mr. Speaker, we 

want to take our perspective as well, as the official opposition, 

on Bill 73. I think the people out there in Saskatchewanland 

should know that we take the role of being the official 

opposition very seriously in the sense that it’s important that we 

go through the bill to see what the government is trying to do. 

 

And from what I understand from the very brief comment that 

the minister spoke about, he talked about boundary descriptions 

as a result of some of the municipal governments, be it SARM 

or SUMA, being able to, you know, to look at the boundaries 

that they may have and have some kind of mechanisms to either 

increase or decrease their boundaries. They’re talking about the 

service areas as well, Mr. Speaker, and they’re also talking 

about a New West Agreement. 

 

And people out there in Saskatchewanland should know the 

New West Agreement, according to the Sask Party, is an 

agreement between Alberta, Saskatchewan, and BC [British 

Columbia] in which they’re going to work together to build a 

common front on trade and commerce and so on and so forth. 

And, Mr. Speaker, on the New West Agreement, we have a 

number of issues that we want to speak on that, because there 

are some problem areas that we in the opposition want to point 

out. And certainly I think as a result of some of the points that 

the minister raised, we want to expose some of the challenges 



2226 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2012 

with the New West Agreement to make sure that the minister is 

aware what’s going on and that the public is also apprised of 

what’s going on as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, both SUMA and SARM have been consulted 

on these agreements, as the minister has spoken about. 

Certainly being a former member of SUMA, I can tell you that 

this organization is very valuable. They’ve got the cities, 

you’ve got the villages, and you’ve got some of the northern 

communities all working as a collective from the towns’ and 

villages’ perspective. And of course SARM being the RMs, 

they also have a very equal if not greater organization, making 

sure that their views are heard and making sure that their entity 

is given and afforded a lot of respect, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think the point being that SUMA and SARM are two 

organizations that are going to watch very carefully how this 

bill proceeds. Mr. Speaker, they want to make sure that what 

they have asked for in the bill is followed through word for 

word, because obviously I think a lot of folks within SARM 

and SUMA may not totally trust the Sask Party on making sure 

that when they ask some things to be done on their behalf, that 

it’s followed through as properly as it should be. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the first things that pop into my head 

when I read Bill 73, in many ways it’s a subtle form, in my 

opinion, and I think also a step in the direction of 

amalgamation, Mr. Speaker. There’s no question in my mind. 

And you look at some of the language that the Sask Party uses 

on this particular bill, that it talks about boundary descriptions. 

It talks about service areas. It talks about the New West 

Agreement, Mr. Speaker. It makes reference to CAPP, which is 

the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers. 

 

And we know, Mr. Speaker, all that language, it’s probably 

language that many, many people out there are a bit worried 

about. Because really, if you look at how the Sask Party have 

proceeded on many fronts, I think the Sask Party, quite frankly, 

want to see amalgamation of the RMs happen. They want to see 

less and less administration of lands, of smaller areas of lands 

throughout the province because, Mr. Speaker, obviously it’s 

their intent to remove, as they have spoken, any impediment to 

development. And, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to the Sask 

Party that working with SUMA and SARM, as I spoke about 

earlier, don’t view these organizations as impediments but 

rather partners. 

 

And what I see again, as I mentioned at the outset here, is the 

fact that I think these are the first few steps towards 

amalgamation, something that the RMs and SARM have really 

despised any discussion on the word or on the process of 

amalgamating. And they are going to certainly be watching this 

particular bill very closely. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, on the boundary description talking about 

service areas, what exactly does this all entail? Obviously as the 

minister mentioned that there are pockets of housing 

developments happening. There are certain resort areas that are 

expanding. There are certain communities that are trying to 

service lots and sell these lots in and around some of their rec 

sites. So I think, Mr. Speaker, that kind of activity, one has to 

be very, very careful that (a) first of all that you’re properly 

zoning and properly planning these areas, but (b) how does it 

conform to the area? How does it impact the RMs? How does it 

impact the villages? Where do the taxes go? 

 

These are really complex discussions, Mr. Speaker, complex 

discussions in the sense that there has to be not only SARM and 

SUMA at the table, but there has to be developers at the table. 

There’s got to be people that have been leading some of the 

communities at the table of the impacted areas, mayors or 

reeves. These are the people that have to be involved, Mr. 

Speaker. And this is something that I would suggest that people 

don’t take too lightly because when you start talking about 

boundary description, Mr. Speaker, it really begs the question, 

what exactly is this all about? 

 

And I would suggest that these are the few steps, the trying 

steps that the Sask Party are undertaking to see how they can 

move the amalgamations of the RMs further along down the 

path, Mr. Speaker. And that’s exactly what I think is happening 

with this particular bill. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, under the New West Agreement — and 

SUMA and SARM would know this, and many people have 

looked at this agreement with the Sask Party and of course the 

Sask Party sitting with Alberta and BC in formulating this 

partnership, Mr. Speaker — one of the things that the minister 

alluded to in this particular bill, he talked about municipal 

procurement. And what that means, Mr. Speaker, is that a lot of 

the RMs, whether they’re in SUMA or whether they’re in 

SARM, whether you’re dealing with the community as a mayor 

or as a reeve, they have a number of contracts that they let each 

year. And some of these contracts vary in scope of work and 

certainly vary in value. 

 

Now what I think is happening with the Sask Party, Mr. 

Speaker, is they have, through the New West Partnership, they 

have been manipulated by Alberta and BC, basically being told 

that any contract work for SARM or for SUMA under or over a 

specified amount has to be advertised in Alberta and British 

Columbia. And, Mr. Speaker, they say we will also do that for 

Saskatchewan. Any work that any of our communities are 

going to do in BC or Alberta, we will certainly advertise in 

Saskatchewan as well. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the Saskatchewan Party’s been had 

by this New West Partnership. It is not about growing a 

strategic partnership with Alberta and BC, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

really about putting at risk the autonomy of some of our local 

community leaders. And when they do some work at their local 

level, wouldn’t they like to be able to allocate some of that 

work to some of their local businesses and some of their people 

that have been providing that service for years? And, Mr. 

Speaker, I would think that they would. 

 

So my whole point being is that under the New West 

Partnership Agreement and some of the comments the minister 

made in reference to Bill 73, it may now force RMs, reeves, and 

councils, as well as municipal governments in cities, towns, and 

villages, the mayors and the councillors, they now have to go 

through a process to advertise any work over a specified 

amount. And I believe, I could be corrected on that amount, Mr. 

Speaker. I think it’s $50,000. And really, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 

think the people of Saskatchewan were made aware of this 

particular problem when the Premier and some of the Sask 



November 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2227 

Party representatives were touting this New West Partnership 

with them and BC and Alberta. 

 

There’s no question, Mr. Speaker, we do have the agreement on 

interprovincial trade, which is a national agreement that was 

before this New West Partnership, Mr. Speaker. So it wasn’t 

just window dressing that we thought the Saskatchewan Party 

was doing. They are really doing a lot of things that are quite 

frankly misunderstood by a lot of people, or not understood; 

and secondly, Mr. Speaker, certainly not with their input nor 

their advice. 

 

So we look at the boundary description. You look at the service 

area comments that the minister made on this particular bill. He 

made reference to the New West Agreement, Mr. Speaker, and 

one of the things on the New West Agreement as well is on 

overweight permits, as the minister alluded to, that if you’re 

driving through one RM, and there is an understanding that the 

RM has issued some company out of Alberta or some company 

out of BC the right to haul over limits on our roads, then guess 

what? No other RM can stop that company or that person from 

hauling overweight loads on their RM roads or through their 

towns, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now is there any provision there for dangerous goods? Is there 

any kind of dangerous good provisions that would be 

implicated as a result of this particular rule? And, Mr. Speaker, 

I think those are some of the questions that we have to ask in 

opposition because obviously there are dangerous goods that 

are being transferred all throughout Saskatchewan, and we hope 

that the designation of dangerous good routes, the safe handling 

of the dangerous goods, and the policy and procedures are well 

understood. 

 

But does this change in the process that the minister spoke 

about and saying that trucking companies can apply for permits 

from some of the RMs in the province and that permit must be 

respected throughout all the RMs and all the different towns 

and villages that truck may travel through . . . And, Mr. 

Speaker, we hope that that is clearly understood by all the 

partners. And I can almost guarantee you that the RMs are very 

territorial, not only in servicing their highways and working 

with their people, but also making sure that rules and 

regulations are not forced on them and that they should respect 

their local autonomy and respect their local decision-making 

process. And I think that some of the comments that the 

minister made severely compromises that. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the overweight situation that I 

spoke about in terms of the challenge that some of the trucking 

industry may face to the structures of our roads, it is really a 

major problem, Mr. Speaker. That if you don’t have uniform 

processes, that you don’t have good rules and regulations to 

make sure that there isn’t overweights on our roads, and we 

have a difficult time as a province to find the resources to 

ensure that the weight restrictions are followed, to ensure that 

safety is not compromised, and to ensure that the trucking 

industry has good, solid monitoring in place so as to ensure 

that, not only for their safety but the public safety as well, that 

this is a role that the government has to play. 

 

Now the RMs and the communities and the villages and the 

cities, well they don’t have those same staff members. They 

don’t have the resources of a senior government to be able to 

follow up and follow through to ensure that the trucking 

industry and some of the overweights and the dangerous goods 

that they’re hauling throughout our communities and RMs, that 

there is some monitoring, that there’s some oversight of that 

particular industry. 

 

So the point being is that if that is something that the 

Saskatchewan Party want to weaken, then they would bring that 

issue forward through Bill 73 as the minister has referenced in 

some of his opening comments. The fact that if there is a 

licence for overweight limits and permits issued by an RM, all 

the other RMs have to abide by that permit and, Mr. Speaker, 

that is something I think is going to be problematic for the Sask 

Party. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister also talked about licence fees 

and the issuance of licence fees and the fact that he suspects 

that there may be revenues from the licence fees and how 

they’re going to work with SUMA and SARM on the licence 

fees issue. Clearly, Mr. Speaker, it also begs the question: who 

gets the proceeds of these licence fees? If there’s going to be 

more licence fees needed or they’re increasing the amount that 

the fees are in place now, who gets the revenues? 

 

And I would suspect and hope and pray, Mr. Speaker, that any 

additional revenues that come from permitting and certainly 

comes from licensing, whether it’s an overweight issue, that 

those fees should go to the RM or should go to the community. 

And the reason being, Mr. Speaker, is we don’t want this 

government to view this process as a cash grab and therefore 

it’s important that we get those questions answered ASAP [as 

soon as possible]. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the other thing that’s really worrisome on 

this particular bill is the debt limits of some of our municipal 

partners whether again, whether it’s through SARM or SUMA, 

that they’re going to allow the debt limit to increase. Now what 

are the parameters of the increase that they’re allowing these 

communities to go into debt? And that’s something that’s 

really, really important because, as we know, many 

communities in many regions not only struggle with some of 

the current services that they provide to the residents but, Mr. 

Speaker, there is a huge, huge infrastructure challenge facing 

Saskatchewan over the next 5 to 10 years, if not sooner. And 

that, of course, infrastructure is called water and sewer services, 

Mr. Speaker. And many of these communities cannot afford to 

do some of this work on their own. 

 

So when you talk about allowing them to increase the debt, is 

this Sask Party’s way of saying, look you guys, you need the 

water and sewer, we’ll let you guys borrow more money? And, 

Mr. Speaker, you’ve got to begin to ask the question, is this 

affordable for some of the RMs? Is this affordable and doable 

for some of the communities that may need these services, Mr. 

Speaker? And I can tell you that is a daunting task that’s faced 

by our municipal partners. And without solid support from the 

federal, provincial government — which I know they won’t get 

— then the only obvious solution that the Sask Party has on this 

front is to allow communities to increase their debt and to 

increase their amount of borrowing. 



2228 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2012 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the sad reality of the Saskatchewan 

Party nowadays is, on one hand they say to the communities, 

we’ll give you some increase in operating your local 

governments. But on the other hand, they aren’t going to help 

with your water and sewer. On the other hand, they’re going to 

amalgamate your services. On the other hand, they’re going to 

make sure that you can’t interfere with overweight licences or 

permits that one RM may give and others may not like. These 

are some of the things, Mr. Speaker, I think is a very huge 

problem for the people that are our municipal partners. And 

more so, it is going to be a problem for future generations as 

they’re going to have to pay some of these costs. 

 

The other matter, Mr. Speaker, is the whole notion of the debt 

limit being allowed to be increased under this particular bill. 

And the most amazing hypocrisy on this particular process, Mr. 

Speaker, on Bill 73, is on one hand, the Saskatchewan Party 

turns around and says, and says to the school board association, 

SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards Association], we’re not 

going to allow you to tax property any more on the education 

front. We’re not going to allow you to do that. We’re going to 

be able to set your budgets because we’re a senior government 

and we’ll do what’s best for education. And so therefore, the 

SSBA, the school boards association, we’re told that they no 

longer have taxing powers and this was, of course, compliments 

of the Sask Party. 

 

Now what’s happening here — it’s a bit confusing to us on this 

particular bill — is that they’re not allowing the school 

divisions to generate their own revenues for the purposes of 

running their school divisions. But under this bill, they’re 

allowing, they’re allowing municipalities to increase their debt, 

giving them that arbitrary choice to increase their debts for 

whatever money that they may need. 

 

So the confusion here, Mr. Speaker, is why are you being 

hypocritical and critical towards the school boards association’s 

taxing power for educational purposes, but you’re then turning 

around and offering the RMs and some of the municipal 

governments throughout our province the ability to increase 

debt? Isn’t that the same thing? Isn’t that the same thing, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

And that’s why I go back to my earlier point. I think this 

government is going to move forward on their amalgamation 

agenda, and this bill is a good example. Bill 73 is a good 

example of how they’re going to subtly do some of the things 

that will force these communities to eventually amalgamate, 

Mr. Speaker. And all the language, all the language of the 

amalgamation argument includes boundary description, service 

areas, the New West Agreement provisions. They talk about 

licensing fees, and they talk about debt limits, Mr. Speaker. 

 

All that wording and all the terminology used by the minister in 

describing Bill 73 leads us to believe within opposition that 

they are well on their way, they are well on their way to 

amalgamating some of our RMs and some of our communities. 

And I wouldn’t put it too far in the future, Mr. Speaker, where 

we’ll see smaller communities begin to dry up because they 

have no municipal services from this government. And I think, 

Mr. Speaker, that that’s just fine with the Sask Party that they 

don’t have to defend nor support these smaller communities. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of issues that I want to take 

forward on this Bill 73. I would warn the people, I would warn 

the people of Saskatchewan that if you let some of these bills 

go through without scrutiny, without research, and without 

getting partners that are involved as a result of this bill to 

participate in giving us advice, then you’re allowing the Sask 

Party to do what they want at will. 

 

We know that the Sask Party is going to move forward with 

amalgamating a lot of the RMs and amalgamating a lot of the 

communities because, as we’ve heard time and time again, that 

the Sask Party want to get rid of the impediments to 

development. And some of those impediments, Mr. Speaker, is 

the RM structure that the Sask Party want to get rid of. And, 

Mr. Speaker, what’s the best way to do that? It’s to allow them 

to go broke, to not give them any services, to allow them to 

fight amongst themselves, and most important of all is to say, 

one RM allocates an important permit like an overweight 

permit; all the other RMs have to abide by that. You’re going to 

create some conflict. 

 

Because I know how solid and I know how important that the 

RMs feel their role is to protect the interest of their RM. And 

when you have an arbitrary decision made by the Sask Party 

that really debases the local autonomy and control, then I think, 

Mr. Speaker, that this is a huge problem for the RMs and for 

SUMA. So whether it’s boundary description, service areas, the 

New West Agreement — which I think is really contrary to 

Saskatchewan’s interest — whether it’s licence fees, Mr. 

Speaker, or whether it’s the debt limit increasing for some of 

the partner communities within SUMA or SARM, I think, Mr. 

Speaker, that this Saskatchewan Party government has a lot of 

explaining to do because this bill’s going to take a lot of 

scrutiny and it’s going to certainly garner a lot of attention from 

the different folks out there. 

 

And I can tell you that some of the evidence, the wording, the 

actions, and the intent behind this bill, I would say to the people 

within SUMA and SARM that amalgamation is the Sask 

Party’s agenda. And Bill 73 is the first step towards doing that, 

Mr. Speaker, and I would suggest that people would be highly 

offended if they paid close attention to what the bill’s all about, 

and what the minister’s comments were, and of course what our 

position is as the official opposition. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot more I want to say on Bill 73. 

There’s a lot more that my colleagues want to say as well on 

Bill 73. So we will take the opportunity, as I mentioned time 

and time again, to look at the bill, assess the bill, see what the 

bill is going to do in terms of the good of the bill, or what the 

net effect is in terms of the negative effect of the bill. And 

that’s the role of the opposition — to warn the people. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 

Bill 73. Thank you very much. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The member from 

Athabasca has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 73, The 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



November 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2229 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 74 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2012 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the 

Minister of Government Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of Bill No. 74, The Cities Amendment Act, 

2012. This bill will amend The Cities Act, which provides the 

legislative framework through which Saskatchewan’s 16 cities 

exercise their powers and provide services. The Act and its 

regulations have been in effect since January 1st, 2003. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to note that I said Saskatchewan’s 16 cities. 

This now includes the city of Warman that officially became 

the province’s 16th just a few short weeks ago on Saturday, 

October 27th. This is an example of the growth and 

development that is occurring in this province. Government 

intends to continue this growth now and into the future. 

 

The amendments proposed in this bill do four things. First they 

will improve processes related to boundary alterations or 

annexations to make it work better for the cities and 

municipalities involved, for the Saskatchewan Municipal 

Board, and to support our government’s growth strategy. 

Second, they respond to requests for amendments from the city 

governments for consistent authorities and treatment among the 

three municipal Acts regarding matters such as unpaid utility 

charges and trailer home permitting. Third, they support the 

intent of agreements such as the New West Partnership 

Agreement and the Agreement on Internal Trade in areas such 

as business licensing and municipal procurement. Fourth, they 

address other requests from across the municipal sector to 

clarify wording and improve consistency among the municipal 

Acts regarding primarily administrative matters and make other 

changes identified by the minister to clarify areas such as 

education property tax reporting, licence fees, and purchasing 

policies. 

 

I will expand briefly on the amendments in each of these areas. 

First, the amendments related to the process for boundary 

alterations in The Cities Act include the following: a new time 

limit on how long a municipality must wait for a response to 

proposed annexation application from the other affected 

municipality; requiring mediation before the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board hears and decides an application for 

annexation on which the affected municipal councils cannot 

reach agreement; providing clear authority for the approval of a 

portion of or parts of an application by the board; and clarifying 

that an application may be amended or withdrawn at any time 

up until the board completes its review, after which the board’s 

decision shall apply. 

 

These amendments I just mentioned are consistent with 

amendments proposed to all three municipal Acts and The 

Municipal Board Act this session that we believe will improve 

and expedite the boundary alteration process. Government 

encourages cities and their surrounding municipalities to work 

co-operatively to resolve differences and to plan for and support 

the growth and development that’s occurring in our province. 

 

The second main area of amendments responds to requests from 

the cities and SUMA for authorities consistent with the other 

two municipal Acts, The Municipalities Act and The Northern 

Municipalities Act, regarding matters such as unpaid municipal 

utility charges and trailer home permitting. The proposed 

amendments will allow cities to add unpaid city utility charges 

incurred by a tenant to property taxes provided that prior notice 

is given to the tenant and property owner and any utility 

deposits are applied to the charges. This authority was 

requested by resolution of SUMA. It’s already provided in the 

other two municipal Acts. All three Acts are being made 

consistent in terms of prior notice and other requirements 

before such charges can be added, and this is in order to ensure 

municipalities make reasonable efforts to collect the 

outstanding charges before turning to the property owner. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Cities have also requested the ability to license and permit 

trailer homes as an alternative to assessing and taxing these as 

improvements, similar to the existing authority in the other two 

Acts. This does not impact recreational trailers and is an 

alternative to assessing and taxing these trailers as 

improvements. 

 

The next category of amendments includes enabling cities to 

establish and enter into intermunicipal agreements and 

arrangements that reconcile business licensing requirements so 

that a business or certain types of businesses could operate 

across participating municipalities under a single licence. They 

are voluntary provisions and ensure cities have the legislative 

authority to agree on such arrangements. These amendments 

support this province’s commitments under agreements such as 

the New West Partnership Agreement and the Agreement on 

Internal Trade. This will encourage municipalities to reconcile 

their business licensing regimes similar to what Saskatchewan 

has done in partnership with the provinces of Alberta and 

British Columbia regarding the extraprovincial business 

registration option that became effective this past July. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the amendments address other requests 

from stakeholders to clarify certain administrative matters such 

as the signing of council meeting minutes, consistent 

terminology regarding service or filing of assessment appeal 

notices, and adding contact information for appellant agents to 

assessment appeal notices. These have been requested by the 

cities through their city solicitors, city assessors, and city 

clerks. 

 

My ministry also identified amendments to clarify certain 

provisions, for example those regarding education property tax 

reporting. These reports will now go to Government Relations 

instead of the Ministry of Education. As well other amendments 

clarify that fees for issuing a permit, inspection, or approval not 

exceed the cost of administration and enforcement similar to the 

present situation regarding licence fees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the ministry consulted extensively on these 

amendments with the city sector, including individual cities and 

city officials as well as with SUMA and the Saskatchewan 

Association of City Clerks. Other stakeholder groups were also 

consulted on specific aspects of the proposed amendments. 

These consultations began in mid-February 2012 and concluded 

this past summer. They involved meetings as well as sharing 



2230 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2012 

proposed wording of the amendments for review, comment, 

revision, or refinement. I’d like to take this opportunity to thank 

those individuals who took the time to provide input, advice, 

and feedback in the development of this legislation. 

 

In conclusion, the amendments proposed to The Cities Act 

address issues identified by that sector, by the ministry, and 

others to improve and streamline processes. They encourage 

and support intermunicipal co-operation, consultation, and 

forward-looking planning, and the amendments meet the needs 

of our cities, the public, and businesses to support the continued 

growth of this province. And so, Mr. Speaker, I move second 

reading of Bill No. 74, The Cities Amendment Act, 2012. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The Minister of 

Government Relations has moved that the Bill 74, The Cities 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I want to again rise on behalf of the official opposition and give 

our comments on Bill 74. Now, Mr. Speaker, we are very, very 

pleased to see that the addition of two more cities in the 

province is something that we want to applaud and we want to 

commend all those people that have been involved. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we want to see the growth of Saskatchewan’s 

population and the economy continue. There is no question that 

having 16 cities in Saskatchewan is a great accomplishment for 

us as a province and that’s something that goes without saying. 

The opposition certainly wants to see that continued growing 

and the continued economy that’s necessary to sustain services 

in our population. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when the minister makes references in 

introducing some of these bills to — and I use the word loosely 

— to the growth plan of the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, what we 

see on this side of the Assembly, and it all relates to Bill 74, 

Mr. Speaker, is we’re seeing growing debt. There’s no question, 

Mr. Speaker, that it’s $1 billion more into debt that the Sask 

Party has created as a result of the announcement today. They 

were half a billion dollars off on their projections for oil and 

gas and also for potash, Mr. Speaker. So the only thing that 

Saskatchewan sees from the Saskatchewan Party’s growth plan 

is a growing debt and a growing distrust for a government that 

can’t seem to get their numbers right when they’re doing 

estimates as to what they expect from certain sectors. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they were way off on potash, they were way off on oil 

and gas, and now you’re seeing Saskatchewan being saddled 

with a $1 billion debt. 

 

Now how does that relate to Bill 74, Mr. Speaker? That’s 

exactly my point, Mr. Speaker, is that while you have a 

government coming along, tweaking here and tweaking there 

on some of the municipal agendas, Mr. Speaker, they’re doing 

greater and grander damage to Saskatchewan and to our cities 

and to our towns and our villages and our RMs by not 

managing the resources of the province right. 

 

So here we have in this situation under Bill 74, the minister 

making reference to their growth strategy. And that growth 

strategy is a big joke, Mr. Speaker, because all we’ve seen 

that’s been growing here, Mr. Speaker, is a growing debt, and 

as I mentioned, a heavy reliance, a heavy reliance to balance 

their books on the backs of municipal governments, and a 

heavy reliance from people out there in Saskatchewanland that 

are paying more for their power, paying more for their gas, 

paying more for their telephone, paying more for all kinds of 

services, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then they make reference to that silly notion they call 

Saskatchewan’s growth strategy, Mr. Speaker. They make 

reference to that when introducing bills of this sort. They do 

small little things on bills of this sort to try and say they appear 

to be doing something, and they turn around and do something 

absolutely ludicrous and ridiculous to hurt some of the 

communities that are being impacted by Bill 74. And some of 

the ludicrous things they do, Mr. Speaker, as evidenced today, 

is they’re increasing our debt by $1 billion as a result of their 

mismanagement, their gross mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. 

And there’s going to be a lot more words about their 

mismanagement as time goes on, Mr. Speaker. We’re seeing 

that. 

 

Now what I tell the people that may be watching this particular 

process under Bill 74, our municipal partners, and The Cities 

Act, we’re talking about The Cities Act and how they’re going 

to tweak a few things here and there. We’re talking about 

people that may have had a power bill or a gas bill attached to a 

property that has been unpaid. Now they’re going to make sure 

that there’s some means in which the city can actually get the 

bill paid before the sale to another party is undertaken. That’s 

what I assume the minister made reference to when they talked 

about an unpaid bill that is left on properties. Now we’re all for 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when the cities ask for things of this sort, their intent as a 

city is to try and become efficient and to try and become 

methodical and organized in some way to make sure that they 

administer the city’s affairs well. And that’s what I’m talking 

about, the little tweaks here and there. But the minor actions 

that this Sask Party government as evidenced in Bill 74 are no 

way, in any way, shape, or form complemented by the manner 

in which they’re managing the finances of our province. I think 

the critic used the phrase of $1 billion in debt increase today, 

our Finance critic. And that’s an absolute shame. 

 

And one of the things that people out there in 

Saskatchewanland have always maintained, Mr. Speaker, if 

there’s one thing we’d like to see happen is we’d like the 

government to manage our economy and manage our finances 

well. And today as a result of some of the mid-year financial 

statements that the Finance minister has unveiled, we can have 

Bill 74 that may help the cities and a small tweak here and there 

that might be of value to the cities, Mr. Speaker. But the 

greatest challenge or the greater challenge is the big global 

issues and how the Sask Party has failed miserably to manage 

the finances of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Bill 74, Mr. Speaker, again we talk about things like boundary 

issues. And boundary issues I think, Mr. Speaker, again goes 

back to the earlier statement I made from the previous bill on 

the whole notion of amalgamation. 

 

Now what we’ve got to try and figure out, Mr. Speaker, on The 



November 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2231 

Cities Act is that there are 16 cities in Saskatchewan that are 

being impacted by some of these bills. And I mentioned the 

tweaking that’s going on, and I’m sure that the SUMA and 

SARM have had their say. But really I think overall, Mr. 

Speaker, is there other major issues that the Sask Party is not 

dealing with by putting bills of this sort that the cities may have 

asked for? We don’t know the answer to that question. But I 

can say one thing though, Mr. Speaker, is every city 

administrator, every mayor and council of the 16 cities 

probably managed their money a heck of a lot better than the 

Sask Party has been managing ours, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s the point, is that when we talk about leadership at 

the municipal level it’s very, very important — it’s very 

important — that we recognize the work that they have done 

and, Mr. Speaker, the parameters in which they operate, Mr. 

Speaker. And the most important thing is that they’re not 

mismanaging our cities’ budgets much like the Sask Party has 

been mismanaging our provincial budget. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan cities the question that I 

would like to ask is from the municipal perspective, The Cities 

Act themselves, I understand from my experience within the 

municipal politics is that municipalities cannot predict a deficit, 

that a community has to show through the proper process that a 

city or the towns or villages are not going broke and, in this 

case Bill 74, that they’ve got to show a financial plan as part of 

the agreement for funding that shows that they’re not going 

hopelessly in debt. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what we’re seeing now is that many of the 

cities have been forced to do one thing, as a result of the Sask 

Party’s incompetence at managing the economy nor the 

finances of our province, is we’re seeing a lot of cities going 

into huge debt. They’re going into huge debt. And much of the 

taxpayers, the Saskatchewan taxpayers out there may not know 

that they are being taxed in many ways, shapes, or forms to 

cover some of that huge debt load. Because any time a city 

borrows, guess what? The residents are paying those bills. 

 

So quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, again there is a hypocrisy in the 

manner in which the Sask Party’s been governing this province. 

On one hand, as I mentioned in Bill 74, they’re allowing the 

community or the cities to retain more debt — and the 

universities are another story — but in this case the cities are 

also increasing their debt. Well what happens is the people of 

Saskatchewan have to pay it, and the people of those 

communities have to pay it. 

 

Now what happens if the same parameters, the same guidelines 

that the Sask Party forces onto our larger centres in making sure 

that they have a good, transparent accounting system, Mr. 

Speaker, if they had the same process that they have designated 

the cities to undertake when they’re talking about their financial 

statements — that they’ve got to be accountable, they’ve got to 

be transparent, and they’ve got to follow certain rules and 

regulations and models, Mr. Speaker? Why hasn’t the Sask 

Party followed what they preach? It’s because people would 

find out, as the auditor has, that how they do their books, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s very, very confusing. 

 

Today now the bottom line is we have to take their word and 

their document. And we have to look at it and say, what have 

they done? And in their own very document, the mid-year 

financial statement, Mr. Speaker, they have shown that 

Saskatchewan’s debt is increasing $1 billion — $1 billion as a 

result of the Sask Party’s incompetence. And all we asked them 

when they assumed the growing population, the booming 

economy, and money in the bank when we left government, Mr. 

Speaker, in 2007, we asked them not to mess it up. And what 

did they do? They messed it up. 

 

And this is another example of how in Bill 74 is in the 16 cities, 

they now have to pay for the incompetence of the Sask Party. 

So people out there that are property owners or get service from 

the city, you see the increase in some of the taxes and the 

service fees. Guess what? That’s a result of the incompetence of 

the Sask Party. Do not blame the cities, Mr. Speaker, because 

they’re the ones trying to do the job properly. They’re the ones 

that have followed the rules and regulations. They’re the ones 

that have all the responsibility, Mr. Speaker. And about the only 

people that don’t have any responsibility and blame everybody 

for all the problems and can’t seem to manage things at all, Mr. 

Speaker, are the 49 souls across the way called the 

Saskatchewan Party. 

 

So I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that Bill 74, where they talk 

about the cities in general, don’t make any reference to your 

growth strategy because it’s counterproductive. It’s very 

counterproductive from our perspective. We need to deal with 

the cities on an individual basis as a separate entity. Don’t tie 

them to your silly growth strategy because nobody really buys 

that anyway, Mr. Speaker. It’s got to be the silliest slogan that 

ever . . . Whoever come up with that slogan in the 

Saskatchewan Party ought to be sent back, back to public 

education to try and find a different slogan. Because the growth 

strategy slogan that the Sask Party is using actually, Mr. 

Speaker, is a big, fat joke. 

 

So I think it’s really important that people out there, I think, 

understand that. And the cities, the cities themselves, Mr. 

Speaker, they’re doing a great job of promoting our province. 

They’re doing a great job of promoting their cities. They’re 

doing a great job of promoting their businesses in spite of the 

incompetence of the Sask Party. And that’s one of the things 

that we ought to recognize and fully support and oversee what 

the Sask Party has in plan or has in store for the cities that are 

very successful. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that this is once again 

much similar to the previous bill, that there some concerns 

about boundary issues. I would hope that some of the recent 

issues they brought up in the Assembly in relation to the 

transportation hub outside this particular city, that some of 

these issues can be resolved, that there’s the RMs involved, the 

cities involved, there’s a bunch of other issues at play here. And 

this is one of the examples where I’ve indicated that the RMs 

seem to know what they’re doing. The cities seems to know 

what they’re doing. But one of the biggest confusing partners in 

all that, Mr. Speaker, is of course the Sask Party government. 

 

So every time we have the comments of this and that in terms 

of what the Sask Party envisions as their growth plan, there’s a 

collective laugh over here in the opposition. Because that’s 



2232 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2012 

exactly what we think is, it’s a very laughable slogan that they 

picked up, Mr. Speaker. They talk about growth, and I 

mentioned the only thing growing in the province under the 

Sask Party is our debt. The only thing growing under the Sask 

Party is the ever-increasing amounts that people pay for their 

power bills, for their phone bills, for their gas bills, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And that the only thing growing in this particular process, Mr. 

Speaker, is the Minister of Finance’s nose because every time 

he gets up and claims it’s a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker, we 

see that nose growing and growing and growing. And every 

time he gets up to explain, to explain his budget, he turns red. 

And, Mr. Speaker, then to us that signifies embarrassment in 

how the money has or how the finances have been mismanaged. 

And, Mr. Speaker, may his name be attached next to the $1 

billion deficit in the history of Saskatchewan as the person 

responsible for that debt under this particular Premier. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of issues that are at play on Bill 

74. There are 16 cities who want to see the growth continue. 

We’re happy to see them as great accountable partners. They 

have some issues that they want to be resolved, and we’re going 

to follow those issues here in Bill 74. The municipal partners 

seem to be doing very well, but they know on the horizon, Mr. 

Speaker, they see, the leaders see, that there is going to be some 

challenges. One of them is infrastructure challenges because 

many communities need to replace their water and sewer 

systems. The cities themselves know that they’ve got to find 

ways and means that they can develop land and develop more 

lots for people to build homes on. These are all the challenges 

that the cities see down the road. 

 

But the number one thing that they would expect the cities, in 

the partnership mode with anybody in this particular situation 

with the provincial government, Mr. Speaker, is they want that 

senior partner to be accountable, to be balanced, and not to spin 

numbers so as to appear to have a balanced budget. So any time 

the Saskatchewan Party talk about a balanced budget, there’s a 

huge round of laughter on this side of the House because it’s 

exactly the response that should be given when the minister 

gets up and talks about this balanced budget. Balanced, 

schmalanced — that’s what we say on this side of the House. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s really important that we continue 

hammering home, and I say today, Mr. Speaker, that the first 

time the Saskatchewan Party were out of sync on their 

projections for potash, I think it’s something like $2 billion. 

Was that 2 billion, John? Two billion dollars they were off; just 

a hair on the outside of their projections, Mr. Speaker. Today 

now they’re only half a billion off. So at least they’re getting 

better, not much better, but at least they’re getting better at 

suffering huge losses on their projections for income. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s going to continue. That is going to 

continue. We see there’s some very dark clouds on the horizon 

which we were hoping would never happen, Mr. Speaker. But 

that’s exactly what you get when you put a right wing 

government in charge of an economy built by the NDP. They 

simply don’t know how to do it. They simply don’t know how 

to manage the finances. They don’t know how to manage and 

sustain a growing population. They don’t know how to manage 

a growing population. They can’t meet the needs of that 

growing population, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And yet every time you hear them talk about anything, oh the 

right wing guys are going to figure out the economy. We should 

never leave a booming, growing industrial economy to the right 

wingers, Mr. Speaker, because they’ll mess it up. And this is 

evidence of how easy they’d mess it up. Six years later, $1 

billion more to our debt, thanks to the Sask Party. And they 

come along and talk about their growth strategy, try and attach 

a growth strategy to that integral part of that really good 

growth, and that’s the partners called the cities, Mr. Speaker. So 

every time they do their growth strategy attaching to a very 

valuable partner like the cities, Mr. Speaker, our job in 

opposition is to get up and tell the people the cities are good. 

The Sask Party is not. 

 

Some of these things that they’re trying to undertake, Mr. 

Speaker, the cities are making things happen in spite of the 

bungling and incompetence of the Sask Party, in spite of their 

inability to figure it out, Mr. Speaker, the cities are still doing a 

good job. And on this side of the Assembly, every time they 

mention growth strategy, on this side of the Assembly, the 

opposition simply look at them and wonder which planet are 

these 49 people from. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out today that Bill 74, the 16 

cities in Saskatchewan, we congratulate the two new cities, and 

we tell them we look forward to continuing seeing the 

leadership in balancing your budget and making things happen 

in Saskatchewan, in spite of the Sask Party’s bungling. We 

encourage the cities to continue building and to continue living 

within their means and to continue monitoring what the 

province does under things like Bill 74, and above all else, Mr. 

Speaker, to take no lessons on how to build an economy or how 

to build infrastructure from the Sask Party. Because they just 

don’t have the competency to provide that advice, Mr. Speaker, 

and that’s the bottom line. We encourage them to continue 

building. 

 

Don’t take advice from these guys because they don’t have a 

clue what they’re doing. They don’t have a clue what they’re 

doing. And all they seem to do, Mr. Speaker, is that they go 

from one crisis to another. They bungle one issue after another, 

and they turn around and say, look what we did, when they 

didn’t have any, even a remote connection to what’s happening 

in Saskatchewan today. 

 

The economy’s moving, population’s growing. People are 

optimistic, Mr. Speaker. And we all knew that was going to 

come, and it’ll continue in spite of the Sask Party government, 

Mr. Speaker. And it would have been even better under the 

NDP government because they would have done things right. 

They would have done things with a plan, would have done 

things with a vision, Mr. Speaker. And the problem with that 

government is they just don’t know how to do it. And that’s the 

bottom line. They just don’t know what they’re doing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as much as we have a lot of comments on Bill 

74, my colleagues want to get into the discussion of this bill. 

They want to network with some of their contacts. And the only 

bit of advice we’d have for our city partners that have been 

identified in this bill is, every time they mention growth 

strategy to you, head for the nearest exit because that’s where 



November 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2233 

you should go. Cities as partners here, don’t take any advice 

from the Sask Party on how to grow Saskatchewan because 

they’d mess it up. They have messed it up, Mr. Speaker. And 

they have messed it up, despite having $2.5 billion left in their 

bank account. Today, now, five years later, we’re increasing 

debt by $1 billion. So any time you have a Sask Party member 

visit you as cities, and they talk growth strategy, you either turn 

up the fans so you can’t hear them or head for the nearest exit, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So on Bill 74, to the 16 cities of Saskatchewan, we’ll work with 

you. We’ll want to connect with you. We want to learn from 

you as to how to build and continue to build in the economy. 

And, Mr. Speaker, above all else, the only warning we would 

have for the cities under Bill 74 is make sure you follow up and 

follow through with what the minister was speaking about 

because we hope they don’t bungle that up too. Because the 

intent of what they’re trying to do here in making the cities 

stronger is something that we admire. And therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, we want to take the time to look at the bill, to 

sincerely assess the bill and to talk and work with our partner 

communities and partner organizations, especially our 16 cities, 

on how to become more effective as a government. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 

Bill 74. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The member from 

Athabasca has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 74, The Cities 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 75 — The Northern Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the 

Minister of Government Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of Bill No. 75, The Northern Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2012. This bill will amend The Northern 

Municipalities Act, 2010 which provides the legal framework 

for the governance and administration of northern 

municipalities. These Acts are being amended to support 

government directives and better meet sector needs. 

 

The amendments proposed in this bill serve the following 

purposes. First, they support government’s competitiveness and 

growth strategy related to business licensing, overweight 

vehicle permitting, boundary alteration, and municipal 

procurement. Second, they provide northern councils with 

greater ability to deal with inactive municipal development 

corporations, clarify provisions regarding northern hamlet 

incorporation and northern settlement dissolution, and make 

terms of office for members appointed to the northern 

municipal trust account management board consistent with 

those for municipal councillors, which is four years. Third, they 

address other requests from across the municipal sector to 

clarify wording and improve consistency among the municipal 

Acts regarding primarily administrative matters. They make 

other changes identified by the ministry to clarify areas such as 

education property tax reporting, licence fees, and purchasing 

policies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take a few moments to highlight some 

of these changes. First, to support growth and enhance 

competitiveness in Saskatchewan, amendments to the 

business-licensing provisions will enable municipalities to 

establish and enter intermunicipal agreements and arrangements 

that reconcile business-licensing requirements such that a 

business or certain types of businesses may operate across 

participating municipalities under a single licence. They are 

voluntary provisions and ensure municipalities have the 

legislative authority to agree on such arrangements since these 

are regulatory powers. These amendments also support the 

intent of agreements such as the New West Partnership 

Agreement and the Agreement on Internal Trade to encourage 

municipalities to reconcile their licensing regimes similar to 

what Saskatchewan has done in partnership with the provinces 

of Alberta and British Columbia regarding the extraprovincial 

business registration option that became effective this past July. 

 

In addition, amendments to the overweight vehicle permitting 

provisions will give municipalities explicit authority to 

voluntarily enter into an agreement that would allow for an 

overweight permit issued by one of the municipalities that is 

part of the agreement to be recognized in the other 

municipalities that are also part of that agreement. 

 

Further, amendments to the boundary alteration provisions will 

improve and expedite the annexation process to make it work 

better for the municipalities involved and for the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board. These provisions will remove barriers 

impeding economic growth. They encourage municipalities to 

work co-operatively to resolve issues and differences to 

promote and support the growth and development occurring in 

our province and in our communities. 

 

The second category of amendments is more specific to the 

North to meet northern needs and support greater 

accountability. This bill includes amendments to assist northern 

municipalities to address inactive municipal development 

corporations. The municipalities involved have primary 

responsibility to address these issues by either dissolving the 

corporation or remedying any non-compliance issue. The 

amendments will clarify authority of municipalities to ensure 

municipal development corporations are meeting the 

requirements of this Act, such as relating to financial reporting 

or the Act under which it is incorporated. 

 

This bill also contains amendments related to northern hamlet 

incorporation and northern settlement dissolution. The northern 

hamlet incorporation amendments include a prescribed 

minimum taxable assessment as a criterion for northern hamlet 

incorporation. This amendment will provide greater consistency 

between this Act and The Municipalities Act with respect to 

incorporation at the first level of municipal status, and it’s 

intended to ensure municipal capacity at this level. 

 

The northern settlement dissolution amendments will clarify the 

process of allocating funding for the benefit of the area that was 

formerly a northern settlement. This process is unique to 



2234 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2012 

northern settlements only. The amendments will add flexibility 

to accommodate different situations in communities. It’s more 

appropriate to make the determination of allocating funding for 

the benefit of the area that was formerly a northern settlement 

in consultation with the community and based on analysis of 

the individual community needs. 

 

The last main category of amendments addresses other requests 

of stakeholders to clarify certain administrative matters such as 

the signing of council meeting minutes, consistent terminology 

regarding service or filing of assessment appeal notices, and 

adding contact information for appellant agents to assessment 

appeal notices. 

 

These changes were initially requested by others in the 

municipal sector to either The Cities Act or The Municipalities 

Act. To ensure consistency among the municipal Acts, these 

amendments are also included in this bill. 

 

My ministry also identified amendments to clarify certain 

provisions such as those regarding education property tax 

reporting. These reports will now go to the Ministry of 

Government Relations instead of the Ministry of Education and 

clarifying that fees for issuing a permit, inspection, or approval 

not exceed the costs of administration and enforcement — 

similar to the present situation regarding licence fees. 

 

In addition, back in the spring 2010 session, The Northern 

Municipalities Act, 2010 was in the Legislative Assembly for 

consideration and received Royal Assent at the same time with 

a few other Acts. Because of that, a few amendments could not 

be made at that time due to technical reasons. This bill contains 

those amendments as a consequence of the enactment of several 

Acts in the spring 2010 session. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments were developed in consultation 

with SUMA, New North, and the Northern Municipal Trust 

Account Management Board. These consultations began in 

mid-February 2012 and concluded at the end of August and 

involved sharing drafts side by side of all the amendments for 

review and comment. I would like to take the opportunity to 

thank all those individuals who took the time to provide input, 

advice, and feedback in the development of this legislation. 

 

In conclusion, this bill will address issues identified by the 

municipal sector, the ministry, and others to improve and 

streamline processes. These amendments strengthen 

accountability and transparency and encourage and support, 

co-operation, consultation, and forward-looking planning. They 

meet the needs of northern municipalities, the public, and 

business to support the continued growth of the province. And 

so, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 75, The 

Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The Minister of 

Government Relations has moved that Bill No. 75, The 

Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Once again I am pleased to be able to rise today to give our 

initial comments on Bill 75. And I looked at some of the 

examples of the bill that this particular government has brought 

forward. And, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s the first bill where we 

talk about amalgamation or the second bill of the city where 

they’re doing a little bit of tweaking but basically staying out of 

the way when it comes to the cities being able to drive the 

economy of Saskatchewan forward, and now it looks at the 

northern bill itself, the first words out of the minister’s mouth 

on this particular bill is dissolution of some of the northern 

communities that may have a smaller population, Mr. Speaker. 

So once again you see some of the evidence of this particular 

government. 

 

And how in the heck do you attach the word growth plan to the 

word dissolution of some of the northern governments, Mr. 

Speaker? And that’s exactly the point I made earlier, that you 

look at some of the issues that the North has been struggling 

with. And this is what’s really important. In northern 

Saskatchewan, because I have a lot of experience in the North, I 

travel to a lot of the communities. And you go to some of the 

smaller communities, and there may be 40, 50 people there, and 

they have a thriving community. Many of these people live off 

the land. Many of them have their own homes. They have 

vehicles. They have a great opportunity in some of these 

communities. And they also have a mayor and they have a few 

councillors that they basically look after their affairs, and they 

run a lot of services out of the northern hamlets and out of these 

northern settlements, Mr. Speaker. And people expect that to 

happen. People expect that some of these communities will 

have leadership and that the services will be provided to them. 

 

So here we go again. Like the oxymoron in this particular 

example is the Sask Party talking about a growth plan, Mr. 

Speaker, and in the next breath they’re talking about dissolution 

of some of the northern settlements and some of the northern 

hamlets, Mr. Speaker. So it’s really kind of a weird way of 

communicating with the people saying, oh, we want to talk 

about the growth plan, but here’s the plan to really dissolve a 

lot of our northern communities of their status of being a hamlet 

or being a settlement. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in northern Saskatchewan, once again, the 

same example I would say applies to this Act as the example 

used under The Cities Act. In northern Saskatchewan the 

communities, the First Nations bands as well as the local 

municipality authorities, whether they’re the mayor and council 

or whether the chief and the band council, they want this 

government to do a number of things, Mr. Speaker. They don’t 

want to have the government to ask of this major Bill 75, 

dissolve northern communities. That’s not what they’re asking 

for. 

 

They’re asking for the help. Build the economy in the North by 

giving us access to decent highways, by giving us access to 

decent training, to give us access to decent services, Mr. 

Speaker, and to also give us access to becoming part of all the 

decisions that are impacting, which many northern people feel, 

on the lands that they have occupied for generations and have 

used and have been used by their families and forefathers and 

so on and so forth. 

 



November 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2235 

So, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that the northern 

communities want is they also want cell coverage. We stand up 

every day. We talk about cellphone coverage and the need for 

some of these communities to be given the ability to utilize 

cellphone coverage. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what the northern 

communities want. They don’t want what’s provided under this 

particular bill, where you talk about dissolving their local 

council and firing their local mayor. That’s not what this is 

about. What should happen is we should be embracing these 

partners and bringing them in together to talk about how we can 

build the northern economy stronger and one that’ll be 

sustainable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So one of the things I think is really important under Bill 75, it 

really misses the mark. The intent, the tone, the direction that 

the minister has taken on this particular bill, Mr. Speaker, is 

way off. It is way off. We in the Assembly, both the member 

from Cumberland and I, we talk about things like support for 

the trapping industry. We talk about things like support for the 

commercial fishing industry. We talk about issues like the duty 

to consult, the forestry issues that impact our community, the 

fresh water, the pollution that’s coming from Fort McMurray, 

Mr. Speaker. We talk about housing problems. We talk about 

highways problems. We talk about the lack of services. We talk 

about all these issues. Highways, cell phone, health services, 

housing, the lists goes on.  

 

And what happens, Mr. Speaker, is about the only reference 

that the Sask Party has in their entire government is a reference 

under Bill 75 talking about dissolving some northern 

settlements and northern hamlets, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the 

shame of the Saskatchewan Party right now today is that they 

don’t realize the fact that many of these communities are 

bustling communities. Their economy is tied to the land. The 

economy is not tied to the 40 or 50 houses that constitute a 

settlement or constitute a hamlet, Mr. Speaker. Yes, the people 

live in these houses that are collectively in one spot, but their 

economy is much like the RM economy. It spreads far and 

wide, whether it’s jobs at the mine site or whether it’s tourism 

or whether it’s commercial fishing or trapping or forestry. The 

land is what’s providing the opportunities to some of these 

hamlets and settlements, Mr. Speaker. And these people have 

for many, many years been able to survive on that land. Now 

along comes the Sask Party, and one of their first major 

expressions of interest in northern Saskatchewan is Bill 75 

talking about dissolving northern hamlets or dissolving 

settlements. And that’s a crying shame, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other point that the minister mentioned was saying it’s part 

of our growth strategy. It’s part of our growth strategy. Now 

we’re going to amalgamate and refine their licensing processes. 

Well let me tell you, Bear Creek doesn’t have a bylaw 

enforcement officer. Garson Lake doesn’t have a licensing 

process. You know the small hamlet of Patuanak doesn’t have a 

process where you have an administrator, assistant 

administrator, and 10 staff to help provide those services. It’s 

the mayor and the council and a few staff members that are 

doing all this work. So when you talk about the North and the 

hamlets and the settlements as if it’s a large city that has all 

these services, I think you should do, as I told the Minister of 

Highways today, is get with the program and really start to 

understand your files. 

 

The bottom line is you should be enhancing and working with 

these small hamlets and settlements to try and form a regional 

governance model, much like the RMs. Why aren’t there RMs 

in northern Saskatchewan? Why aren’t we part of the RM 

structure and having settlements like Grandmother’s Bay 

become part of a larger management area? I mean why don’t 

we have like Bear Creek and Sled Lake become wider-ranging, 

more authoritative entities, Mr. Speaker? You know why? 

Because northern Saskatchewan is rich with all kinds of 

resources.  

 

There are tremendous values in the northern people, and they 

know, they know that the northern resource sector does a lot for 

the provincial sector. That we know, Mr. Speaker. So when the 

minister makes any reference to the North, the only words I’ve 

heard coming out of the Sask Party’s mouths opposite is, we 

want to see if we can dissolve some of these northern 

communities. 

 

Within the NDP, Mr. Speaker, had the Sask Party had any 

respect for northern Saskatchewan people, they wouldn’t be 

telling, they wouldn’t be showing the commercial fishing 

industry the disrespect that they’ve shown. And a good example 

of that, Mr. Speaker, is they cancelled our fish freight subsidy. 

They booted out Freshwater Fish Marketing Corporation out of 

the province with no backup plan, and they just steadfastly 

refused to support the commercial fishing industry. They have 

rejected the commercial fishing industry. Then they turn around 

and they say, some of this action we’re doing with the northern 

governments is meant to support our growth strategy. Well how 

in the heck did you dash all hopes of developing a commercial 

fishing industry, then talk about a growth strategy? 

 

Then they turn around and look at the trapping industry. They 

have rejected the trapping industry’s issues as well. They have 

said no to a lot of the funding. The funding, we don’t think, is 

going to be back at all. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the Minister for the 

Environment wrote a letter to some of the leadership that are 

involved with the trapping industry, saying the duty to consult 

does not apply to the commercial trapping industry because it’s 

not an impacted industry that was identified in the Supreme 

Court of Canada’s decision. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, why didn’t they say that before the last 

election? Why did they simply drag along the trappers and 

saying, oh we’ll work with you; we’ll do this with you? Then 

all of a sudden as soon as the election’s over, oh we’re sorry. 

The minister has no more time for you. Oh and by the way, by 

the way, the commercial trapping file, it’s no longer part of our 

discussion under the duty to consult because it wasn’t 

recognized by the legal people. 

 

And that’s exactly our point, Mr. Speaker, is that not only have 

they turned their backs on many other groups and organizations 

throughout the province. They have deliberately and with a lot 

of maliciousness have really turned their backs and have done 

things contrary, and have really hurt the commercial fishing 

sector. They have hurt the traditional trapping industry. They 

don’t look at no industry in northern Saskatchewan that the 

Aboriginal people had developed having any merit in their 

growth plan. 

 

And you look at some of the issues of forestry as well. No 



2236 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2012 

investment into forestry whatsoever. So our people out there are 

doing the very best they can given the limited resources that 

they have to have some semblance of a community and have 

services, and of course of having a mayor and council in place 

to look after the area and to continue building partnerships with 

other communities. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as you can see, as you can see it is an absolute 

insult when they had the minister get up and make reference to 

the Sask Party’s growth plan when they talk about simply 

dissolving some of these northern municipal governments. And 

then you see some of the action on the other side of how they 

totally ignored northern Saskatchewan. Last time we looked, 

looked for any kind of highway improvement or investment, 

and not one red cent for northern Saskatchewan. Now, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — They made a promise to Wollaston. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — That’s right. They made a promise to 

Wollaston. That money is gone. Four years later, Wollaston 

Lake still hasn’t got a road. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, some people out there would even go so far 

as they’re saying, well they’re penalizing the North because the 

North voted for NDP. The bottom line, Mr. Speaker, is us on 

this side of the Assembly do not believe that in any way, shape, 

or form. This has been the mean-spiritedness of the Sask Party 

for years and years, when they were called conservatives, when 

they got embarrassed on the national stage by the then leader, 

Jim Sinclair, about their downright disregard for the Aboriginal 

people and northern people, Mr. Speaker. Some of those days 

and some of those thoughts and processes are still being 

expressed across the way by the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 

Speaker. And some of those views are still held to this day — 

are still held to this day. 

 

And the northern people, and the northern people would say 

this to them — you know, if I can capture their words — okay, 

if the Sask Party doesn’t want to invest in our families, into our 

communities, into protecting some of the smaller municipal 

governments identified in Bill 75, of recognizing our needs and 

acknowledging our needs, then at the very least, at the very 

least, stop taking the resources out of the North and let us have 

some benefits of some of those resources and let us build our 

own economy. Let us do what we want to do in northern 

Saskatchewan. Give us back the land that you took away for 

forestry companies. Give us back the service rights that you 

dealt away by some of the larger mining companies. Give us 

the opportunity to train our own kids, to train our own 

grandkids to take over some of the jobs at the mining 

companies or some of the mine sites, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The people of the North aren’t anti-mining, Mr. Speaker. They 

want to see the benefits attached with some of the resources 

being hauled out of the North at the tune of billions of dollars 

each year. So northern Saskatchewan people sit there and they 

say, well why aren’t you guys dealing with our issues? It’s not 

because they voted NDP, Mr. Speaker. We tell people because 

they don’t want to acknowledge the North. They don’t want to 

acknowledge the Aboriginal people that live in the North, and 

the non-Aboriginal people. They don’t want to spend the 

money to fix the roads and provide cell coverage or provide 

addiction services or provide housing help, Mr. Speaker. All we 

want to do, the Sask Party, is suck as many resources out of 

northern Saskatchewan without spending no money and putting 

no money back, Mr. Speaker. That’s exactly what they want to 

do. 

 

[15:45] 

 

So it has nothing to do with who the northern people voted for, 

Mr. Speaker. It has everything to do with the Sask Party looks 

at the North as an opportunity to take billions out and putting 

nothing back, Mr. Speaker. And that, Mr. Speaker, from our 

perspective defines greed, Mr. Speaker, and from our 

perspective it defines outright disregard for our great people, 

people of northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what do the people of northern Saskatchewan want, Mr. 

Speaker? They don’t want no special deals. They don’t want no 

special deals. You know, park your special deals somewhere. 

What the people of northern Saskatchewan want is they want a 

fair deal. They want a fair deal and recognizing that there’s a lot 

of resources being taken out of the North. The North is rich in 

resources. And instead of taking, taking, taking, taking by the 

Sask Party, why don’t you start putting some of the money back 

and investing properly in northern Saskatchewan? Instead the 

first bill that you make any reference in northern Saskatchewan 

on is Bill 75, and part of the discussion the minister spoke 

about was dissolving some of these northern municipal 

governments that may be too small for their liking. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the trappers, the commercial fishing 

industry, the Métis Nation, the FSIN [Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations], the New North organization, 

many of the local chiefs and the mayors and the MLAs, we’re 

going to stand up to the Sask Party pretty darn quick here, Mr. 

Speaker, because we’ve had enough of this kind of treatment of 

seeing resources being hauled out of the North on crummy 

roads, Mr. Speaker, of seeing people being stuck on roads 

where they can’t phone for help because there’s no cellphone 

coverage. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of jobs in southern 

Saskatchewan that the northern economy helps create and helps 

maintain. People know that in the North. And all the northern 

people asked was one simple thing, was a bit of respect. Give 

us decent roads to travel on, safe roads to travel on. Give us 

decent services like housing. Give us decent services like 

training for our kids so we can be part of this economy. 

 

But what does the Sask Party do? They turned their backs. They 

turned their backs on the northern people, and about the only 

reference that they make in their entire vocabulary in the last 

number of years since they’ve been elected was The Northern 

Municipalities Act. And what was it about? It was to dissolve 

smaller settlements and dissolve smaller hamlets, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s an absolute shame. I concur with the member from 

Cumberland — it’s an absolute shame. 

 

And I would say this to the Sask Party: keep up that kind of 

treatment of northern Saskatchewan and there will be some 

trouble. And I don’t know what that trouble is yet, but there’s 

more and more anger. There’s more and more anger towards 

how the northern people are being treated, Mr. Speaker, and 



November 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2237 

there’s going to be a lot more action. I fear that many people 

are going to get angrier and angrier to the point where there will 

be some major problems. And I’m asking the Sask Party to 

recognize that today and do something to correct some of that 

anger and frustration that’s out there. 

 

So the manner in which you treated our trappers, the manner in 

which you treated our commercial fishing industry, the manner 

in which you’re trying to kick out working people from their 

homes that they’ve lived in the last 18, 19 years . . . Because 

they got a job, now you want to kick them out of these homes. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, you keep that up as a Sask Party 

government; you’re going to get a lot of frustrated people 

responding to you in a big, big way. In a big way. And it’s not 

going to be a very positive way. And that’s why I tell people in 

northern Saskatchewan, be patient. Be patient, because our time 

will come. Our time will come. And the continual disregard by 

the Sask Party to northern issues, there will be a price to pay, 

Mr. Speaker. And I can’t take any guesses to what that will be, 

and I hope it’s nothing major, Mr. Speaker. But the frustration 

is building, and people of the North are angry about this stuff. 

They’re very, very angry. 

 

And I can tell you right now that the minister gets up and talks 

about dissolving some of these northern governments, Mr. 

Speaker. Not a word of dissolving some of the smaller 

governments in the South. Not a word. You mention 

amalgamation to the Sask Party. They won’t admit it, but 

they’re doing it privately. But they’ll never, ever say that in 

public. When it comes to the North, they’re more than willing 

to say it, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the crux of the problem is that 

the northern Saskatchewan people are not going to continue to 

sit by and take the grief from the Sask Party that they have over 

the last number of years. I think now, Mr. Speaker, that we’re 

going to see a lot more people getting angrier and standing up 

and saying something, that there are coalitions being developed. 

 

And you sit here today. You sit here today, and you hear the 

minister talk about New West Partnership. Well how does that 

impact Stony Rapids, the New West Partnership? Well guess 

what? Their New West Partnership deal implicates how Stony 

Rapids does business. Sled Lake, guess what? They’ve got to 

follow this New West Partnership deal that the Sask Party 

created. Well they don’t have the resources to do that, Mr. 

Speaker. How are they going to resolve that as a small 

community? They don’t have the resources. 

 

So you have this New West Partnership that absolutely nobody 

really wanted, and there are so many problems with that 

partnership. And one of the biggest things now is that anything 

over a specified amount on a New West Partnership — it 

doesn’t matter if you’re a municipal partner — you’ve got to 

advertise that. 

 

Well I can’t see Missinipe being able to, you know, being able 

to do that. Say they have to replace a fire truck. Well guess 

what? If they’ve got to go advertise right across Western 

Canada because that’s the provision under the New West 

Partnership, well they don’t have the resources. They don’t 

have the means to do that. But do you know what’s going to 

happen? The Sask Party is going to instruct their municipal 

advisers, anybody that has anything over 50,000 — I think 

that’s the figure — you will now advertise that across Western 

Canada under a New West Partnership. And guess what? The 

hamlet or the settlement will pay that. They’ll pay that cost. 

They’ll pay the advertising. They’ll pay the outreach. 

 

That’s exactly my point, Mr. Speaker, is the contrary actions of 

the Sask Party under the notion of growing this province. It’s 

striking, the fact that they have not . . . don’t have an idea what 

they’re doing. And yet people, whether it’s a northern hamlet or 

a large city, they seem to make things happen and do things 

properly, but these guys across the way don’t have a clue as to 

how to get it done. 

 

So how does this work? You throw a growth strategy under the 

northern Act. You throw a New West Partnership under the 

termination of some of the hamlets and settlements in northern 

Saskatchewan. And why doesn’t that fit? Why doesn’t it fit? It 

just seems this doesn’t fit very well, Mr. Speaker. So my point 

is, you know, is to the minister, you’ve got to start paying 

attention to northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And the problem you have if you don’t start paying attention to 

northern Saskatchewan except through provisions and bills of 

this sort, what’s going to happen is that people of the North are 

going to start spreading that anger, not just to the Sask Party 

government, but they’re going to start spreading that anger to 

resource companies that are working in the North whether it be 

Cameco or Areva or some of the larger centres. They’re going 

to be painted the same brush as the Sask Party, and I can almost 

guarantee you that the Camecos and the Arevas and some of the 

forestry companies don’t want to be tied at all to the Sask Party, 

Mr. Speaker. They don’t want to be tied at all. 

 

And that’s the point when it comes from northern 

Saskatchewan issues. They better start resolving those problems 

or the problem is the North is going to start standing up and 

who’ll be implicated in the poor governance of the Sask Party is 

resource companies that are operating in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We know that day is coming. Me and the member from 

Cumberland know very well the mood and the position that 

many northern people are taking. And the more and more 

disregard and disrespect that the Sask Party shows the North, 

the more and more the fact that all they want out of the North 

are the resources and not putting nothing back, all they want out 

of the North is to be able to dissolve smaller settlements and 

smaller hamlets as their action plan for the North, well, Mr. 

Speaker, that kind of disregard and disrespect will not go 

unnoticed and it will not go unpunished, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s why the people of the North look at this Sask Party 

government and shake their head in utter belief because they 

know they don’t have a clue what to do about the economy, the 

Sask Party doesn’t. And the people of the North are just 

embarrassed by this government and they’re angry about their 

disrespect toward northern Saskatchewan people. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned at the outset, mining 

companies know full well the anger and the mood of people in 

northern Saskatchewan. They know full well. And you look at 

some of the bills that the minister’s bringing forward, Bill 75. 

Why would you attach Bill 75 and the intent to dissolve some 

of these smaller settlements and hamlets to your growth 

strategy? Like where is the sense there? And this is where we in 



2238 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2012 

opposition, we implore the minister, read your files. You can’t 

on one hand talk about growth strategy and then turn around 

and say, but we’re allowing provisions to dissolve some of 

these northern communities. 

 

Well who has the authority, Mr. Speaker? He has the authority 

because many times he’s considered the ex officio mayor from 

some of these smaller settlements and some of these smaller 

hamlets. So what happens, Mr. Speaker, is that he can 

arbitrarily dissolve some of these communities. And is that 

another slap in the face to northern Saskatchewan people? I 

think absolutely it is. It absolutely is. 

 

So you look at some of these mines. You look at some of these 

mines. One doesn’t have to be a genius to figure out what they 

extract out of northern Saskatchewan from one mine site, from 

one industry. And I’ll give you a good example, Mr. Speaker. 

In Key Lake they load up yellowcake in the 45-gallon drum 

containers. And that yellowcake is not really filled right to the 

top, but yellowcake is placed in these special drums. Those 

drums are loaded onto a semi. And of course the semi takes 

them from the mine site because Key Lake does all the 

processing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that one drum itself, 45-gallon drum of 

yellowcake, that’s not full. I think the value of that drum is 

about $65,000 just the contents themselves. And sometimes 

they’ll haul out two or three semis, a couple of semis a day. 

And, Mr. Speaker, you can imagine the value of that 

yellowcake coming out of one mine, out of one industry, one 

mine. How much, how much money is being pulled out of 

northern Saskatchewan? We estimate there’s billions of dollars 

every year at least. From that one mine, has got to be close to 

$1 billion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what happens? What are the northern people asking for? 

One mine, one industry, one example — $1 billion a year. What 

do the northern people want? They don’t want a special deal. 

They want to work at the mine. They want to have their kids 

trained to be able to work at some of the other industries. They 

want respect for their land. And they want decent, safe 

highways and services like cellphones and decent housing for 

their people. It’s not a huge ask, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what happens? This government totally ignores these 

northern issues and they ignore the northern issues and they 

ignore the northern issues on a continual basis. The Minister of 

Highways sent me a sheet of all the work he’s doing in 

Highways. And I looked at that sheet and, Mr. Speaker, I think 

half the work hasn’t been done yet. And I can almost guarantee 

you, half the contractors on that spreadsheet that he sent me 

haven’t been paid. There’s a big holdback on many of the 

contractors’ income. But what’s worse is half the province was 

off that worksheet, and that part was northern Saskatchewan. 

Northern Saskatchewan was completely off the Department of 

Highways worksheet in terms of identifying where the work 

was being done for highway improvement. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ll give you a good example of what I mean 

by working for northern Saskatchewan and some of these bills 

that are brought up. When Calvert was the premier of 

Saskatchewan, we had a lot of discussion on roadwork. We had 

a lot of discussion because when the economy started building 

under Calvert, the key thing is Romanow brought our province 

back from bankruptcy created by the Conservatives across the 

way. Calvert started building the economy and, Mr. Speaker, 

things were really happening. 

 

And one day we had a discussion on Highway No. 1, the 

Trans-Canada Highway. And Calvert wanted some action on 

that highway. And I was the minister at the time, just a newly 

minted Minister of Highways. And he come along, and I can 

tell you right now that we spent more money on Highway No. 1 

in the four or five years that Calvert was the premier than the 

Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the words that Calvert said is that we govern for all of 

Saskatchewan, is what he told our entire cabinet. We will 

govern for all of Saskatchewan. We’re not going to go to 

pockets of support because that does not denote leadership, is 

what he said. The important thing is that as premier at the time, 

Mr. Speaker, Calvert made very clear to his entire cabinet that 

we governed for all of Saskatchewan. And that means 

southeastern Saskatchewan as well as northwestern 

Saskatchewan. That means the cities. That means the rural 

areas. That means every part of this province. 

 

And today now, Mr. Speaker, we see from the Sask Party no 

respect for a number of areas. No respect for a number of areas, 

and northern Saskatchewan being one of them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’ll go back to the earlier statement, that a lot of time and a 

lot of effort was put in place to support the Trans-Canada 

Highway. And much of that money came from the NDP, Mr. 

Speaker, because it was the right thing to do. There was safety 

issues. There was major problems. And the NDP moved on that 

file, even though we traditionally don’t do well in that area, Mr. 

Speaker. Even though we don’t do well in that area, we put 

major investment in that area because it was the right thing to 

do. And, Mr. Speaker, we don’t see any evidence of that 

whatsoever from the Sask Party in terms of being fair. 

 

[16:00] 

 

So the message is, you govern for all of Saskatchewan. You 

stop treating certain sectors of our province in a negative way 

because that’s going to have consequences. And we’re already 

seeing evidence of that. And the least you can do is not bring up 

your silly growth strategy language when you talk about 

dissolving northern communities because that just does not fit 

in any way, shape, or form. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s tons of examples of how people in the 

North are simply fed up with this government, and they aren’t 

going to take it anymore. I’m not kidding. I’m telling the Sask 

Party, this is going to be a problem and it’s going to be a 

problem fairly soon. So you better start waking up to the fact 

that if the only reference you’re going to make to the northern 

Saskatchewan is through silly bills like Bill 75 to amalgamate 

some of the smaller communities, then you’re asking for a heap 

more problems and a heap more trouble. And you’re going to 

get it. 

 

Now northern Saskatchewan people, as I said at the outset, said 

they don’t want a special deal. They just want fairness. They 

want consistency and they want what every Saskatchewan 



November 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2239 

resident has, Mr. Speaker. At times they want to have decent, 

safe highways. They want to have access to health care. They 

want to have services like training, like cellphone use. These 

are some of the things that people in everyday walks of life take 

for granted. Well the northern Saskatchewan people wouldn’t 

mind doing that as well. 

 

And the other thing that people of Saskatchewan want, Mr. 

Speaker, is they want a decent government. And, Mr. Speaker, 

they are not getting it whatsoever from the Sask Party, and 

those days of the Sask Party rule are coming to an end, Mr. 

Speaker. We know that. We know that. And I think many 

people in the front bench know that as well. And as much as 

some of them may smile, Mr. Speaker, there is a process called 

elections. And as much as they try and gerrymander the 

process, the people of Saskatchewan will, will sooner — and I 

hope it’s a lot sooner — will get rid of this Sask Party, Mr. 

Speaker. Sooner than 2015 because I think there’s going to be a 

lot of trouble on the horizon. And once the honeymoon is over, 

once the honeymoon is over, guess what, Mr. Speaker? They go 

from heroes to zeros in a heart beat. And that happens in 

politics, Mr. Speaker, and that’s going to happen again. 

 

My bit of advice on Bill 75, Mr. Speaker, is the North is going 

to rise up. There are going to be a bunch of people that are 

going to get very angry. And they’ve had enough of being 

pushed around. They sincerely do. And as long as they talk 

about dissolution of smaller communities in the North, and 

that’s the only language they understand over there, Mr. 

Speaker, then I think the northern people are going to rise up 

and teach them a new language. And that language is 

responsibility. 

 

And the second message is you govern for all of Saskatchewan, 

including northern Saskatchewan, the same lesson that Calvert 

taught many of us in cabinet when we spend money and tons of 

money on all parts of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when you look at a leader like Calvert, who 

really built this economy, we know on this side of the House 

. . . And history will judge us, history will judge the NDP under 

Romanow and under Calvert, not the Sask Party. And they will 

realize quickly enough that the NDP provided some very 

critical leadership, that the NDP ushered in a resource 

opportunity for Saskatchewan, for many people throughout the 

country, if not the world. And Calvert brought in many, many 

companies. And we started seeing the economy chugging 

along, Mr. Speaker, and then it was starting to hum. 

 

And then all of sudden the election was called and now the 

Sask Party are jumping from their homes and saying, look what 

we’ve done. And the entire population of Saskatchewan has a 

collective laugh because so far they have marketed the fact that 

they claim they’ve done this. They claim that they’ve done this, 

built this economy. And I can tell the Saskatchewan people 

there has never been a right wing government in the history of 

Saskatchewan politics that has ever been successful at creating 

a booming economy and a great province. It’s always been 

under an NDP rule. And, Mr. Speaker, that applies to 2012 and 

beyond, Mr. Speaker, because the fact of the matter is the right 

wingers over there don’t have the skill set nor the mindset, and 

they simply don’t know what they’re doing. 

 

So on that point, Mr. Speaker, on this particular bill, we’re 

going to pay very close attention to Bill 75 because if there is 

any effort and any plan to undermine the economy, control and 

actions and authority of some northern municipal governments 

by trying to dissolve them, Mr. Speaker, that’s going to add 

further fuel to the fire, further fuel to the fire. Because I think 

what they’re trying to do is again suck out as much money out 

of the North as they can. And some of the activity they might 

do is dissolving some of these northern communities so they 

can pull out 60 or 70,000 out of the northern fund, so they can 

come and try and balance their books on the back of some of 

these smaller northern communities because we’ve seen 

evidence today that this government is broke. 

 

So they’re half a billion dollars off their projection, one more 

billion dollars in debt. They were 2 billion off their potash 

projections two years ago, Mr. Speaker, and I think the people 

of Saskatchewan have seen this before. They’ve been down this 

path before, and they say this conservative government is back. 

And now what you need to do is get rid of them once again. Get 

rid of them and send them packing, Mr. Speaker, and that 

opportunity will come forth fairly soon. 

 

So on that point, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the Assembly, I 

tell every New Democrat, every progressive-thinking person 

out there, and all the people that have been enamoured and 

fooled by the Sask Party so far is they have betrayed the trust of 

the Saskatchewan people. They’re making a mess of many 

things. We in the opposition are going to continue to fight and 

fight hard. We want to get rid of these guys because they don’t 

know what they’re doing. We need your help. We’ll continue 

fighting. We’ll continue clawing our way back. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that process begins when we elect a new 

leader in March and we start rebuilding our team. And I’ll be 

reaching to the people who want to run for the Saskatchewan 

New Democrats so we can build a greater province, a province 

that will last, not a province that’ll sell Crowns and that’ll 

compromise the environment or go to war with our working 

men and women, much like the Sask Party is doing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, a lot of issues under The Northern 

Municipalities Act that we want to cover. It’s all connected. It’s 

all important. And I can say today that any bill that the 

government wants to bring forward about northern 

communities, me and the member from Cumberland will be 

paying very close attention. Because we simply don’t trust 

these guys, and above all else, we want to get rid of them, Mr. 

Speaker. And the best way to do it is keep fighting them. And 

the reason why I want to get rid of them, they simply don’t 

know what they’re doing. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I want to adjourn debate on Bill 

75. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The member from 

Athabasca has moved adjourned debate on Bill 75, The 

Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 



2240 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2012 

Bill No. 76 — The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 2012 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the 

Minister of Government Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of Bill No. 76, The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 

2012. The Municipal Board Act establishes the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board and provides the framework through which it 

undertakes its responsibilities related to the approval, oversight, 

and adjudication of a variety of municipal governance matters. 

 

The amendments proposed in the bill address two general areas. 

First, they will improve the SMB’s processes and abilities 

related to municipal boundary alteration applications or 

annexations where the municipalities involved cannot reach 

agreement. These amendments are made in conjunction with 

other changes respecting annexations in the three municipal 

Acts. Second, the bill will respond to requests from the board 

and the ministry to update provisions regarding the appointment 

of part-time members, members’ pension plans, to correct and 

clarify wording and remove outdated references. 

 

I’ll briefly touch on how the amendments proposed in this bill 

accomplish this. In terms of municipal boundary alterations or 

annexations, the ministry conducted a review of the process for 

resolving annexation disputes between municipalities, 

consulted extensively with the SMB and the municipal sector, 

and identified several changes to the process to make it work 

better. 

 

I want to point out that by far the majority — approximately 88 

per cent of boundary alteration applications — are 

straightforward, are agreed to by both municipal councils, and 

do not come to the SMB. We encourage councils to continue to 

resolve issues on their own. Occasionally, however, the affected 

councils reach an impasse which results in no agreement, and 

the applications then go the SMB for decision. 

 

The amendments in this bill relate to that part of the annexation 

process after an application reaches the Municipal Board for a 

decision. The amendments improve this part of the process in 

the following ways: first, it will clarify the board secretary’s 

ability to determine the completeness of applications and to 

notify applicants of deficiencies before it may be considered by 

the board. This will speed up the process and save the board’s 

time for higher priority questions. This bill also ensures that 

councils undertake mediation to settle the dispute if none has 

been attempted prior to the SMB’s review and decision. The 

premise is that a voluntary settlement, even with the assistance 

of a mediator, is preferable to having the SMB impose a 

decision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the changes in this bill also include providing 

clear authority for the SMB to approve a portion or portions of 

an application. This change from an all-or-nothing approach 

means the board can find and approve compromises and solve 

at least part of the issue. As well, amendments are proposed to 

provide more flexibility in the appointment of alternate 

part-time members representing SARM and SUMA to sit on the 

panel that reviews and holds hearings regarding municipal 

boundary change applications. This is intended to address 

issues respecting the availability of these members in potential 

situations where the member’s municipality is a party to or 

affected by an application. 

 

These amendments I just mentioned support other amendments 

being proposed to the three municipal Acts related to the 

boundary alteration application process that are also being 

introduced this session. Together these changes will encourage 

municipalities to work co-operatively to resolve issues and 

balance competing interests in order to promote and support the 

growth and development occurring in and around our 

communities. 

 

The other amendments in this bill respond to requests from the 

board and the ministry to update the Act. These include 

enabling the appointment of part-time members by the minister. 

Full-time members will continue to be appointed by the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council. Part-time members will still be 

subject to the same membership qualifications that are set in 

regulations, allowing newly appointed board members to 

continue to contribute to pension plans in which they were 

previously enrolled such as municipal pension plans. The 

purpose of this change is to support the continued recruitment 

of board members from the local government sector. These are 

individuals who have acquired extensive experience, are 

relatively senior and well along in their careers, and who are in 

the best position to contribute to the board’s work without 

disrupting their pension arrangements from their local 

government careers. 

 

Also altering requirements to publish SMB orders in the 

Gazette from two publications to one publication, consistent 

with other Acts, and removing references to repealed legislation 

and discontinued board functions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the ministry has consulted extensively on the 

changes in this bill with the SMB and the municipal sector. 

Consultations occurred in 2011 on recommendations from the 

ministry’s review of the boundary alteration process. Further 

consultations were conducted with the SMB during 2012 on the 

amendments. The board is supportive of these proposed 

amendments. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, the amendments in this bill respond to 

improvements identified by the Saskatchewan Municipal 

Board, the municipal sector, and the ministry to make the 

boundary alteration process work better. They support the 

government’s growth plan and also provide more flexibility for 

the board both in terms of its decision-making abilities and in 

terms of recruiting new members. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 76, 

The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 2012. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 76, The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 2012. Is the 

Assembly ready . . . I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to once again stand today on behalf of the official 

opposition and offer our first look and our analysis of Bill 76. 

And, Mr. Speaker, if I’m correct in listening to what’s being 

proposed here, is that there is going to be some mediation on 



November 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2241 

some municipal boundary arguments or discussion that may 

occur under the Saskatchewan Municipal Board. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the member mentioned the fact that there’s 

88 per cent, I think was the figure he used, that most of the time 

that if there is a discussion or dispute in relation to a boundary 

of a municipal government, that generally it’s all kind of 

spoken out and people are generally co-operative and there’s 

usually not a big problem. But there are instances, Mr. Speaker, 

as the minister alluded to, that there may be some dispute. 

 

So what’s happened is there’s a couple points that I picked up 

on during his presentation. One is that the secretary responsible 

for the board, I think he said secretary, that she would be able to 

go through applications and determine whether they are 

completed or whether they’re properly filled out or whether the 

proper process was followed, and that if they’re not then she 

wouldn’t let it proceed to the board level. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m assuming that there has got to be a lot 

more professionalism out there that would make sure that 

applications for amalgamation or taking over a certain 

boundary of another jurisdiction, that people out there know 

how to fill these forms out properly. Now the question I have is 

that is there isn’t the, if that’s not the case, that if there is a lot 

of people that are not filling out these forms properly to allow 

for their application to go to the board, then we need to know 

what kind of a percentage of the applications is problematic. 

You know, like and that’s the point that I would make is that 

the secretary now has that ability to be able to determine which 

package is complete and which one is not. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Now how big of a problem is that, Mr. Speaker? We don’t 

know. And what we do know, according to the minister, is that 

88 per cent of the applications do come to the board and they’re 

usually handled and there may be some argument, but overall, 

there’s some success on 88 per cent of them. But of those 88 

per cent, how many of them have come to the board before and 

not properly filled out these forms? We don’t know that 

information and that would be nice to know, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what I want to say is that it may be logical to have the 

secretary be able to vet through these applications so the board 

isn’t consumed with applications that aren’t completely filled 

out, but is it going to solve that problem? That’s the real 

question, Mr. Speaker, that I have. 

 

The other issue that he raised, Mr. Speaker, was that if there is a 

dispute between somebody who wanted to annex a certain 

property and another group that may not want to have that 

occur — because that happens in Saskatchewan — then this 

Municipal Board can make a decision, but if it becomes too 

confusing, too conflicting, too problematic for the board to 

make a decision after the application has been deemed to be 

filled out properly by the administrator, then there is mediation 

that would be the next course of action for the application. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the question that we have in the opposition is, 

who does the mediating in terms of resolving a conflict when 

one party wants to annex another party’s property? And is it a 

judge? Is it a professional person that does all this kind of 

work? Is it anybody within the government employ? Like how 

generally is the process . . . [inaudible] . . . and who selects the 

mediators? Is it the province or is it the board? 

 

Because it’s really important to know that some of these 

applications that may occur from time to time, that if there is a 

huge dispute, then you go to the mediator and it depends who 

appointed that mediator. Sometimes that has a direct impact on 

the outcome of the mediator’s choice of which person that they 

want to support. And that’s my point is that we need to find out 

in greater detail, mediation with whom? Like who do you . . . 

How does the process work? And I think that’s important for 

the Saskatchewan public and the Saskatchewan people to know 

clearly how that works. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Municipal Board, the comment about 

the continuation of a pension plan because they had received it 

before. Certainly from our perspective we look at the pension 

plan, the value of a pension plan as something that we would 

certainly support, and that we would explain to people — the 

working men and women of our province — that this, having a 

pension plan at work, is really important and that we ought to 

take some time to understand how this works and to make sure 

that your perspective as an employee is to look at your employ 

for a long time so that when you do reach the age of retirement 

that you actually do have the necessary means to sustain your 

lifestyle. 

 

So I think that’s something that’s really, really important, Mr. 

Speaker, is that if the Municipal Board and some of the 

contents of Bill 76 is to strengthen that process whereas 

employees are protected by ways of a pension plan and that 

there is a seamless process in place and that this certainly 

protects the employees as best we can, or as best as possible, 

then it’s something that the official opposition can certainly 

support. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at the first blush there is a lot of questions and 

there’s a lot of issues that we potentially see that could be 

concerning. And some of these steps in these processes . . . As I 

indicated, there is the inference that this could possibly lead to 

some amalgamation of some of the RMs because I see that in 

all the language here today, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the 

important thing is that if the Sask Party is planning to 

amalgamate . . . And this is another tool that they would have at 

their disposal called a Saskatchewan Municipal Board, and that 

any dispute mechanism is in terms of annexing of land from 

one RM to another, that there will be a mediation process in 

place and that people will have to abide by that. So we look at 

all these issues and all these problems that could be created as a 

result of this bill and the potential harm that could come to 

some of the RMs or the towns, and some of the impacted 

choices and the decisions of the Saskatchewan Municipal 

Board. Certainly it merits more and more attention and more 

and more discussion. So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that 

we adjourn debate on Bill 76. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 76, The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 

2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

I’m going to call the question on the adjournment. All those in 

favour of adjourning the House, please say aye . . . Adjourning 

debate, sorry. Sorry, adjourning debate on Bill 76. 



2242 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2012 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — The ayes have it. 

 

Bill No. 79 — The Representation Act, 2012 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of Bill 79, The Representation Act, 2012. Mr. Speaker, 

this bill is the final step in the process of establishing new 

constituency boundaries in Saskatchewan. These boundaries are 

based on the most recent decennial census data. The Legislative 

Assembly now has passed a resolution adopting, without 

amendment, the boundaries proposed in the report of the 

Constituency Boundaries Commission. The Constituency 

Boundaries Act, 1993 now requires me, as the minister 

responsible, to introduce The Representation Act, 2012 in the 

same session of the Legislative Assembly to establish the new 

provincial constituencies as directed by that resolution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Constituency Boundaries Commission was 

established on April 18, 2012. The commission was composed 

of the Hon. Mr. Justice Neil Gabrielson as chairperson with Mr. 

Stuart Pollon and Mr. Harry Van Mulligen also serving as 

members. The commission’s first meeting was held May 1, 

2012, and their deliberations continued until early October. As 

required by The Constituency Boundaries Act, the commission 

completed an interim report, then it held a series of public 

hearings across the province in September. The commission 

also considered written submissions before preparing its final 

report. 

 

The commission states in its report that in undertaking its work 

it was guided by the requirements of the Act, relevant decisions 

of the court, and by common sense. 

 

The Constituencies Boundaries Act, 1993 requires that: 

 

In determining the area to be included in a proposed 

constituency south of the dividing line and in fixing the 

boundaries of that constituency, a commission shall ensure 

that the population of each proposed constituency is, as 

nearly as possible, equal to the population quotient. 

 

The constituency population quotient is the total population 

minus the northern population divided by the 59 ridings. The 

total population is defined as the voting eligible population that 

is 18 years of age or older. We are advised in the report that the 

constituency population quotient for these purposes was 

determined to be 13,059. 

 

Having established this central principle, the Act then allows 

the commission to depart from this requirement where, in its 

opinion, it is necessary to do so because of: 

 

special geographic considerations, including: 

 

sparsity, density, or relative rates of growth of the 

population in various regions . . . 

 

accessibility to the regions . . . or 

 

the size and shape of the regions . . . 

 

a special community of interests or diversity of interests 

of persons residing in regions . . . or 

 

physical features of regions . . .  

 

Finally, the Act provides that in any event a commission shall 

ensure that the population of each constituency south of the 

dividing line remains within 5 per cent, more or less, of the 

constituency population quotient. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in compliance with these rules and with what I am 

sure was a healthy dose of common sense, the commission has 

achieved the creation of 61 constituencies. Their boundaries 

will ensure that the value of each vote by a Saskatchewan voter 

will be as nearly as possible equal, no matter where the vote is 

cast. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for good reason the two northern constituencies 

continue to operate under special rules. Those rules recognize 

the lower population density and vast distances involved in 

those constituencies. However, the remaining 59 constituencies 

will now have the same number of actual voters, plus or minus 

5 per cent, in accordance with the recently amended Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a fundamental principle of our democracy that 

each vote should be of roughly the same value throughout the 

province. In Saskatchewan we have a permitted size variance of 

plus or minus 5 per cent between constituencies. This is one of 

the lowest in Canada. However, it is our view that to ensure 

votes of equal value in Saskatchewan, it is the number of 

eligible voters in the constituency that should be established as 

roughly equal rather than the overall population. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is the voters who elect the members of the 

Legislative Assembly. Therefore in our view it is the voters 

who should be the focus of constituency boundaries process. 

The final report of this bill reflects that. 

 

The other change reflected in the final report and now the bill, 

is the increase in the number of constituencies from 58 to 61. 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has been enjoying a significant 

growth over the past several years. Since the census on which 

the current boundaries were based, our population has increased 

over 5 per cent. We are proud to say that this dramatic increase 

is continuing. 

 

Our government’s view is that this process must reflect the 

increase in population since the boundaries were last drawn. It 

should also anticipate the population growth that we are 

confident will occur before the next commission is established 

following the 2021 census. 

 

For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, the Act was amended to 

recognize the population change in Saskatchewan by increasing 

the number of constituencies from 58 to 61. A 5 per cent 

increase in the number of seats was achieved by adding three 



November 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2243 

constituencies south of the dividing line as that term is defined 

in the Act. 

 

I would note that there was absolutely no direction provided in 

the legislation as to where these three new constituencies were 

to be situated. This was left for the independent Boundaries 

Commission to determine. Their final report has now set those 

boundaries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these new boundaries will come into force on the 

dissolution of the current Legislative Assembly prior to the next 

provincial general election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the independent constituencies Boundary 

Commission led by the Honourable Mr. Justice Neil Gabrielson 

has served this Assembly and the people of this province 

exceedingly well. They have listened carefully to the people of 

this province and have worked quickly and diligently to execute 

their duties on our behalf. I thank them again for their service to 

the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I move second 

reading of Bill 79, The Representation Act, 2012. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved second reading of Bill No. 79, The Representation 

Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to . . . I recognize 

the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker, here we go 

again. Here we go again on three more politicians for this great 

hallowed hall of democracy, Mr. Speaker. And I want to say 

first of all, Mr. Speaker, that the commission that undertook 

this work, I have no doubt that the commission probably 

worked very hard. And I understand that they may have some 

parameters in which they had to work on. And there’s no 

question in my mind, Mr. Speaker, that the commission 

member, the committee members were probably very 

important, very professional, and very thorough in their work.  

 

So I don’t think we want to focus at all on the actual 

commission or the committee members, Mr. Speaker. Because 

certainly from our perspective, they undertook this work, and 

it’s important that we recognize some of that effort and all the 

while knowing that they had some rules and regulations, and 

they had some hoops that they had to go through. But 

nonetheless I think that the commission done some very good 

work. 

 

But the crux of the problem and the real root of the problem, 

Mr. Speaker, is the Sask Party didn’t ask the people of 

Saskatchewan for the mandate to employ three more politicians. 

Mr. Speaker, they didn’t ask the Sask Party candidates in the 

last election to come along and get three more MLAs, Mr. 

Speaker. Not one Saskatchewan Party candidate went to the 

steps of the people that they were visiting, and I don’t care who 

it is, if they walk in there and say, guess what we’re going to do 

if we get elected? We’re going to add three more politicians. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I dare any one of them to say that they have 

said that to their constituents in the last campaign, Mr. Speaker. 

And the answer, absolutely not, not one of them mentioned this, 

Mr. Speaker. Not one single Sask Party MLA got the mandate 

from the people of Saskatchewan to add more politicians. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what did they do today? What should have 

happened, Mr. Speaker, is they should have told people the 

absolute, bare truth during the last campaign by telling them, 

we’re going to add more MLAs. And, Mr. Speaker, they never 

did. They never did. You know why? Because they would have 

got at least 10, 15 of them trounced out of their seats, and they 

would have been locked out of homes, Mr. Speaker. They 

would have been locked out of yards. They would have been 

locked out of communities. If the premise of their presentation 

was, as a Sask Party MLA, we’re going to hire more politicians, 

if they would have said that . . . And I challenge any one of 

them to say, yes, I did tell my constituents that because they 

know that’s absolutely not true. Not true at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Because I can tell you right now, the people of Saskatchewan 

would take you in the back of the woodshed, and they’d teach 

you a very valuable lesson of integrity. And they’d teach you a 

very valuable lesson of how not to try and fool the people of 

Saskatchewan. Nobody, nobody — no organization, not one 

group, not any organization that I’m aware of in the history of 

Saskatchewan that has any bearing in Saskatchewan — went to 

the Sask Party and asked the Sask Party, put more politicians in 

place. I don’t think any organization — and we see a lot of 

organizations over the years that come visit in this Assembly — 

and not one organization said to the Sask Party, add more 

MLAs. Add more MLAs — not one — at a cost of millions of 

dollars. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what the Sask Party done was they fired a 

bunch of workers. And they fired a lot of workers, people that 

have given their lives and their educational efforts to serving 

the people of Saskatchewan. And they fired them. And they’re 

going after 20 per cent, 15 per cent. They’re just going on and 

on, firing people and transferring people and letting 

hard-working citizens of Saskatchewan go because that’s just 

the mean-spirited nature of the Sask Party. 

 

And what did they do after they fired all those people, Mr. 

Speaker? They added more MLAs in their Assembly. And we 

sat here, and we just couldn’t believe it. We were absolutely 

astonished that they would bring more MLAs as a result of this 

particular bill, Bill 79. And we sat here and say, how ludicrous 

is that? How silly is that? And how totally out of touch is that 

plan to add more MLAs when you’re busy firing highways 

workers, when you’re busy firing health care workers, when 

you’re busy firing people that have served the community for 

years, Mr. Speaker? When you’re asking the working men and 

women to do a lean, a lean program is what they call it. You’ll 

fire them without provocation and you fire them without 

thought about the impacts of your choice. And then you turn 

around and say, but we’re going to hire and get more MLAs. 

 

Where in your plan did you identify, in your platform or your 

radio ads, that you’re going to hire more MLAs? And, Mr. 

Speaker, not a peep, not a single word from the Sask Party on 

the doorstep, in the newspapers or the radio ads or their 

billboards. Not a single mention of adding three more MLAs. 

 

And I can tell you from our perspective, Mr. Speaker, I say 

shame on them. I say shame on them for two things. Number 

one is doing something that they didn’t advise the people of 



2244 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2012 

Saskatchewan. And number two is that they’re doing this for a 

specific reason: to try and gerrymander a next election in their 

favour, Mr. Speaker. And that’s one of the reasons why they 

put some rules in like not counting the children of our province 

in the census, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that the distribution of 

those seats are fair and thorough, Mr. Speaker. Those are some 

of the problems I think the Saskatchewan Party’s going to have. 

 

And the cost of adding more MLAs over time, Mr. Speaker, is 

millions of dollars. And I can tell you the people of 

Saskatchewan would much rather have somebody driving a 

truck to clear the roads in the middle of a winter storm than 

having somebody sit here in the Assembly and talk about how 

valuable the Sask Party is in terms of adding more MLAs, Mr. 

Speaker. They want more politicians, the Sask Party, at a cost 

of thousands if not millions of dollars. Is that your priority? 

 

When you have youth suicide in northern Saskatchewan at an 

alarming rate. You have child care space problems. You have 

issues of social housing. You have issues of trying to make sure 

that the economy keeps moving along all the work that is 

necessary. Mr. Speaker, what does the Sask Party prioritize in 

terms of their mandate and their shining moment? They want to 

add more MLAs. Now where in the heck did that come from, 

Mr. Speaker? Where did it come from? Who asked for that? 

Who asked for that, Mr. Speaker? Nobody asked for it. Nobody 

asked for it. 

 

I don’t care how much the member from Moose Jaw yells, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s about the only time we hear the member from 

Moose Jaw North speak here. Well there’s a couple of times we 

hear him speak, Mr. Speaker, when he gets up and says yea or 

nay on a vote, or when he jumps up when he needs to say 

something because he hasn’t said anything in three months 

here. I think what’s really important, Mr. Speaker, is . . . I 

would suggest to that member is to turn back on your laptop, 

get back to your cartoons because that’s probably the best place 

and most productive amount of time that you can spend in this 

Assembly as opposed, as opposed to standing up and voting for 

more politicians. 

 

Where did that come from, Mr. Speaker? Why are you adding 

more politicians? Who asked you to add three more MLAs? No 

group in Saskatchewan. Not one Sask Party MLA asked the 

constituents about his mandate. And that’s why I say shame, 

shame on them for doing this. Shame. There’s more issues in 

Melfort. There’s more issues in Shellbrook. There’s more 

issues even in Kindersley. And what do they do? We’re going 

to add more MLAs. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I sit in this Assembly today and I can tell 

you, we don’t need more MLAs. We need more highways 

workers. We need more people working in the health care field. 

We need more people that are going to help build this economy. 

We don’t need more politicians in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

We have enough. And the reason why we don’t need any more, 

Mr. Speaker, is I looked at their backbench and there’s about 30 

of them that don’t do anything here anyway except vote yea or 

nay. 

 

So the point I would point out, Mr. Speaker, is that nobody, 

nobody asked the Sask Party to put in more MLAs. Nobody 

whatsoever. And no group that I’m ever aware of ever came to 

the Assembly and told the Sask Party, one of the pressing 

things that you should do is add more politicians. And where 

did that come from, Mr. Speaker? Where did that come from? 

 

And today now, today now you go back to Moose Jaw and 

they’re shutting down Valley View Centre. They’re shutting 

down Valley View Centre, and they’re not putting any plan in 

place to accommodate the population there. There’s no bridge 

being built, no bridge being built in P.A. because these guys are 

broke. These guys are broke. You have stories of homeless 

people, people being kicked out of their homes in Meadow 

Lake. And the member from Meadow Lake’s pretty quiet over 

there. 

 

So you have all these issues, Mr. Speaker, and about all the 

Sask Party can do today is, but, but we’re adding more 

politicians. That’s their response to the crisises out there, and 

that’s where their priority is. So people say, okay, add more 

politicians. Add more politicians. Add more politicians is what 

the Sask Party is saying. Then our argument is, why did you 

discount the children in allocating those seats? Because, Mr. 

Speaker, they’re trying to gerrymander the politicians or 

gerrymander the process, the political process. They’re trying to 

gerrymander the political process. 

 

And I say to them today, Mr. Speaker, as they sit by their 

fireplace and when they’re much older than they are now and 

they’re carrying their grandchild — this is what’s important — 

and their grandchild will ask one of those members, why did 

you do that? Why did you do that? And why did you get this 

Gerry Mander guy to do that? You know, and the grandchild 

will ask one of them. 

 

And of course one of them will respond, my dear child, Gerry 

Mander is not a person. Gerrymander is a process that the right 

wingers use when they’re threatened by a thing called 

democracy, Mr. Speaker. That’s what gerrymander is. And that 

poor child will be confused, Mr. Speaker. The poor child will 

be confused and then say, why would you do that? They’ll ask 

their grandparent, why would you gerrymander a process for 

your own benefit? Why would you put rules and regulations in 

to gerrymander the process? Why would you do that? 

 

And I go back to my earlier statement. That’s what right 

wingers do when they’re panicked by a thing called democracy, 

Mr. Speaker. We see it in Ottawa and now we’re seeing it here 

in Saskatchewan, compliments of the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So once again you sit here and we tell people over and over 

again, over and over again, which one of the Sask Party 

candidates, which one of the Sask Party candidates knocked on 

a doorstep and said or knocked on a doorway and said, we are 

going to hire three more politicians? Not one single one of them 

did that. And, Mr. Speaker, not one, not one. And the worst part 

is today, today they’re still sitting on their hands not saying a 

word, Mr. Speaker. They’re not saying a word even though they 

know they’re doing this. They’re sitting there saying, well don’t 

look at us; we’re just the backbench. We’re just the backbench. 

Our job is to say yea or nay when we’re told to say yea or nay. 

So don’t look at us. 

 

But the question you’ve got to ask is, which one of you guys 



November 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2245 

campaigned on that? And I can tell you right now, not one 

single Sask Party MLA campaigned on that because they know 

the people of Saskatchewan would have given them their very 

candid opinion on what they thought of that plan, Mr. Speaker. 

But a year later they’re trying to slip it through here at the 

Assembly, to try and hope nobody’s watching this during a 

busy Christmas season. That’s the strategy. Everybody knows 

that. 

 

You know, so the whole process is that, quite frankly, from our 

perspective, Mr. Speaker, this whole process and this whole bill 

stinks, Mr. Speaker. That’s the bottom line. It absolutely reeks. 

And I know that the new Minister of Justice has got this file in 

front of him, Mr. Speaker. He got it from the previous minister 

of Justice. 

 

And I said this at the outset when the previous minister 

introduced this file, when he introduced this file, what makes 

the file really problematic for many of the thinking public, the 

people that really watch what’s going on is that you’ve seen 

evidence of how they are going to make sure people that don’t 

have photo ID [identification], photo ID when they come to 

vote — well, Mr. Speaker, that eliminates a lot of the NDP 

base, people that are older, the Aboriginal community, the 

immigrant community, people that may not have a driver’s 

licence — they’re trying to do these voting suppression tricks. 

 

So they done some of that through some of their election bills, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s what conservatives do, Mr. Speaker. And 

again, between the voter suppression and the mixed dates for 

the election and now adding more politicians, what the heck is 

that all about? That’s the bottom line that people are asking, 

Mr. Speaker. And as I mentioned and I go through all these 

bills, and I go through all these bills and it’s not a political 

minister that is doing this, Mr. Speaker. The worst insult to 

injury, the worst assault on democracy, the more salt put in this 

wound, Mr. Speaker, is that it’s the Minister of Justice that’s 

advocating some of these bills. Not the current minister, but 

certainly the past minister led this charge, the member from 

Saskatoon northeast, whatever. And now it’s the current MLA 

that’s acting as the minister. Now he has to carry the can and he 

has to defend this bill. 

 

But I ask this question as you’re sitting at home with your own 

families, with your own families. I’ll ask him, do you think it’s 

a good idea to have three more MLAs? And I can almost 

guarantee you that most of the Sask Party family members 

would say no, we don’t think that’s a good idea. There’s better 

use of money, better use of resources, better use of this place, 

this hall of democracy, than trying to gerrymander the process, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s exactly, that’s exactly what we in the NDP 

say is wrong about the Sask Party. They’re wrong. It’s all about 

manipulation. It’s all about voter suppression tactics. It’s all 

about trying to gerrymander the electoral process. It’s all about 

manipulation, control. And, Mr. Speaker, they never had the 

mandate to begin with to ask the people of Saskatchewan if 

they could add more MLAs. 

 

And today I challenge them. Let’s do a survey. Let’s do a 

survey on how many people in Saskatchewan would like to see 

more MLAs. Let’s do it in Melfort. Let’s do it in Melfort, and 

the member from Melfort will be pretty quiet. He would 

probably get up and say nay, Mr. Speaker. He won’t want, he 

won’t want the survey results at all, Mr. Speaker. So they can 

chirp from their chairs, Mr. Speaker, but the fact of the matter is 

they never got the mandate from the people of Saskatchewan to 

add more MLAs. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I challenge him today to say, let’s do a 

survey in my constituency to see who wants it, who wants more 

MLAs. And I bet you that gentleman will be the furthest away 

from the station where they’re taking the surveys because he 

knows he’ll be told, absolutely not. The people of 

Saskatchewan think there are greater priorities out there than 

having more politicians, and they should actually punish the 

Sask Party for trying to gerrymander the political process 

through some of the bills that they have brought forward in this 

session. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this bill is absolutely rife with problems. 

There’s a song in all of our hearts, our democratic hearts, to tell 

the people of Saskatchewan from on top of the highest 

mountain of this province where there’s many people listening, 

the Saskatchewan Party want to add more politicians. Who 

gave them the mandate to do that? Who asked them to do this? 

There’s many other problems. Who asked them to do this? Not 

a single soul, Mr. Speaker, not a single organization, not a 

single person told them at the last election, you know what 

would be a great idea, Sask Party guy? Adding more 

politicians. Not one person. Not one person told the Sask Party 

or any of their candidates that whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s how confident, that’s how confident we are in the 

fact that this mandate to add more politicians is wrong. And the 

assumption that they have the people’s support of 

Saskatchewan is way off, and the fact is they never got the 

permission .And you know why they didn’t ask the people of 

Saskatchewan? Because the people of Saskatchewan would say, 

absolutely not. Shake your head. People don’t want more 

politicians. They want more programs. They want more 

workers. And they want more intelligence from their 

government when it comes to issues of this nature. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So I challenge every one of them — they’re sitting very quiet 

over there— you name me one person that would ask you guys 

for more politicians. And there’s not one that you guys can 

mention. Not one single person within your constituency want 

an extra three MLAs in this Assembly, not one. And notice 

they’re all very quiet. It must be bedtime over there for them — 

very, very quiet, very, very quiet, very, very quiet. 

 

You know why they’re quiet, Mr. Speaker? Because they’re 

absolutely embarrassed on this bill. But their job is to stand up 

when this bill is called and say, yea or nay. Now don’t mix it 

up, you guys. I know a lot of the backbenchers go home and 

they practise. Because there’s only two words you’ve got to say 

in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. One of them is yea and the other 

is nay. Okay, so when you go home and make sure you get the 

Y and the N correct, because that’s about all you’ve got to say 

on this bill. Because you didn’t have nothing to say on the 

doorstep, nothing on the debate, nothing in your press releases, 

absolutely nothing on their billboards. And today now, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re going to sit here and are going laugh our heads 

off when they get up and they say yea to this silly bill to add 



2246 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2012 

more politicians. 

 

We’re going to see if any one of them have the courage to say, 

no, we don’t need more politicians. But, Mr. Speaker, they 

won’t because that’s what right wingers do when they are afraid 

of a thing called democracy. They turn to their old friend, their 

great friend, gerrymander. So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move 

that we adjourn debate on Bill 79. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 79, The Representation Act, 2012. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 69 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 69 — The 

Information Services Corporation Act be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to enter 

into debate as it relates to Bill No. 69, An Act respecting 

Information Services Corporation here this afternoon. This bill 

has come around at a time where we have a government that’s 

scrambling for cash, has been on the hunt for cash, and has 

found it in one of our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This piece of legislation represents a historic broken promise to 

the people of the province on an asset that’s important to the 

people of this province, of an asset that has value, that returns 

millions to our treasury, allows us to fund the many services 

that are so important to this province, and all of that being sold 

off in a very short-sighted manoeuvre by a government that is 

unwilling to be straight with Saskatchewan people about the 

true state of their finances and are doing all that they can to 

hold up and paint a financial picture that’s anything but the 

reality of the budget at this current point in time. 

 

We have such a great history in this province as it relates to 

Crown corporations, of Saskatchewan people and communities 

coming together, working together, looking at the challenges 

and opportunities of a given time and place, and putting 

together some solutions. And Crown corporations are but one 

example of that rich history in this province in responding to 

those challenges and opportunities, making sure that we’re 

putting forward solutions that address challenges of a given 

time but also provide a certainty well into the future. And ISC 

is certainly an example of that. 

 

Not only is ISC an important tool to the people of our province, 

to the land surveyors, to the businesses in this province. It’s 

also an important tool by way of providing revenues back to the 

province of Saskatchewan. I believe, was it over $15 million 

this last year that directly provided to the people of this 

province, and $15 million of a dividend to our budget? 

Something that this government’s willing to forgo into 

perpetuity. 

 

When you think of that, Mr. Speaker, maybe what could these 

dollars fund? Well they could be funding a bridge in Prince 

Albert. Or they could be funding the needed infrastructure and 

schools in Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. Or we can move around the 

province looking at the pieces of infrastructure that’s there. But 

I think Prince Albert is a very key one that we could be 

focusing on where right now this government’s piecemealing it 

together, doing a rather low-budget fix, to a band-aid fix to 

infrastructure that’s so vital by way of an artery to northern 

Saskatchewan, but also a vital artery for people that flow across 

a river, across a bridge, on a daily basis and are really placed at 

risk with the sort of band-aid, piecemeal approach that the 

government opposite is taking in repairing a infrastructure 

that’s so vital to Prince Albert and so vital to an entire region. 

 

And then I see how that directly relates to basically a 

government that is tying the hands of future governments, tying 

the hands of the public purse, that’s hamstringing our future, 

that’s preventing us from being as strong as we can be by 

selling off assets for which provide us control over our future, 

and that provide us revenues to fund the needed and important 

infrastructure, the important programs that will allow us to 

secure that future. 

 

Fifteen million dollars last year, Mr. Speaker, is what ISC 

brought in for the people of Saskatchewan into our treasury. It 

ran a profit that was larger than that. And the opportunities 

abound for ISC to be able to expand its services and be able to 

expand its revenue stream by way of contracting with other 

jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we have a government with blinders on that’s put itself 

into a precarious financial position that’s now looking at this 

short-sighted sell-off as a way to quickly get its hands on some 

cash to take care of short-term obligations. But certainly they’re 

not looking to the long term. They’re not looking to the future. 

And they’re not thinking of future generations in doing so. 

 

And you know, it reminds me in many ways of, you know, 

where in some cases a family may get into a tight financial 

circumstance and they start to scramble. And they’re looking 

for cash, and pressures are upon them, and they start to 

liquidate assets in their home. And I guess this is why we have 

things like pawn shops, Mr. Speaker, here in many ways where 

all of a sudden an individual or a family in a tight financial 

position is forced to sell off the TV they acquired, Mr. Speaker, 

for cents on the dollar for what its actual value is because of a 

hard-pressed financial circumstance. 

 

We have a government opposite that, you know, has presided 

over a period, a special period of economic times in this 

province by way of the resources that we have as a province, by 

way of the impressive hard work of Saskatchewan people who 

are always willing to roll up their sleeves and do their part in 

our province, and by way of the entrepreneurs in this province 

who take that risk, that calculated risk and that make the 

investments in our province. 



November 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2247 

And here we see at this point in time, within this time of 

tremendous opportunity, a time where in many ways what we 

as a province have by way of resources is in demand to the 

world, we have a government that’s failed to capitalize on that, 

and by way of making the meaningful improvements that they 

must and should in the lives and communities of Saskatchewan 

people but have also failed to make improvements by way of 

our financial position as a province, by way of our public 

finances. 

 

And now we see a government that is doing all it can to hold up 

its public relations line, this notion that they put forward that at 

the beginning of this year that they were going to balance the 

budget. And of course, Mr. Speaker, all the evidence suggests 

anything but that occurring. It suggests that this is another 

budget that’s off track. And unfortunately this is the fourth in a 

row, Mr. Speaker, that seems to be directly in line with 

becoming another deficit for Saskatchewan people. 

 

But instead of owning up, instead of being straight with 

Saskatchewan people, instead of sharing the true and fair state 

of our provincial finances, we see a government that’s engaged 

in expensive spin. In fact this boastful approach of this 

government is something that I know many find tiresome. It 

was when they put up their ads right after the provincial budget 

— a provincial budget that wasn’t balanced from the get-go 

when they punted $100 million of public debt on to the 

universities, Mr. Speaker, when they had overly inflated their 

assumptions as it related to potash in this budget — and then 

they went around and pretended that they had a budget that they 

were bringing forward that was balanced. 

 

And not only did they pretend that in the Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker. They then pretended that in communities across the 

province and engaged in a very costly, expensive game of 

budgetary spin. And we saw billboards go up all over this 

province that were funded with the taxpayers’ money, with 

public money entrusted to those members opposite, to put 

billboards up to suggest something that defied the reality that 

was going on in this province, to suggest something that was 

certainly not fact, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now we see a government that is doing all it can to 

continue to paint that picture, Mr. Speaker, that they’d like to 

tell Saskatchewan people instead of levelling with 

Saskatchewan people, instead of being straight with 

Saskatchewan people and sharing the true and actual picture of 

our finances. So we’re stuck here now with a government that’s 

more interested in painting a picture, more interested in 

maintaining their expensive budgetary spin that they put on 

billboards all across this province with taxpayers’ money. 

 

And they’re looking for every way they can to hold up that 

public relations line. And when we look to the liquidation, the 

fire sale of ISC, an asset that delivers important services to the 

people of this province and delivers millions and millions of 

dollars to the treasury of this province, $15 million alone last 

year. And I’m being heckled by the Minister of Culture and 

Tourism and . . . What’s his ministry? . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . No, film. Is film still in his title? How is film 

still in his title because he’s eliminated film? Good question. 

Because the point about the minister who heckles, I think still 

has film under his umbrella but of course he’s the minister 

who’s presided over the elimination of the film industry in this 

province. 

 

And what we’re talking about right here is the sale of ISC, 

which gives to the province of Saskatchewan $15 million a 

year. And we know that minister has dug his heels in, in a very 

ideological way and a very rigid way, and has killed a creative 

film industry in this province, the investment in this province, 

driven workers away from this province, when what was 

required was just over $1 million a year. And, Mr. Speaker, this 

bill right here, Bill No. 69, the bill as it relates to Information 

Services Corporation and the fire sale, represents $15 million to 

the people of Saskatchewan on an annual basis. 

 

So again just to review, the minister who killed off the film 

industry, killed off a tax credit and an economy that cost our 

treasury $1 billion a year, he dug his heels in here. But what the 

government is currently willing to kill off into perpetuity, into 

our future, into decades and generations forward, is something 

that’s generated last year $15 million a year. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think with these sorts of revenues, we 

could more than be supporting a thriving film industry in this 

province. We could be inviting those workers that are leaving 

this province in his constituency as we speak, Mr. Speaker, and 

having them build their lives once again in this province. We 

can invite those individuals, those entrepreneurs to come back 

and place their investment in our province, an investment that’s 

been chased away by that minister opposite and that 

government opposite. 

 

So what it comes down to, Mr. Speaker, is that we see a 

government that has a budget that is off-track, a government 

that is scrambling and looking for solutions, a government 

that’s been clearly on the hunt for cash. And we saw that. We 

recognized when they went out and had a review done, an 

assessment done by way of RBC [Royal Bank of Canada], what 

they did when they went through that RBC is in fact they had a 

specific quote in there that talked about that this, the potential 

privatization of that asset would . . . Sorry. Ironically the 

Minister of Culture heckles loudly in a boisterous way across 

the floor. He’s cultured, Mr. Speaker. But what I will say is that 

not only do we have lacking culture on that side of the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, we also have lacking common sense, 

Mr. Speaker, when we have Bill No. 69 that now represents a 

fire sale of an asset that we, that we know to be important to the 

people of this province. And it’s a broken promise, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s a broken promise. 

 

And I know the member that shouts across the floor, I believe 

he, I think he’s the MLA for Northeast and he’s also apparently 

the Minister for Culture, Mr. Speaker. Again I say a tad ironic 

with the boisterous exchange across the floor. 

 

But I know that member when he went out on to doorsteps in 

his Northeast constituency there last year, he brought forward a 

platform, and I have it in front of me here, Mr. Speaker. And 

I’ve gone through that platform and I’ve looked through with 

great detail, and I haven’t found a single mention of him being 

straight with Saskatchewan people that he was going to be 

selling off their assets. And in fact I don’t see a single mention 

that he was going to be killing the film industry and driving 

some of those workers who were located in his riding outside of 



2248 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2012 

this province. But he can yell across the floor, Mr. Speaker. I’d 

urge you be straight with Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s where I believe that this represents in the fire sale of 

ISC, a broken trust with Saskatchewan . . . 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 5 o’clock, this 

House stands recessed to 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Ottenbreit .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2215 

  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2215, 2216 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2215 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2215 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2215 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2215 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2215 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2216 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2216 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2216 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2216 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2216 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2217 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 A Beacon of Hope 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2217 

 Christmas Kettle Campaign 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2217 

 St. Andrew’s College Centennial 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2217 

 Phones for a Fresh Start Program 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2218 

 New Affordable Housing in Prince Albert 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2218 

 Fighting Alzheimer’s Disease 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2218 

 University-Industry Research Partnership Celebrated 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2219 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 State of Provincial Finances 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2219 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2219 

 Support for Dementia Patients and Their Caregivers 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2220 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2220 

 Changes to Labour Legislation 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2221 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2221 

 Prince Albert Bridge 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2222 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2222 

TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2223 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2223 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 73 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2224 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2225 

 Bill No. 74 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2012 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2229 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2230 

 Bill No. 75 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2233 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2234 

 Bill No. 76 — The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 2012 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2240 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2240 

 



 

 Bill No. 79 — The Representation Act, 2012 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2242 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2243 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 69 — The Information Services Corporation Act 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2246 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 




