




















































Hansard: December 04, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 23A  TUESDAY, DECEMBER 4, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2359 

 December 4, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before introductions, I will be tabling the 

2012 auditor’s report volume 2. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 

request leave to introduce a guest . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, seated in your gallery is a great friend to all of us 

in this Assembly, and that would be Mr. Ben Walsh sitting at 

the very top. Of course Ben works in legislative security with 

the Sergeant-at-Arms, and we all know and care for Ben 

greatly. 

 

Last week we came in and Ben was wearing, sporting a 

particularly nice tie of his, Mr. Speaker. And I understand that 

through the course of the day, there was numerous members 

that commented on how much they liked Ben’s tie. And in fact 

the next day we were still talking about the tie, and he said to a 

couple of us, well if you like it so much, maybe we should sell 

it for charity. Ben suggested that in fact the Regina Food Bank 

could likely use some dollars at this time of year, and I certainly 

agree. 

 

And today we’re going to kick off the start to the tie auction for 

Ben Walsh’s tie, and I look forward to starting that auction off. 

I’m hoping I’m sporting this tie at the end of this process. So at 

this point in time, the process will be this. I’ll start off the 

auction sheet. I’ll leave the auction sheet down at the front 

security desk following . . . kicking it off here today. And I’ll 

start with a bid of $50 here today, Mr. Speaker. But you know, 

Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared likely to bid again because this is a 

pretty special tie and one I look forward to wearing. Not only 

that though, Mr. Speaker, I believe I’ll challenge at this point in 

time my good friend on the floor opposite, the member for 

Weyburn-Big Muddy, to see if he’ll see my bid, raise my bid, 

and generate some dollars. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, all in the spirit of the season, we introduce the 

tie auction. I’ll remind all members and the public at large that 

they can bid on Ben Walsh’s tie at the front desks of security, at 

the front of our Legislative Assembly. And on Thursday 

morning at 9 a.m. we’ll determine who’s the winner, although, 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest it may end in a tie. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to join with my colleague across the 

way in first of all welcoming Mr. Walsh to the Legislative 

Assembly. Certainly he’s no stranger to any of us, and we 

certainly appreciate his work in this initiative, Mr. Speaker. 

And I will be taking part and seeing his bid and raising and 

doubling it, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. And I’d 

encourage all of my colleagues to not only welcome him but 

also do the same. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, thank you, thank you very 

much. Mr. Speaker, not wanting to get off track on the bidding, 

but I will participate in that as well. I’ll certainly want to match 

the member from Weyburn and add another 50 bucks to it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in your gallery are a number of people that were 

here for a technical briefing earlier today on The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act, which will be introduced later this afternoon. 

Mr. Speaker, these people are all stakeholders who’d have an 

interest in the employment Act, and I would like to welcome 

them to the Assembly today. 

 

Among that group are a number of people that sat on the 

advisory committee and participated in a number of all-day 

sessions in getting ready for production and presentation of this 

bill. Mr. Speaker, these people have provided invaluable service 

to the province, and I would like to ask that all members join 

with me in welcoming them to their legislature today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join in with the Minister of Labour in welcoming his guests to 

the legislature. He didn’t name them all by name but they’re 

quite a crew, important people who have a lot to say about our 

labour regulations and laws here in Saskatchewan. And we look 

forward to seeing the bill. Largely they’ve had a hand in that, 

but I know there’s been others as well, and we look forward to 

seeing that. And I want to join in with the minister thanking 

them for their good work and service to the people of 

Saskatchewan. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to introduce to you and through you, two people sitting 

your gallery. I believe, Mr. Speaker, both of them are quite 

familiar to a number of members in the Assembly. They are 

Roland Lafrance and Lara Zaluski. Mr. Speaker, these two 

individuals, about a month ago, returned home from the 

Ukraine where they volunteered with Mission Canada to be part 

of the Canadian election observer team during the Ukraine’s 



2360 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2012 

recent general election. I’d ask all members of the Assembly to 

welcome them to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s truly my 

honour today to introduce to you and through you to all 

members of the Assembly, a great group of students, 26 

students from grade 12 from Humboldt, Saskatchewan — one 

of the best cities, I might say. Accompanying them are their 

teachers, David Millette and Julia Thomson, and I would like 

everyone to welcome them. 

 

And to represent Humboldt, we will bid $200. 

 

The Speaker: — At this time I would like to introduce, seated 

in the Speaker’s gallery, His Excellency Bruno van der Pluijm, 

ambassador of Belgium to Canada, along with support staff 

from protocol, Melinda Carter and Laurie Hutton. If the 

members would please welcome them to the Saskatchewan 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

I recognize the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition, I would also like to welcome His 

Excellency and his assistants to the legislature. And I would 

like to say to you: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Flemish.] 

 

And bienvenue à l’Assemblée législative de Saskatchewan on 

behalf of everyone. 

 

[Translation: welcome to the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would want to join with all members of the Legislative 

Assembly to welcome the ambassador to the Legislative 

Assembly this afternoon. I had a good meeting with him this 

morning. We talked about a number of issues, including free 

trade and about the trade relations that Saskatchewan has with 

Belgium. It was a very good discussion and we look forward to 

an opportunity to welcome him here once again to our province 

in the near future. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

proud to stand today to present a petition on cell service. And 

the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel delivers 

cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nations, along with 

the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans Bay; 

Buffalo River First Nations, also known as Dillon, and the 

neighbouring communities of Michel Village and St. 

George’s Hill; English River First Nations, also known as 

Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch Narrows 

First Nations along with the community of Turnor Lake, 

including all the neighbouring communities in each of 

these areas. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are 

all from throughout the Northwest and many other areas, and 

the people who have signed the petition today are primarily 

from Turnor Lake. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to rise to present petitions from people from across our 

province as it relates to our provincial finances. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada, in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 

financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 

people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 

taxpayers, and businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents from 

Estevan, Swift Current, and Regina. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Improving the Lives of Working People 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

remind the legislature and all of Saskatchewan about our shared 

history, when Saskatchewan led the nation through such events 

as the Estevan strike of 1931, the Regina riot, The Trade Union 

Act of 1944, the creation of leading health and safety 

regulations in the ’70s. And it goes back even further than that: 

one of the earliest collective actions in Saskatchewan was the 

Cumberland House strike in 1777. 

 

What’s awe-inspiring about each of these is that by working 

together we’ve continuously led the nation in improving the 

lives of everyday working people. Working people in 

Saskatchewan had the vision to imagine and the will to fight for 

a world where they could be safe, be home to spend time with 

their families, and live on a fair wage where they could give 

their kids what they didn’t have. They didn’t think this vision 

was important just for themselves, but also for their co-workers 

and their neighbours. Some people died in fact because of their 

stand against exploitation. The irony here, Mr. Speaker, is that 

we’re seeing it slowly erased, little by little, which leaves me 



December 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2361 

wondering why we have to once again fight battles already won 

years ago. 

 

Why is this government choosing to leave our children a 

Saskatchewan that will offer fewer rights than we’ve had? 

That’s not the Saskatchewan our children deserve. One day, 

Mr. Speaker, this government will be remembered for the 

deliberate erosion of rights that were recognized by previous 

governments who care about middle-class people. Clearly this 

government doesn’t care about the middle-class people. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mission Canada Observer Team 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a group of 

422 Canadian volunteers made up Mission Canada, which was 

the Canadian election observer team during the Ukraine’s 

recent general election. Mission Canada was funded by the 

federal government, organized by the volunteer organization 

CANADEM [Canada experts mobilized], and was led by 

Saskatchewan Senator Raynell Andreychuk. 
 

Thirteen Saskatchewan citizens were part of Mission Canada, 

two of whom, Mr. Speaker, I introduced, Roland Lafrance and 

Lara Zaluski, and two other people that I know of, Mr. Speaker: 

one being Marcus Abrametz who happens to be the member 

from Saskatchewan Rivers’ constituency assistant; and Pat 

Atkinson, a former member of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

These people volunteered their time to help democracy develop 

in Ukraine. I think, Mr. Speaker, the work of Mission Canada 

can be best summed up in the words of a Ukrainian citizen who 

had an opportunity to observe their work, and I will quote, Mr. 

Speaker, recognizing that her English was not her first 

language. And the quote goes: 

 

The observers of the mission are not interested in the win 

of any parties or candidates, but they are interested in the 

win of democracy, election transparency, and the freedom 

of expression of Ukrainians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe nothing more needs to be said, except 

thank you for a job well done. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Mispon Aboriginal Film Festival 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Mispon 

Aboriginal Film Festival began in 2006. It is all about 

traditional values and storytelling while using contemporary 

forms of storytelling. It also focuses on outreach programs to 

teach First Nations students from communities in northern 

Saskatchewan about filmmaking. 

 

This year’s festival will be showing films throughout the month 

of December at the Royal Saskatchewan Museum. The festival 

features many different films, including the first episode of the 

new season of Untamed Gourmet which will be airing in the 

new year on the Aboriginal Peoples Television Network, or 

APTN. 

 

Festival organizers particularly wanted to highlight this show 

because it was produced by the Gemini award-winning 291 

Film Company, which has trained many First Nations people. 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the 291 Film Company has joined 

the long list of companies and individuals who have been 

forced to leave their province after this government’s 

short-sighted decision to eliminate the film employment tax 

credit. This former Saskatchewan company has recently moved 

to Victoria. 

 

The Sask Party government may have done its best to kill the 

Saskatchewan film industry, but Saskatchewan First Nations 

people will always fight to preserve art, history, and culture in 

this province. Thank you to festival director, Trudy Stewart, 

and the board president, Janine Windolph, for organizing this 

year’s Mispon Film Festival and for keeping storytelling alive 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Diamond Jubilee Medal Recipients 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise in this 

House to bring recognition to 10 special individuals in the 

Prince Albert area. Just recently on November 24th, the Mahon 

Auditorium in the J.M. Cuelenaere Library was packed. People 

gathered to participate as Member of Parliament Randy Hoback 

handed out Queen Elizabeth Diamond Jubilee Medals. 

 

Mr. Speaker these medals are given to those who are active in 

their communities and are involved by volunteering for 

different community services. These are the people who never 

really get acknowledged yet never seek any recognition. This 

medal is a thank you to all of them for the hard work that they 

have done in their respective communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 10 recipients from Prince Albert are Larry 

Brewster, Sergeant Rhonda Meakin, Warrant Officer Ross 

Dean Alexson, Reverend Dr. Sandy Scott, Bishop Albert 

Thevenot, Floyd LaVallee, Frederick Payton, Clara Kutnikoff, 

Clara Wiberg, and Les Karpluk. 

 

These selfless individuals are always giving their time and are 

very active in our community, yet never ask anything in return. 

Their hard work and dedication has made our province a better 

place. Mr. Speaker, I would like this Assembly to join me in 

recognizing these 10 outstanding community leaders. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Saskatchewan Veterinarian of the Year 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

honoured today to rise and congratulate a good friend of mine, 

Dr. Shawn Haas, Doctor of Veterinary Medicine. Dr. Haas has 

just been named the Saskatchewan Veterinarian of the Year by 

his peers at the Saskatchewan Association of Veterinary 



2362 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2012 

Technologists. 

 

Dr. Haas graduated from the Western College of Veterinary 

Medicine in 1993 and completed his master’s in herd medicine 

from ’93 to ’95, and later completed his reproductive specialty 

exams. In 1995 he moved to North Battleford and worked for 

the Lakeland veterinary clinic, which he later purchased in 

2003. 

 

Shawn is also very involved in the community and is currently 

president of our local humane society. As well he is a member 

of the discipline committee for the Saskatchewan Veterinary 

Medical Association and a past member of the animal welfare 

committee for that body. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for many years, Shawn has been our farm’s 

veterinarian, and I have very much appreciated his excellent 

service and his caring manner. He truly has a tremendous 

rapport with both his human clients and his animal patients. 

Shawn is an absolutely wonderful friend and an excellent 

veterinarian, and I would certainly ask all members of this 

Assembly to join with me in congratulating him on receiving 

the honour of being named Saskatchewan Veterinarian of the 

Year for 2012. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

20th Anniversary of A Prairie Alphabet 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m pleased to rise today to recognize the work of Weyburn 

author Jo-Anne Cugnet. As many will know, Jo-Anne is the 

author of numerous works, including the award-winning 

bestseller children’s book, A Prairie Alphabet. 

 

Recently anniversary celebrations were held at the Allie Griffin 

Art Gallery in Weyburn to mark the 20th anniversary of this 

book’s publication. Illustrated by Yvette Moore of Moose Jaw, 

A Prairie Alphabet was written by Jo-Anne because she wanted 

to write a book for her children that reflected their rural life. 

Upon publication of the book, invitations came to the author 

from all over the world, including a request to travel to do a 

book reading in Kiev, Ukraine. 

 

A Prairie Alphabet was the first book that was allowed a booth 

at Agribition, and the following year a larger booth was offered 

to allow Yvette Moore to display the paintings that went along 

with the book. A Prairie Alphabet’s most recent 

accomplishment was being selected for inclusion in the 

Saskatchewan legislature’s 100-year time capsule alongside 

many commemorative articles, letters, and photos, as well as 

memorabilia marking our time in history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join with me in 

congratulating Jo-Anne and Yvette on 20 years of A Prairie 

Alphabet. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It looks like the 

NDP [New Democratic Party] are having trouble with the 

concept of fiction versus fact. Yesterday the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana had a little difficulty understanding the 

difference, Mr. Speaker. The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

yesterday in Hansard stated, “. . . emissions continue to grow. 

Fact.” That’s fiction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Under the Saskatchewan Party government, greenhouse gas 

emissions had been decreasing. Since 2008 total greenhouse gas 

emissions have decreased by 1.6 per cent. That’s a fact. While 

under the NDP, emissions rose by 70 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s also a fact. 

 

The member from Saskatoon Nutana also stated that the 

Saskatchewan Party is “. . . excluding two-thirds of the 

province’s emissions from its own regulations. Fact.” Mr. 

Speaker, this is once again fiction. All emitters over 50 000 

tonnes are included in legislation, while all emitters between 25 

000 and 50 000 tonnes will be included in regulations, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s a fact. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it seems that the NDP are having a difficult time 

separating fact from fiction, so much so that they are now 

trying to blame the Environment minister for freezing rain in 

December. Freezing rain in December isn’t climate change, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s December in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Changes to Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Finally 

after a wait of over six months, the Sask Party trotted out a 

massive overhaul of workplace laws that nobody voted for, and 

today we will see the Sask Party’s legislation. In the spring, the 

Premier launched this labour review that contained not a single 

public consultation meeting and the little discussion booklet 

that had outlandish and fearmongering questions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no one in this province voted for upsetting the 

balance of our province’s labour laws. Will the minister today 

table legislation that keeps Saskatchewan fair and balanced 

when it comes to labour legislation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Yes. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, on the second last day of the 2007 

fall session, the Sask Party introduced its unconstitutional 

essential services bill. Yes, it’s unconstitutional, and that is a 

fact. The court threw it out, and five years and two Labour 

ministers later, the people of Saskatchewan still don’t know 

what will happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now the province is sitting again with two days 

left of the session, and the public still has no answers about 

what will happen about essential services. The Premier was 



December 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2363 

asked about the legislation in the spring, and acknowledged that 

he had led a government that didn’t take consultation seriously. 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will today’s labour legislation 

solve the essential services fiasco this Sask Party created five 

years ago? Yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the goal of this legislation 

is to modernize our labour legislation and to bring it so that it is 

consistent with what takes place in a variety of other 

jurisdictions across Canada. Some of the Acts have not been 

substantively reviewed for almost 20 years. Others have not 

been reviewed for more than two generations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the process we received over 3,800 

responses. I would like to thank everybody that participated by 

submitting a response and, Mr. Speaker, to the members 

opposite, they will see the bill very shortly, and they will have 

the opportunity to see what is included in the bill and be able to 

make comments on it at that point in time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, workers in Saskatchewan have 

progressively better legislation protecting the workplace for 

over 100 years. People have made great strides to win the right 

to an eight-hour workday. It’s rooted in the 19th century fight 

for a middle class for workers. It comes from a commitment 

across Canada for eight hours for work, eight hours for leisure, 

and eight hours for rest. But the minister leaked details at his 

paid luncheon speech that he’d like to do away with the fairness 

of an eight-hour workday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s common sense that across the province that an 

eight-hour workday is the appropriate balance for working 

families. To the minister: will today’s legislation do away with 

the eight-hour workday and what other important labour 

standards that we’ve come to appreciate? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

indicated to people before that our province has got a 

permitting system that allows people to deviate from the 

eight-hour day. Nurses do it with regard to a 12-hour days. 

Firefighters have got longer hours. British Columbia allows up 

to 12 hours in a day. We’ve talked about the possibility of 

having four 10’s or five 8’s. That would make us consistent 

with what takes place in other jurisdictions and, Mr. Speaker, 

some workers wish to do that. What is absolutely sacred, Mr. 

Speaker, is when you work in excess of 40 hours in a week, that 

you should be entitled to time and a half. 

 

Mr. Speaker, workers and employers wish to have some degree 

of flexibility to plan things so the people can spend more time 

with their families to adjust for changes in workload. We want 

to ensure that workers are protected. We value and respect the 

contributions of the working women and men in our province 

and want to ensure that their rights are adequately protected on 

an ongoing basis. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 

appreciate the minister’s raised the idea of overtime. You know, 

the principle of overtime means that if workers are asked to stay 

longer than a regular workday and a work week, they’re paid 

extra for that time. To do away with overtime would be an 

abuse of workers, Mr. Speaker. Right now all workers, 

especially those who are not in the union, receive overtime for 

those hours above and beyond 40 hours every week. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, overtime exists because if workers are not 

guaranteed that extra pay, employers could force a 60-hour 

work week on people, returning us to the dark ages of labour 

relations. To the minister: will today’s legislation do away with 

overtime to allow any other system of paying out overtime 

hours? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have a long-settled 

practice in our province which is enshrined in legislation, that 

you are required to work up to 40 hours at a regular rate. 

Beyond that, you are entitled to time and a half. The employer 

can require up to 44 hours. That’s well settled, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We value the work that people do in our province. We want to 

make sure that they are adequately and appropriately 

compensated. We want to make sure that they have a safe 

environment to carry out their employment duties. Mr. Speaker, 

we work hard to ensure that that happens through our 

occupational health and safety workers, and those are things 

that will continue. 

 

We also, Mr. Speaker, want to ensure that we have people that 

are paid adequately. Earlier this year we raised the minimum 

wage to $10 per hour and increased the amount of payment for 

a call-out time. Mr. Speaker, those are the type of things that 

this government does for the working women and men in our 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, this whole sham process has been 

ridiculous from the start because the Sask Party refused to hold 

a single public meeting to show that they take consultation 

seriously. 

 

Now not only did the Sask Party surprise the people of 

Saskatchewan with this overhaul; they promised the whole 

process wouldn’t cost the public a dime. The minister 

committed to that in committee. But now the taxpayers are 

being asked for more than a half a million dollars extra. And 

there has been a clear indication from the minister the process 

isn’t finished. In fact he said more work needs to be done at 

further cost to the taxpayer. To the minister: how has the Sask 

Party spent over a half a million dollars on a process without a 

single public meeting? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 



2364 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2012 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, last week when the 

member opposite was not quoting himself, he was in fact 

quoting me. And I appreciate him quoting me, and would like 

to urge him to quote me correctly and accurately when he does 

so, and would like to urge him to finish the quotes. Right after 

the comment that I made, I went on to say, “As the matter . . . 

progresses further, there will be other costs that we will either 

absorb or else we will cross as they come.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we indicated earlier that there would be some 

additional costs. I can advise the member opposite the money 

was used to hire three temporary policy analysts, to hire a 

contract lawyer to assist with the development of the 

legislation, and a temporary director of strategic 

communications; publish advertisements and public awareness, 

and expenses that were incurred for the advisory committee. 

People travelled from across the province and participated. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we thank them for their contributions. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I find that a very interesting 

answer, that somehow half a million dollars seems to be spare 

change to this minister. When we were asking in committee he 

said, and I will quote him, this is, “We will add, during the 

process, four temporary persons that will be, the cost of which 

will be absorbed with the existing budget.” Now he says it 

sounds like a half a million dollars is a bit of a rounding error. 

What else could he do? Well, Mr. Speaker, to the minister I 

have this question: why weren’t the costs absorbed in his 

budget? Weren’t they planned for? And why is he expecting the 

taxpayers of this province to pick up the tab for his costly 

massive overhaul of our labour legislation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite can’t 

have it both ways. He sat in his chair for most of this session 

criticizing us for not doing more to communicate with people, 

not doing enough to have the information out there. When we 

do spend the time and the money to do this — and I’m not 

minimizing the cost of it, Mr. Speaker; there is a cost and it’s a 

significant cost and it’s money well spent — but, Mr. Speaker, 

this is something he shouldn’t be able to criticize us for and 

then say you should absorb it at the end of the day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want to have a common sense approach to 

this. Mr. Speaker, October of 2012 the member opposite said, 

“In May when we saw this coming forward there didn’t seem to 

be a reason why this was coming forward. That was the big gap 

in this. There was no common sense reason for it.” But in the 

NDP submission which was July of this year, it said, 

“Governments should be always ready to improve labour 

legislation. That readiness is an important part of a common 

sense commitment to a better future for the province.” Mr. 

Speaker, we’re going with the NDP submission. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Reporting of Provincial Finances 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, today the non-partisan, 

independent Provincial Auditor of Saskatchewan released her 

volume 2 report. She says the government books are “wrong” 

— wrong, Mr. Speaker. She also says the books also “contain 

significant errors and are materially wrong.” Why would that 

minister report and stand behind books that he knows contain 

errors and that are wrong? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll do a quick review of 

what the Government of Saskatchewan does, which is the exact 

same type of budgets that the New Democratic government did 

over its years, Mr. Speaker. The summary financial statements, 

which is the issue that the auditor has with the province, her 

understanding is that we should focus more on the summary 

financial statements. Mr. Speaker, we produced the summary 

financial statements, and in fact in the auditor’s report, the 

auditor clearly states that the summary financial statements of 

the Government of Saskatchewan are reliable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the summary financial statements are produced 

according to the generally accepted accounting principles, the 

GAAP principles, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the summaries are 

produced for everyone in the province of Saskatchewan to be 

able to see the entire picture. And, Mr. Speaker, we also do a 

General Revenue Fund budget which is an accounting budget as 

well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that that minister 

can not only spin the budget; he can also spin the auditor’s 

report, Mr. Speaker — the non-partisan, independent Provincial 

Auditor of Saskatchewan, I’ll remind the minister. 

 

Giving a private sector example, the auditor compares this to a 

company that hides its losses from its shareholders. That 

practice is illegal, Mr. Speaker. The auditor calls the Sask 

Party’s reporting “creative accounting.” Companies don’t get to 

choose their accounting rules, and the auditor says, neither 

should that government. Why does the minister and the 

government think it can play by its own set of rules? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the position of Saskatchewan has not changed since 2004-2005 

when the NDP were the government, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the NDP government introduced summary financial 

statements, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday and the day before, I had the honour of 

being in Toronto to meet with financial institutions who were 

looking at the Saskatchewan financial picture. And I’ll tell you, 

Mr. Speaker, there is a degree of such confidence in 

Saskatchewan that I was extremely . . . [inaudible] . . . Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the summary financial statements are reliable. The 



December 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2365 

auditor said so. The summaries are all of government, Mr. 

Speaker. There is nothing that is left out of the summaries. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we continued to do that after being elected in 

2007 and we will continue, continue to produce both an 

operating budget GRF [General Revenue Fund] and the 

summaries. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s 2012. That 

government’s been in power for five years and while every 

other, every other province in Canada has brought themselves 

into compliance with public sector accounting standards, that 

government has stuck their head in the sand, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The auditor says this government is using creative accounting 

to pretend there is a surplus when it’s actually a deficit. In fact, 

the last three budgets were all summary deficits. The auditor 

says that if last week’s mid-year report used proper accounting, 

the Sask Party would have been forced to report a GRF deficit 

of more than $528 million instead of their claim of a GRF 

surplus. How does that minister, that Premier, and that 

government get off treating the truth and the people of this 

province with such blatant disregard? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the 

member, prior to 2004-2005, summary financial statements did 

not exist in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, in 

2004-2005, in this very budget, they were introduced. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note in the 2003 budget . . . 

I’m going to quote from an article of the Leader-Post dated 

March 29th, 2003. And this is the quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

. . . Melenchuk announced Friday that his government will 

move to what are called summary financial statements for 

the 2004-2005 budget — a complete spending plan . . . 

advocated by [the] Saskatchewan Party and the provincial 

auditor. 

 

. . . “What you will get is a complete picture, as in all . . . 

financial plans, a complete picture of all activities of 

government [Mr. Speaker].” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve moved forward. We actually 

contributed to the fact that the NDP opened up their eyes and 

realized that the GRF was not the only way to show the people 

of Saskatchewan the true financial picture. And now we have 

the true financial picture, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, a very clear example of 

the misleading approach is the broken promise to school 

boards. Mr. Speaker, the government guaranteed school boards 

that they’d cover their borrowing. Now they’re breaking that 

promise. The auditor’s report says the government “has revoked 

its promise to fund their new debt.” The report says they 

haven’t . . . [inaudible] . . . school boards yet, Mr. Speaker. And 

it goes on to say the intent of this broken promise is to “avoid 

having new debt recorded.” The auditor is saying they’re hiding 

at least $31 million and that it could be as large as $74 million, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this broken promise is nothing more than creative 

accounting and manipulation. Why is that minister so intent on 

misleading games? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, absolutely there is no 

intent to mislead the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of the member opposite I’m going 

to try to simplify this to relate it to something that he could 

understand. Mr. Speaker, I’ll try to simplify it for what would 

be referred to as an operating budget of a household. Mr. 

Speaker, never has the Saskatchewan Party said that the 

General Revenue Fund budgeting is a replacement for the 

summary financial statements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the General Revenue Fund is an operating budget. 

It’s the revenue and the expenditures, and when revenue 

exceeds expenditures, Mr. Speaker, it is a balanced budget. It’s 

a balanced budget. The member opposite has a little difficulty 

understanding the concept of a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker, 

even in his own election campaign. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it is very clear that the General Revenue 

Fund is simply a subset of the entire summary financials. We 

don’t include the Crown corporations. We don’t include the 

crop insurance in the General Revenue Fund because, Mr. 

Speaker, it is just a portion of all of the summaries that we 

continue to produce on a balanced basis. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I guess you can see from 

those sorts of answers why the minister is calling the financial 

management of that government “misleading.” The auditor’s 

report refers to that government’s accounting as “both poor 

practice and misleading to the public.” 

 

The report condemns that government for pretending to have a 

GRF balance when in fact it has a GRF deficit. The report 

highlights this government’s manipulation, stating that it uses 

two sets of books so that it can choose the outcome it wishes to 

communicate to the public instead of the true, full picture, Mr. 

Speaker. The auditor calls for one set of books only, focused on 

the summary financial basis. When will that minister stop 

misleading the public and report on one set of books? 

 

The Speaker: — I would caution the member to choose his 

words much more carefully and not try to impugn the honour of 

any member of this Assembly. I recognize the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we appreciate the work of the Provincial Auditor and the entire 

staff within her office. Mr. Speaker, to produce, I believe, 36 

chapters, Mr. Speaker, with 112 new recommendations — 

many of the recommendations that ministers have been working 



2366 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2012 

on already for a number of years because they’re ongoing, Mr. 

Speaker — is a document that we appreciate, Mr. Speaker. We 

take it seriously. 

 

Accountability of government is very, very important and that 

is why we commended the NDP in 2004-05 when they finally 

moved from only doing a General Revenue Fund budget, which 

is just a portion of the summaries, and they moved to the full 

summary disclosure just like the Saskatchewan Party does each 

and every year, Mr. Speaker. We humbly disagree with the 

auditor in terms of only moving to one statement. We will 

continue to produce both statements for the benefit of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Inspection of Slaughter Plants 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Provincial 

Auditor provided a lengthy chapter in her report detailing a 

number of deficiencies in how meat is inspected and regulated 

here in Saskatchewan. Of particular concern is her conclusion 

on page 286. It reads: 

 

We concluded that the Ministry of Health did not have 

effective processes during September 1, 2011 to August 

31, 2012 to regulate the production of meat that is safe for 

human consumption when it is handled by the 76 

inspected slaughter plants within Saskatchewan. Health 

did not have sufficient information to know if regional 

health authorities effectively inspected slaughter plants 

and resolved identified problems to enforce The Sanitation 

Regulations, 1964. 

 

To the minister: can he explain how his government has failed 

to ensure that meat from the 76 slaughter plants here in 

Saskatchewan is in fact safe? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Health accepts the 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations in this regards and we’re 

currently determining how to best address them. Obviously, 

Mr. Speaker, food safety is very important to the people of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to note that 

health-licensed slaughter plants in this province are inspected to 

ensure that the facility is well maintained and that meat is being 

handled safely. Mr. Speaker, it’s also important to note that the 

facilities that are mentioned in this report primarily serve local 

farmers who are looking to have their animal slaughtered, 

processed, and packaged for their own consumption. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do have a process in place that is able to track 

through the system whether or not there are any illnesses as a 

result but, Mr. Speaker, to date no reports of illnesses have been 

indicated because of these slaughter plants. But certainly we are 

following up on the auditor’s recommendations and look 

forward to working our way through those. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, families and producers have the 

right to know, Mr. Speaker, if the meat that is being processed 

is in fact safe here in the province. The minister talked about 

different processes in place for tracking information. Well 

that’s part of the problem, Mr. Speaker, because the ministry 

has not been tracking information properly. 

 

Of particular concern are the plants where problems have been 

identified. The auditor’s report states that 76 plants were 

inspected and nine plants were deemed to have high or medium 

risk. Of those nine that were at risk, were identified — 

problems were there, Mr. Speaker — six of the nine did not 

receive the necessary follow-up inspections within the one- to 

six-month time frame that is stipulated. My question to the 

minister: how is it that the ministry has not been doing the 

necessary follow-up on plants where it has been identified 

where there is a medium- to a high-risk concern? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member would 

know that it’s the regional health authorities that conduct 

inspections under the regulations, and that’s why the ministry is 

working with the regional health authorities as well as the 

Ministry of Agriculture in this regard. 

 

We have already, Mr. Speaker, based on follow-up from the 

auditor’s recommendations, we’ve requested additional 

information from the public health inspectors’ survey, from 

their operators, Mr. Speaker, the health-licensed facilities that 

are licensed and inspected by the regional health authorities. So 

we’ve asked for more detailed information in this regard. 

 

We are also consulting with our regional health authorities as 

well as the Ministry of Agriculture to develop a plan that will 

revisit the standards, that will improve tracking of inspections 

and surveillance, including those that need reinspections after 

there are concerns that have been noted. As well, Mr. Speaker, 

we are looking at, through with our partners, determining a 

mechanism that we would be able to publicly report inspections 

when it comes to these health-inspected facilities. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, health regions are doing the 

inspections in these situations, but it is up to ministry to 

actually know what is going on and ensure that the correct 

processes are being followed. On page 291 it says, “Health was 

unaware that 6 of the 9 high and medium risk plants did not 

receive follow-up inspections within the required timeframe 

(i.e., within one to six months).” 

 

Mr. Speaker, individuals in this province, families deserve to 

know if the food that is being processed, Mr. Speaker, the meat 

that is being processed is in fact safe. That is so important. We 

see many examples from other jurisdictions where, when it 

goes wrong, it goes wrong for so many people and it is a 

problem. 

 

The actual inspection is important, Mr. Speaker, and through 



December 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2367 

this process there’s annual inspections of the facilities. But the 

auditor also pointed out that the actual meat, Mr. Speaker, from 

the plant is not being inspected. From the report it says, “Most 

other provinces require that both the plant and the meat be 

inspected before the meat is sold.” My question to the Health 

minister: is it his opinion that the meat should be inspected as 

well as the plants, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I certainly know . . . 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the member for his question and 

certainly as it stands we will work with our regional health 

authorities and ensure that the proper surveillance is taking 

place in terms of what is required under a health-inspected 

licence, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I find it interesting. Is the member requesting that we go 

even further when it comes to these facilities? Because I will 

note from page 284 that under the former government that 

stakeholders were consulted in 2005 and 2006 about possible 

legislative changes. No changes resulted, Mr. Speaker. So at 

that time they had one opinion when it came to health-inspected 

slaughter facilities. 

 

Is it now the position of the NDP and that member that this 

policy needs to be changed? Mr. Speaker, we are going to 

follow up and ensure that regional health authorities are doing 

the inspections that they need to be done, ensuring that that 

work continues to be done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 85 — The Saskatchewan Employment Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 85, 

The Saskatchewan Employment Act be now introduced and read 

a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved first reading of Bill 

No. 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 82 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, today I rise to move second reading of a bill to 

amend The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act. 

 

The Saskatchewan Pension Plan provides a unique retirement 

savings vehicle for individuals with little or no access to 

occupational pension plans or other retirement savings 

arrangements. It is the only plan of its kind in Canada operating 

at arm’s-length from government and offering members 

professional investment management at institutional costs. 

 

Since 1986 the Saskatchewan Pension Plan has grown to over 

32,000 members and $318 million under trusteeship. The plan 

is an integral part of the retirement savings plans of many 

Saskatchewan people. The Saskatchewan Pension Plan offers 

members important benefits such as affordability. You can be a 

member of the plan regardless of your earnings. This is 

especially attractive for people with irregular or seasonal 

earnings such as students, part-time workers, or people who are 

self-employed. 

 

Simple. The Saskatchewan Pension Plan takes pride in making 

the plan easy to join and easy to understand. Paperwork is kept 

to a minimum. As well, administrators of the plan are always 

available and happy to answer any questions members may 

have. They are willing to assist with any aspect of the plan. 

 

Consistent. The plan’s philosophy is to invest cautiously over 

the long term. This is an attractive approach for many people 

but especially for those with little or no investment experience. 

 

The plan is also voluntary. You are never obligated to 

contribute. 

 

Flexible. You can make a contribution at any time during the 

plan year. 

 

Portable. It is always your plan regardless of where you live or 

what you do. 

 

Professionally managed investments are handled by a 

professional investment firm. 

 

Mr. Speaker, amendments to the plan are necessary in order to 

keep the Saskatchewan Pension Plan current with modern times 

and to make the plan as sound as possible for all members. The 

amendments that are being made to survivor benefits are 

required to comply with The Pension Benefits Act, 1992. This 

will allow members to transfer funds from registered pension 

plans and locked-in retirement accounts into their 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan account. This will complete the 

process which started with the changes announced in December 

2010. 

 

At that time, the contribution limit was increased from $600 to 

$2,500. Members were allowed to transfer up to $10,000 per 



2368 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2012 

year from an RRSP [registered retirement savings plan] or 

unlocked registered pension plan. They will now be able to 

transfer from locked-in vehicles as well. Retirement options are 

being moved from the Act into regulations to allow the plan to 

be more responsive to the needs of members as the array of 

retirement products evolves. 

 

Another amendment will allow funds payable to a member of 

the Saskatchewan Pension Plan to be transferred to the General 

Revenue Fund in the event that the member cannot be located. 

This would only be done after all other avenues had been 

exhausted, and the funds would continue to be held in the 

member’s name. This protocol is similar to the process used by 

other financial institutions when clients cannot be located. 

 

Finally, the language in some sections has been modernized. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 82, The Saskatchewan Plan Amendment Act, 2012. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly . . . I recognize the member for 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

very pleased to stand today on behalf of the official opposition 

and of course give our initial comments in relation to Bill 82. 

And obviously, Mr. Speaker, that bill is making reference to the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 

 

And there’s no question from our perspective as opposition 

members that modernizing some of the pension plans that exist 

out there is really, really important. Having a continual view of 

how to make some of the pension plans stronger, better, and 

certainly more durable over time is something that I think the 

opposition certainly views as being practical and common 

sense. There’s no question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On Bill 82 the minister spoke about $318 million in collective 

assets — I think that’s the figure that he used — the fact that 

there was 32,000 people that are involved with this particular 

pension plan. And he spoke about the plan being flexible and 

being affordable, Mr. Speaker, and also being managed 

professionally. There’s no question in our minds that those are 

some of the attributes of some of the pension plans that are key 

to ensuring that people’s savings and people’s commitment to 

their pension plan is certainly is rock solid in terms of stability 

and growth for the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the changes that he spoke about is the 

RRSP contributions and unlocking some of the investments that 

some of the pension plan holders might be able to take 

advantage of. The minister alluded to a $10,000 figure. There’s 

no question that there is an opportunity to strengthen the plan 

by adding some of the features of transferring up to $10,000 

from a locked-in contribution elsewhere, something that I think 

that would strengthen the plan overall. And I think it’s 

important that we look at some of these options for people. 

 

There’s no question that the best and most valuable advice that 

one would get in relation to this particular bill and the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan is to talk to the people that are 

impacted — the pension holders themselves — to ask them if 

this Act goes far enough, to see if this is something that they’d 

like to do, and what they may perceive as a problems or if 

there’s other areas that could really strengthen the plan. What 

would they think? 

 

So one of the things that I want to point out: there’s 32,000 

people involved with the Saskatchewan Pension Plan; then 

there’s 32,000 opinions. And obviously, Mr. Speaker, you can’t 

access 32,000 opinions in a productive way over a short period 

of time. And that’s one of the reasons why I think we have the 

processes identified through the Assembly, to encourage those 

that are involved with the pension plan to voice some of their 

concerns, some of the shortcomings that they perceive is in this 

particular bill. And of course the number one reason to get 

involved with the debate is to see how and if this plan is going 

to affect positively the pension plan, the people that are 

involved with this pension plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of questions that we have around 

survivor benefits. Is there any kind of new way that this 

particular pension plan is going to deal with that issue? Is it 

concurrent? Is it similar? And does it concur with other pension 

plans? And so it’s important that some of these issues be 

addressed and that we look at some of these matters. 

 

But again I go to my earlier comment about the actual pension 

plan holders. There are people right throughout Saskatchewan. I 

understand there may be farmers’ wives or people that make 

small incomes, that they contributed to this particular pension 

plan. It’s been around for a number of years, and I was quite 

surprised to see that there’s $300 million in this particular 

pension plan. And I was also very impressed with the amount 

of contribution and savings and of course the commitment that 

many of the people that have contributed to this plan have 

shown over the years. So I think it’s really important that we 

look at the pension plan issue as being very important, that we 

continue modernizing any pension plan that is out there, to seek 

the advice of the people that are being impacted. And that 

obviously is an ongoing invitation that we would have on 

behalf of the official opposition. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we spoke a bit about the professional 

management perspective. The minister spoke about the need to 

continually push this particular ideal that any pension plan 

needs a professional planner, good management team, and so 

on and so forth. And these are some of the things that I think 

that we certainly concur with, but it’d be nice to know, like who 

is the actual pension plan management team? Where are they 

from? How is the pension plan managed? 

 

I’m sure that the vast majority of the 32,000 pension 

contributors have all that information, but it’d be nice for us to 

really know exactly how it’s managed so we can talk about the 

positive attributes of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan when 

people ask MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 

advice on what pension plans work and which pension plans 

have good protection, who’s managing what pension plan. All 

that information is very valuable to us because the public asks 

us many, many times for information on that note. 

 

[14:30] 

 



December 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2369 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think again the language of being 

professionally managed, of being modernized, of being flexible, 

of being affordable, giving concessions here and there, 

changing the Act to make sure it truly reflects what the pension 

plan holders want, these are some of the issues that we’ll take 

the time as an opposition to ascertain and to make sure that this 

is what exactly the pension plan holders have in mind. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, we have several months to go. 

This is a relatively important bill in the sense of the $300 

million that is being held in trust. And we think that it is 

something that we have to pay very, very close attention to. 

And as the official opposition, we certainly will take the time to 

go through this bill. 

 

So on that note, the open invitation to people out there that are 

part of this pension plan. We would offer the opportunity for 

you to come forward and really share with us your perspective. 

And again, the whole notion is to simply modernize, strengthen, 

and ensure that your pension plan is durable. And by all 

indications, Mr. Speaker, it is being professionally managed. 

And if there’s ways that we can help to head down that road to 

make sure this pension plan is strengthened and longer lasting, 

then the opposition will certainly do their part and continue to 

support you on that front. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn the debate 

on Bill No. 82. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 82, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 83 — The Foreign Worker Recruitment and 

Immigration Services Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased today to move second reading of a bill, Bill No. 83, The 

Foreign Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services Act. 

This legislation, Mr. Speaker, as the title suggests, is being 

introduced to protect foreign workers and immigrants from 

exploitation by recruiters, immigration consultants, and 

employers while being recruited to Saskatchewan or are in the 

process of immigrating to our province. We are projecting in 

Saskatchewan that we will require as many as 75 to 90,000 

skilled workers over the next five years. 

 

Immigration is a key component and an important part of how 

we intend to fill our immediate and future demand for a highly 

skilled labour force. The benefit of this legislation is more 

people from around the world want to come to Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, to work and to live and to have a better life in a 

very prosperous province. The number of nominees under the 

Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program has grown from 

200 nominations in 2005-06 to 4,000 annually now, and the 

federal temporary foreign worker program has increased 250 

per cent in the last six years. 

 

That’s why, Mr. Speaker, we need this legislation. It’s about 

fairness for newcomers and ensuring Saskatchewan continues 

our strong reputation as a preferred destination for immigrants. 

The result of an increasing number of immigrants, Mr. Speaker, 

is an increased number of people who are vulnerable to 

mistreatment during the recruitment and immigration process, 

and that’s what we plan to address through this legislation. 

 

Some foreign nationals experience exploitation or mistreatment 

due to their limited ability to speak and understand English or 

because they lack a knowledge of Saskatchewan and Canadian 

laws and culture, and they aren’t always sure what is considered 

fair here. These newcomers may be reluctant to raise issues for 

fear of losing their employment or status in Saskatchewan. 

 

I would want to hasten to add, Mr. Speaker, that there have 

been not very many cases of this type, but we want to present 

this legislation to ensure that we don’t run into a situation 

where we have a problem. So this is certainly a preventative 

measure to address the concerns in this area. 

 

The bill balances the rights and obligations of recruiters, 

immigration consultants, and employers, and newcomers during 

the process of recruiting and immigrating to Saskatchewan. It 

will not affect rights within the workplace. That balance is 

achieved under five basic principles. 

 

First of all, it will serve employers. The bill acknowledges that 

our employers need the services of recruiters and immigration 

consultants to help with foreign workers to allow them to 

immigrate to our province. Second, it will ensure employers 

pay for the costs of recruiting their foreign workers. Third, this 

legislation will make the recruiting and immigration consulting 

market transparent and open. Fourth, it will require recruiters, 

immigration consultants, and employers to act ethically. And 

finally, the bill will inform and enforce by educating 

stakeholders on their obligations under the proposed legislation, 

and if they fail to comply, by establishing enforcement 

measures. 

 

We held two rounds of stakeholder consultations, Mr. Speaker: 

one in 2011 and one earlier this year. And stakeholder groups 

agreed that there is a need for legislation to protect foreign 

workers and immigrants. I believe, Mr. Speaker, we were able 

to strike a balance between the different viewpoints we heard in 

the consultations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation will position Saskatchewan as 

having the most comprehensive protection for newcomers of 

any province in Canada. No other jurisdiction has protections 

for both recruitment and immigration consulting services that 

compare to these proposals. Mr. Speaker, I’m confident that 

this bill is good for Saskatchewan, good for foreign nationals 

coming to live and work in Saskatchewan, and good for 

Saskatchewan employers hiring foreign workers. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m also confident this legislation is good for 

recruiters and immigration consultants who are prepared to 

provide their services fairly and ethically. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 



2370 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2012 

83, The Foreign Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services 

Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 83, The Foreign Worker Recruitment and Immigration 

Services Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly . . . I recognize 

the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 

I’m very pleased on behalf of the official opposition to offer our 

initial comments on Bill 83. And there’s no question in our 

minds, Mr. Speaker, that everything that Saskatchewan can 

possibly do to attract people and to retain people to come and 

make Saskatchewan their home and their lifelong home is 

something that we pay very, very close attention to, Mr. 

Speaker, and to be able to bring some foreign workers in and to 

ensure that these foreign workers are not only welcome in the 

province but that they also know that they are protected in 

many ways, shapes, and forms. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, by and large, I think a lot of the 

employers, the people that are trying to attract some of the 

highly skilled foreign workers to our province, I think they have 

an even greater role than government to make sure that they not 

only bring the folks that want to work here but to also protect 

them and to make them feel at home. And I think Saskatchewan 

being a province that has been shown and has been known over 

the years to have great compassion to many people that come to 

our province, I think that the employers out there in the 

province certainly have added to that and will continue adding 

to the notion that Saskatchewan is a place where you’re going 

to welcome as many people from all throughout the world to 

come here and make their home, to live and to raise their 

family, and to do that with good, high-paying jobs and of 

course having safe and secure communities and having quality 

education, having good health care. These are all important 

aspects. I think that many people that when they look at 

Saskatchewan, they see all these attributes, and they certainly 

see all the value of moving to this province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister spoke about some of the needs 

that they may have for foreign workers, the notion of 75 to 

90,000 more foreign workers are needed. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s one of the points that I would raise is that as an 

opposition member, we want to know exactly where some of 

the target countries are. This is important to note, that when 

people are sitting down with MLAs or sitting with the 

opposition, we’d like to know which countries have an interest 

in moving to the province. And that’s why this bill is so 

interesting for us because there has got to be a lot of 

information that the Assembly needs to have. 

 

And the opposition has to certainly be privy to that information, 

and that information has to be forthcoming from the 

government as quickly as possible. And why, Mr. Speaker? 

Because it just shows the people of Saskatchewan which 

countries are sending people here. Is it Ireland or is it the 

Philippines? It’s important for us from the economic 

perspective to determine which is the best way to establish 

relationships with what countries, to really build on that, Mr. 

Speaker. This is some of the information that is really, really 

valuable to us. And we would certainly want to see some of that 

information come forward. 

As well, Mr. Speaker, what are some of the skill sets that the 

immigrant community is bringing to our province? That’s 

another important lesson to know, Mr. Speaker. Like for 

example, I give you in health care I think it has been a number 

of years that Canada in general has been blessed with a great 

supply of South African doctors. I think now there’s been 

changes within the country of South Africa, so the access and 

ease of getting South African doctors to Canada has been a 

challenging one over the last several years. And that’s one of 

my points, Mr. Speaker. Although the bill talks about 

immigrant workers, the point I’m trying to make is that if 

you’re getting a certain type of class or a certain set of skills 

from an immigrant wanting to move to Saskatchewan, we 

would like to know which country they’re coming from and 

what skill set that they’re bringing to the province. It’s really, 

really important that we know. 

 

The other issue, Mr. Speaker, is that the 75 to 90,000 

immigrants that the Saskatchewan Party want to target as to 

hoping to have them move to Saskatchewan, of course the 

opposition wants to see continued growth, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

really, really important. That is the notion I think is really 

something that we want to stress as an opposition: that the 

economy is something that is something that we can’t take for 

granted and that we need to have continual effort to strengthen 

that economy overall. And a good, solid supply, a good, solid 

supply of a skilled workforce is really, really important, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So when we have the minister mention numbers of 75 to 90,000 

immigrants that may be coming to Saskatchewan under Bill 83, 

we need to have some of that information: what skill set, which 

country that they’re coming from, and certainly, Mr. Speaker, 

which locations are they going to in the province. I think that’s 

really, really important, and that information could help a lot of 

organizations and groups in their work, in their work and in 

their effort to try and make some of the immigrant families feel 

welcome to our province and our country. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think some of the notions under Bill 83, as 

the minister spoke about, he wanted to ensure that the process 

in the bill served the employers. And we don’t have a 

fundamental problem with that because obviously the 

employers, as a second principle that the minister spoke about, 

is that they are going to be paying for all the immigrants 

coming to our community or coming to our province in general. 

 

And that’s something that is important, that if they’re taking the 

effort, they’re making all the contributions, they’re doing all the 

hard work, then obviously then this program and this bill 

should be serving the employers, the people that are making 

this effort to bring some of the highly skilled immigrant 

community to our province. And no question about it, Mr. 

Speaker, because they are paying for those fees and those costs 

and all the bills attached to this effort, that certainly their 

interests ought to be, ought to be protected. 

 

The other point, Mr. Speaker, that he mentioned very briefly as 

another initiative is to make sure that this process is transparent 

and that it’s open, that there’s no nefarious activity, and when 

you’re looking at trying to attract an immigrant family here, 

that there isn’t any kind of human trafficking, so to speak. 

 



December 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2371 

And I think that’s only fair that the more transparency and the 

more light that we can shed on which groups of people are 

coming here and how they’re getting here, which is really, 

really important, that is something that we would certainly 

applaud from the humanity perspective in the sense that if 

people are being trafficked in a bad way to meet some of the 

needs that we have as a province, then, Mr. Speaker, we have to 

make sure that that activity is not only exposed, but it is 

certainly penalized, and it’s highly, highly discouraged in the 

future. 

 

The other thing that the minister made reference to is that as 

people help Saskatchewan employers find some of the skilled 

labour force that they need from a number of companies, that 

these consultants or the people that actually recruit some of 

these immigrant workers, that they have a good ethical code of 

conduct. I think that really goes without saying because if you 

have people that are involved in this kind of activity, you want 

them to be of course highly skilled. You want these people that 

are involved with finding these immigrant workers to be very, 

very ethical and to be having humanity, basic respect for human 

life as a premise of their whole operation. I think that’s really, 

really key that we point that out, and the minister certainly 

spoke about that as well. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we want to be able to educate the 

stakeholders, whether it is the employers that are going to be 

attracting these workers or whether it’s the recruiters that are 

involved or the consultants, as sometimes they’re called, that 

are involved with this particular industry, that they’re highly 

ethical in their conduct. We want to make sure that the church 

groups that might be involved with this that are trying to have 

some of the immigrant families move into their neighbourhood, 

to help them with housing, to help with a number of other 

matters, these are some of the things that the stakeholders 

would be involved with I’m assuming. 

 

So as the minister spoke about, one of the other segments of 

this particular bill is educating stakeholders. I think that work 

needs to be continual. I certainly see it progressing to a point 

where it becomes highly professional and highly interactive 

amongst all the groups. So you’re having all the stakeholders 

not having separate conversations but having them all talking 

together in a committee form to ensure that the education and 

some of their work and some of their contribution that they may 

have to this bill is heard and certainly, you know, that they’re 

all involved with this whole industry, so to speak.  

 

Mr. Speaker, that there is occasion, as the minister alluded to, 

that where some certain groups of people may try and take 

advantage of an immigrant community or a family wants to 

move here . . . And you have that, that opportunity. That 

opportunity may exist. And I was pleased to hear that the 

minister said that this is not a common practice, but it may 

occur from time to time. So it’s important that we put some 

disincentives for that kind of activity.  

 

And that’s another point that the minister raised in Bill 83, in a 

sense that if there is some poor practices and that there is some 

disrespect or some very poor treatment of some of the 

immigrant workers or their families in getting here to 

Saskatchewan, then I think the employers and the people of 

Saskatchewan have every right to know about that and that they 

ought to also know that if that activity is occurring, then there 

are penalties and that there is enforcement and that there is 

follow-up and follow through and to make sure that this doesn’t 

occur ever again. And that of course is a work in progress, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So some of the things that the minister has spoke about in the 

bill of serving employers and making sure that the employers 

are paying the cost, which is really important, to make sure that 

the system itself is open and transparent, to make sure that 

there’s ethical conduct of the recruiters or the consultants, as 

they call them, as they try and get families here, and to make 

sure that they constantly and consistently educate stakeholders 

to make sure that there isn’t any kind of bad practices out there. 

And that if there is bad practices, that there is some 

enforcement mechanisms in place. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, certainly from our perspective, as the NDP 

talk about smart growth, we know that some of this effort has to 

be undertaken. We know that these are some of the ongoing 

work that has to happen and has to be on a continual basis. We 

can’t just have one particular bill, Bill 83, and all of a sudden 

we figure our work is done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the devil’s in the detail in the certain terms of 

trying to make sure that Bill 83 follows fully the intent that was 

described today and that there isn’t a half measure here or a half 

measure there that takes away the integrity of the bill. And 

that’s what’s really important to us as an official opposition in 

the sense that if you’re going to have a smart growth strategy 

that we speak about, then you have bills that involve attracting 

families here, the immigrant worker and their families here, 

then we better make sure we get it right, that we better make 

sure we do this properly and that we do it thoroughly. And 

that’s what’s a common theme that we certainly adopt here in 

the official opposition on this side of the Assembly, that if 

you’re going to do something to strengthen Saskatchewan 

economy, you’ve got to do it right. And, Mr. Speaker, we take 

very seriously this particular bill and what the impact is and 

what the desired outcome is going to be. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we see there is going to be some difficulties 

for Saskatchewan over the next number of years even though 

the minister spoke about having 75 to 90,000 people coming 

through this particular program. We know that from our 

perspective, that as we see evidence that the economy is 

struggling — Saskatchewan’s economy, whether it be the oil 

and gas sector which we’ve seen a drop in investment and a 

drop of activity overall, and what we’ve seen in the Potash 

Corporation itself as well, that there’s been a lull in investment 

as well, Mr. Speaker — from the government’s own books, we 

see half a billion dollars less in resource revenue income.  

 

And that is certainly a problem, Mr. Speaker, because that 

doesn’t bode well for the future. And then we see as well that 

there’s $1 billion dollars added more on to the debt. And we see 

some of the ongoing global issues that are going to impact 

Saskatchewan, whether it’s the US [United States] finally 

mastering their own supply of oil and gas, which we hear by 

2020, which is a short seven years away, that the US are going 

to be independent of their energy needs that they don’t have to 



2372 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2012 

go to any other country. And that certainly spells a challenge 

for not only Canada, Mr. Speaker, but for a number of other 

companies as well. And Saskatchewan being swept up in all the 

global activity, it’s not going to bode well for our province. 

 

So one of the things that I think is really important is that even 

though we have bills of this sort coming forward and we have 

the minister talking about 75 to 90,000 new workers, Mr. 

Speaker, I can tell the people of Saskatchewan that I doubt very 

much if we can get to the 90,000 person range, Mr. Speaker, 

because obviously our economy will begin to cool. And as the 

US begins to do their own work on oil and gas, there’ll be less 

demand and less need for Saskatchewan’s oil and gas. And that 

spells trouble for our province overall. 

 

If we see evidence in Alberta, as has been noted in several 

newspapers, that they are having a difficult time continually to 

be able to supply the States with oil and gas, Mr. Speaker, then 

imagine what Saskatchewan’s challenge will be in the future. It 

would be twice than if not three times the challenge that Alberta 

faces. And that’s my point, Mr. Speaker, is that the economy 

itself, not only for the country but in particular for 

Saskatchewan, is going to face some obstacles and hurdles over 

the next couple of years. And that’s one of the reasons why I 

think this particular bill, it needs to address that, Mr. Speaker. It 

needs to talk about some of the challenges that we face. 

 

And as you look at some of the recent issues, Mr. Speaker, 

around, on every front — whether it’s mining, whether it’s oil 

and gas or whether it’s tourism or whether it’s, in this case, 

potash — all the indicators from all the different resource 

industries is that over the next three or four years Saskatchewan 

is going to face a daunting challenge. And we’ve seen evidence 

today of the financial state of Saskatchewan where the auditor 

has lambasted the Saskatchewan Party government for having 

two sets of books, one they show the public and one that really 

shows the incredible debt and deficit that we have as a 

province. That really spells trouble to our province overall. 

 

And within the NDP circles, Mr. Speaker, as I spoke about our 

smart growth strategy, that’s exactly my point, is that if you’re 

going to have growth in the province it has to be very smart. 

It’s got to be methodical and it’s got to be thorough. So on one 

hand we have Bill 83 that talks about immigrant workers which 

we as a province agree and need to come and make 

Saskatchewan their home. They can contribute and offer so 

much.  

 

But at the same time, we’re not addressing some of the ongoing 

economic issues. And we’re dipping into our rainy day fund. 

We’re selling our Crown corporations. You begin to see the 

social fabric, what makes Saskatchewan so great — whether 

it’s the Crown corporations or whether it’s a strong economic 

agenda or whether it’s respect for the working people or 

whether it’s a good robust, vibrant economy — all these issues 

and all these assets, Mr. Speaker, are up in the air because of 

the SaskParty’s bungling, and certainly their rhetoric as a right 

wing party. These are some of the things, Mr. Speaker, that 

have actually hurt our province. 

 

Now us New Democrats say, hold it here. We have to provide 

leadership. And leadership’s got to be solid in the sense that it’s 

got to be multi-faceted. It also has to be consistent. It has to be 

thorough. It has to be professional. It has to be 

well-thought-out. The sum of all the efforts out there have to 

come together and make Saskatchewan stronger. And that’s 

what we certainly want to speak to people out in Saskatchewan 

about when we talk about the smart growth strategy, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So again it’s all about fairness, as the minister mentioned. And 

we don’t have any disregard for a notion that as we invite 

immigrant communities, or immigrant families and immigrant 

workers to our community, then we have to be fair. We have to 

be respectful and we can’t have them sent back like we sent 

back the Irish workers. Because obviously we’ve seen evidence 

of that. We’ve seen some students that are being held up and 

actually holed up in a church because they were going to school 

here. They took a small, part-time job. Now they’re being 

evicted by the federal government. 

 

And these kind of signals, that kind of message, and that kind 

of media attention, Mr. Speaker, does more harm, does more 

harm than good, and does more harm overnight than some of 

the other messages that we have as a province to try and attract 

people here to our province. So this is what exactly that the 

NDP mean when we talk about smart growth. We’ve got to be 

consistent. We’ve got to be fair. We’ve got to be dogged in 

terms of our determination to keep some of these families here 

and determined to make sure that they stay here for many, 

many years because they can contribute so much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other thing that’s really important in making sure that we 

welcome the immigrant community is to make sure all sectors 

of our country and all sectors of our provinces are equally 

engaged. And I want to bring in the Aboriginal file here, Mr. 

Speaker, if I can. Many people in the Aboriginal community 

also want to be part of the economy, and they’re asking this 

particular government to do what they can as well to help the 

Aboriginal community. The First Nations, the Métis, you know, 

the people that live in some of the northern communities or 

some on the First Nations land, they want to be part of the 

economy as well. 

 

So as you’re doing the effort to attract immigrant families and 

immigrant workers, do the same with the Aboriginal 

community. Because it makes sense in many, many ways to 

have corresponding efforts in both regards, Mr. Speaker, 

because the Aboriginal people can add a great amount as well 

to easing some of the labour shortage in this province if they’re 

actively engaged. 

 

And again we’ve seen evidence of how they’ve dismantled the 

Aboriginal employment development program. The Sask Party 

has, they’ve dismantled the entire Aboriginal education branch, 

Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party has done that. And bit by bit, they 

have methodically taken away so much opportunity and so 

many measures to support the Aboriginal people. And now we 

see that overall from year to year there is an actual increase in 

the unemployment amongst the Aboriginal people. And they 

generally ask, like, to people like myself and the member from 

Cumberland, well why aren’t they doing the same effort as they 

do on other fronts for the Aboriginal community? 

 

So that message cannot be lost, Mr. Speaker, the message that 

the Aboriginal want to be part of this economy, want to be part 



December 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2373 

of the training opportunities, want to be part of the resource 

sector, want to be part of earning a living and being able to 

provide for their families. All these issues are really important 

to the Aboriginal communities as they’re important to the 

immigrant community, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the question that people ask out here is, why can’t we do 

both? And the absolute answer is, under the smart growth 

strategy for the NDP, we can and should do both, Mr. Speaker. 

And that’s why some of these bills that come forward deal with 

one sector of the issue, not the other. Really it puts an unfair 

burden on the Aboriginal community as being ignored and the 

immigrant community themselves. If they started getting some 

uncertainty from some of the economic indicators for the 

province, they become uncertain about their future in 

Saskatchewan. And then you can see bit by bit, Mr. Speaker, 

the economy begins to suffer. It begins to falter, and we can 

certainly point to the Saskatchewan Party as being the architects 

of that failure and faltering economy in the province because 

they have not thought some of these things through to the 

extent they should have. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this bill has a lot of issues that we need to 

speak about at great length. There are many complicating 

factors and matters that implicate this bill. We have a lot more 

people that want to speak about the issue, about the immigrant 

nominee program. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen evidence that 

even the federal government has MPs [Member of Parliament] 

that put out pamphlets decrying the cost of having some of the 

immigrant community in our province. We’ve seen cancer 

treatment patients being denied basic services in health care by 

the federal government, and these are our immigrant 

community. 

 

[15:00] 

 

So on one hand we see conservatives really pushing the agenda 

to have this anti-immigrant position, and yet the Sask Party 

says nothing to their federal cousins. So they need to get on the 

horn and start a campaign to educate their federal counterparts. 

And since the minister has spoken about the opportunity to 

educate stakeholders, my advice to him is, start educating your 

federal cousins in Ottawa on how to properly treat people that 

try and make Canada and Saskatchewan their home in the 

future. And maybe that’d be a good first step when you talk 

about educating stakeholders. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot more we want to say on this. And 

our group and our caucus are committed to making sure that we 

say what the people out there want to see happen, and that 

what’s really important, is that we take the time to talk to the 

stakeholders and have their voices heard through the opposition 

to make sure that the Saskatchewan Party get it right because so 

far, Mr. Speaker, on many, many files they have failed 

miserably. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 

Bill No. 83. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 83, The Foreign Worker 

Recruitment and Immigration Services Act. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 84 — The Common Business Identifiers Act 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of The 

Common Business Identifiers Act. Mr. Speaker, this 

government made a commitment to ensure that Saskatchewan 

has a business-friendly environment. Better integration and 

delivery of business services through more streamlined and 

efficient channels will enhance this environment in our 

province. 

 

This bill facilitates the continued development of a future 

one-stop business service by establishing a secure database, or 

what is referred to as the hub for sharing business information. 

The hub allows information to be shared between Canada 

Revenue Agency and designated government programs to 

facilitate the use of the common business identifier known as 

the business number. The first step required to implement the 

hub were taken with the passage of amendments last spring to 

the Saskatchewan business statutes to allow the exchange of 

information between the Canada Revenue Agency and the 

corporate registry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill will allow interested government 

ministries, agencies, and municipalities to use the business 

number and the hub to share business information such as 

name, address, corporate directors with other participating 

agencies. Businesses will provide information and updates to 

one of the participating agencies and have that information 

shared with other participating agencies through the hub. Prior 

to the creation of the hub, businesses had to provide a separate 

update to each government agency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to be clear, the information shared through the 

hub will be general public information about the business such 

as name, address, and date of establishment. Information about 

the business’s involvement in the specific government program 

or details of its interaction with a government agency will not 

be shared through the hub. Program-specific information will 

remain within the separate agencies. 

 

In addition to establishing the hub and allowing information to 

be shared through the use of the business number, this bill 

contains extensive regulation-making powers to establish or 

adopt the business number system, identify the rules and 

processes for the operation of the hub, standardize procedures 

to file information under designated Acts that establish the 

participating government programs. These programs will use 

the business number and share information through the hub and 

prescribe the common business information that a business is 

required to provide to participating government programs. 

These programs will be maintained and updated through the 

hub. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill is a significant step forward for the 

province toward its ultimate goal of providing a 

business-friendly environment and a one-stop business service. 



2374 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2012 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 

Common Business Identifiers Act. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 

second reading on Bill No. 84, The Common Business 

Identifiers Act. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 

again I’m proud to rise today to give the initial comments on 

Bill 84. The whole notion, Mr. Speaker, behind The Common 

Business Identifiers Act, as the minister spoke about, is really 

trying to become a business-friendly province. And I will say, 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s been known to be a 

business-friendly province for years and years and years, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s something that we’re always proud of. And 

there’s no question in our mind, Mr. Speaker, as I watch how 

the Saskatchewan Party has basically been caretakers for the 

economy that the NDP built, some of these small measures, Mr. 

Speaker, are in many ways indicative of their experience in how 

to build a solid economy. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a business-friendly environment, I want to 

ask the minister first of all that this business-friendly 

environment notion has been in existence since Saskatchewan 

was born I think in 1905. We will continue building the 

economy. And it’s not going to be the Saskatchewan Party 

that’s going to strengthen the economy, Mr. Speaker. It’s going 

to be the people, the businesses, and a smart growth strategy 

that we speak about within the NDP circles. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a one-stop business support centre, I don’t 

believe anybody out there would argue that this is something 

that is valuable. It’s a valuable tool. There’s no question that the 

hub, in exchanging information amongst the business 

community . . . And how they would do it obviously would be 

through the Internet. I’m assuming that there are ways and 

means in which you can strengthen that particular program if it 

is an Internet program. And there are many, many ways and 

means in which you can make the hub much more successful, 

much more dynamic, and much more integrated in the province. 

Now what I understand from the minister’s tone is that 

basically that they’re going to be there to share information 

such as names and addresses and what they do as a business 

and that they’re going to identify with other business out there 

and they’re going to be able to share some of their experience. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what we want to do in the NDP circles is 

that . . . And again we understand when the minister spoke 

about some information can be shared on the hub and some 

information cannot be shared on the hub. We understand that as 

well, Mr. Speaker. There is no question that that is something 

that we would certainly agree to as well. However on the whole 

notion of trying to make sure that Saskatchewan stays 

business-friendly, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan stays 

focused on strengthening the economy, Mr. Speaker, is what we 

think is where the Saskatchewan Party needs a lot of work. And 

the hub is one small, tiny step in that direction, Mr. Speaker, 

because we don’t think, we don’t think — because we don’t 

have the confidence, in the opposition, that the Saskatchewan 

Party can work their way through this — that the hub cannot 

just be a small, little piece, that you could actually expand on 

the value behind the concept of the hub and really make it a 

solid, integral part of what we do in Saskatchewan, and almost 

to a point where you could make it into a Crown corporation, 

Mr. Speaker, make it that effective. But since they’re selling 

Crown corporations that are effective and are profitable then, 

Mr. Speaker, this is what we see evidence of, is that the concept 

is there, the demand is there, but the Saskatchewan Party wants 

to take small baby steps because they have not yet matured 

enough to start taking care of the economy that they inherited 

from the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the things that’s really, really important on this 

particular notion is that the NDP understand that under our 

smart growth strategy, we’ve got to attract investment. Under 

the smart growth strategy, we’ve got to make sure that the 

business community out there, the international investment 

community knows that Saskatchewan is a province where you 

can have safe, secure investment and make some great gains on 

that investment. There’s absolutely nothing wrong with that, 

Mr. Speaker. And under the smart growth strategy we know, we 

know that there are great opportunities to partner, Mr. Speaker. 

There’s great opportunities to partner with the province and 

with the public sector of the province of Saskatchewan and with 

many other players in our province, Mr. Speaker. We 

understand that as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that the concept behind 

Bill 84, to establish the hub, we have to get grander. We have to 

get much more professional, Mr. Speaker. And we also have to 

really reach beyond our borders to make sure that 

Saskatchewan can have a long-lasting economic opportunity 

which we see the Saskatchewan Party squandering right now, 

Mr. Speaker. And that’s one of the most important messages 

that we have when they bring ideas of this sort behind Bill 84, 

that if you’re going to do the economic building, you’ve got to 

do it properly. You’ve got to do it methodically. You’ve got to 

do it with some intelligence, Mr. Speaker. And you can’t nickel 

and dime any effort that the province has or undertakes to build 

that economy. 

 

So Bill 84, Mr. Speaker, the whole notion of being 

business-friendly, I would say to the people of Saskatchewan 

that the first opportunity the Sask Party had to really strengthen 

our financial position as a province with potash, they were a 

couple of billion dollars off the mark, Mr. Speaker, couple of 

billion dollars off their projections. Do you think that’s 

business-friendly? Absolutely not, Mr. Speaker. And then you 

fast forward to this year. Now they’re half a billion dollars off 

on their projected revenues from oil and gas and potash. Is that 

business-friendly, Mr. Speaker? I don’t think so. And now we 

hear they’re adding $1 billion to the debt of the province. Is that 

business-friendly, Mr. Speaker? I don’t think so. And now 

we’re seeing from the Provincial Auditor a scathing damnation 

of how the books are being handled by the government, Mr. 

Speaker. Now is that business-friendly? Does that exude or 

show confidence from a government to a business community 

that’s outside our borders or planning to look at investments in 

Saskatchewan? I don’t think so, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think so at 

all. 

 

And that’s exactly the contrast that I would like to use when we 

talk about bills of this sort called the hub. While the concept is 

miniature from the Saskatchewan perspective, in terms of the 

effort to try and make Saskatchewan much more 



December 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2375 

business-friendly, the NDP believe we should make the hub a 

grand opportunity, a global opportunity to showcase what 

Saskatchewan can do and the business people can do, and not 

simply a half-measure, half-hearted effort to explain what 

businesses out there are capable of doing and what their 

services or what services that they can provide. 

 

So there’s no question, Mr. Speaker, that while the effort, the 

trying and to do their very best given their limited experience, 

Mr. Speaker, I would say the Saskatchewan Party just simply 

doesn’t get it, doesn’t have the experience, doesn’t have the 

view, the world view, of making sure our economy is 

continuing to stay strong and to stay vibrant. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, look at some of these issues I spoke about 

earlier, under the smart growth strategy the NDP know full 

well, full well the value of having a solid labour force. We 

know that’s important, Mr. Speaker. Now does the hub talk 

about some of the challenges to the labour sector that the 

Saskatchewan Party is currently undertaken or going to war 

with organized labour? Will the hub explain that, Mr. Speaker? 

No it won’t, but the press will and the unions will, Mr. Speaker. 

When we talk about the environmental degradation under the 

Sask Party, will the hub speak about that? Well the hub won’t 

speak about that, but guess what? The environmentalists will 

and the media will. Now will the financial, the precarious 

financial position that the Sask Party has put the people in 

Saskatchewan in, will the hub speak about that, Mr. Speaker? 

No they won’t, but the media will and the banking industry will 

and many other people that understand financing will. 

 

So my point is, how could you on one hand talk about the hub, 

Bill 84, and how is it the fact that you’re going to be 

business-friendly when you have all this other commotion and 

all this other confusion swirling around the small little Act that 

talks about trying to be business-friendly? The people of 

Saskatchewan tell the Saskatchewan Party, give us a break. The 

spinning isn’t going to work. If you’re going to do something 

right, you do it proper. You do it methodically. You do it with a 

lot of intelligence. And you make sure that you’re doing it on 

one front; it’s followed through with some really good logical 

steps on the other. 

 

And I go back to my earlier point. It’s hard to sell the merits of 

the concept behind the hub when you’re $2 billion off your 

target income for potash one year and then you’re half a billion 

off the next year and then you’re adding $1 billion more into 

your debt. You’re getting scolded by the Provincial Auditor. 

Like that kind of activity, Mr. Speaker, is not conducive to 

attracting investment to the province. 

 

Now I’m just a hockey player and I’ve got that figured out, Mr. 

Speaker. So what I can’t understand, if a mere hockey player 

from Ile-a-la-Crosse that failed high school accounting can 

figure out the economic building blocks of the province then, 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell the people of Saskatchewan that this 

caucus, this opposition NDP caucus, with our new leader, is 

going to be a promising opportunity for the province of 

Saskatchewan to come back to the NDP and start getting back 

to the real work of building and sustaining a great province, a 

great economy, an economy based on fairness for the worker, 

protection of the environment, and some, finally some 

intelligence on how to build an economic, make sure we build 

an economic province that is sustainable and doable for years 

and years and years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:15] 

 

So I’m sitting here and I listen to some of my colleagues talk 

about how to build an economy and I’m awestruck, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s why, that’s why a hockey player that 

dabbles in politics is able to explain to people what the smart 

growth strategy is, what international investment’s all about — 

with all the challenges with our economy, how we need to 

figure this all out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I sit here and the Saskatchewan Party in their delight 

announces the hub. So I say, well what’s that about? We’re 

going to share information, what the businesses have. We’re 

going to share information as to what we can do. And I’m 

saying, well I’m underimpressed. I’m underimpressed because 

you’re creating all the trouble on one side and you’re holding 

up Bill No. 84 and it’s called a hub. So I would say to Mr. 

Speaker that, quite frankly, from the perspective of the 

importance of Bill 84, that we are totally unimpressed. Mr. 

Speaker, we’re totally underimpressed, if I could use that 

phrase. 

 

So I would really want to point out, Mr. Speaker, to the people 

of Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Party have got a lot of 

work ahead of them. They’ve got a lot of problems over there. 

And we, on this side of the opposition, on this side of the 

House, the official opposition, we know that there’s trouble in 

Saskatchewan Party land. We know that they’re going to have 

some difficulty and that their little promising start, Mr. Speaker, 

is fizzling out. So they’re going to throw a little efforts here, a 

little efforts there. And I notice, Mr. Speaker, that sometimes 

when there’s some bad news coming, they’ll put on some 

dog-and-pony show on to talk about some issue that they hope 

to divert the people’s attention on. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s some very good ceremonies in the 

Assembly. But one of the dog-and-pony shows that I would tell 

you that they have done is Bill 84 called the hub, under the 

guise of trying to be business-friendly. My goodness, give me a 

break. You’ve got other major problems. The hub ain’t going to 

solve Saskatchewan Party’s problem, Mr. Speaker, when it 

comes to the challenges to the economy, to the management of 

our financing, and to making sure that we’re very thorough on 

how we talk about developing a sustainable Saskatchewan into 

the future. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot more comments I want to make 

on the hub. My colleagues are going to have a lot more 

comments. Some of the initial discussions I have is on this New 

West Partnership that the Premier has signed, whereas Alberta, 

Saskatchewan, and BC [British Columbia] have this agreement. 

Any work over a certain amount, whether you’re a small 

community or a larger centre, has to be advertised to all three 

provinces. Now, Mr. Speaker, at the outset, that could be fine if 

Saskatchewan was in a very good position to dominate the 

other two provinces. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud of Saskatchewan. I’m proud of 

Saskatchewan. The business community has really shown and 

risen to the occasion. But I think we’re punching far above our 



2376 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2012 

weight, Mr. Speaker. But the problem is, the problem is is that 

once you have the hub starting to advertise some of this work, 

what’s the next step? That they’re going to start making sure 

that every municipality or every business that has work has to 

go through the hub to advertise its particular work, and that 

they can’t go through a local contractor. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

you’ve got to be careful on that front because does that 

complicate Saskatchewan’s trade? Does that hurt 

Saskatchewan’s interests? 

 

Well we have to assess that. And I don’t think that there’s 

proper assessment done on that side because the New West 

Partnership may force them to advertise any kind of work by 

any company for any person, private or public, through this 

process. And guess what, Mr. Speaker? All of a sudden 

decisions are being made for Saskatchewan far away from our 

province with none of our interests being taken into account, 

Mr. Speaker. And that’s why we tell people, be very careful of 

the Saskatchewan Party; they haven’t got this thing figured out. 

 

And one thing we’ve always asked them, time and time again 

— very, very, very, very clear — you inherited $2.3 billion in 

the bank, a booming economy, a growing population, an 

optimistic province. There was bright lights and things were 

really happening. And all the NDP said, fine. After years of 

hard work, years of lifting the load, working closely to people 

of Saskatchewan, that the people of Saskatchewan gave the 

province, gave the NDP a break. And then we turned around 

and we told them — although we’re weary — we turned around 

and told them, one simple task, one simple thing, Mr. Speaker: 

don’t mess it up. That’s all we asked them to do. Don’t mess it 

up. And guess what? The right wing party that didn’t create the 

economy is messing up the economy. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell the people of Saskatchewan, the NDP 

have a strategy called smart growth. We’re working on that 

strategy every single day to make sure the people of 

Saskatchewan know that when the NDP come back, Mr. 

Speaker — and we certainly will — that they can rest assured 

that there’s going to be a lot of planning. There’s going to be a 

lot of intelligence. There’s going to be a grand plan to make 

Saskatchewan bigger, better, stronger, faster than Alberta and 

BC put together, Mr. Speaker. And they can only do that under 

the NDP, certainly not under the Sask Party. 

 

So once again, Mr. Speaker, I’m underimpressed with this bill, 

Bill 84, the hub. If that’s their flagship bill to determine and to 

show that they’re business friendly, Mr. Speaker, then I think 

we’re all in trouble. We’re all in deep trouble. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 

Bill 84. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill 84, The Common Business 

Identifiers Act. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 69 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 69 — The 

Information Services Corporation Act be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise to enter the debate on Bill No. 69, An Act respecting 

Information Services Corporation. What this Act basically is 

doing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is privatizing our Information 

Services Corporation. 

 

So what is ISC [Information Services Corporation of 

Saskatchewan], Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well ISC basically 

provides services to the people of Saskatchewan regarding 

information. It holds . . . You could say that your relationship 

with ISC is lifelong, whether it’s your birth certificate, your 

mortgage, your land title, you name it. Everything basically is 

registered through ISC. Your personal property security. So if 

you purchased a truck and you have a loan on your truck, that 

will be registered with ISC. Land, Crown land, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, which this government actually just a couple short 

years ago sold or put up for sale and removed from protection, 

some very valuable land, took out of protection. 

 

So Crown land falls under ISC, vital statistics, corporations, 

legal surveys, so those are some of those things that fall under 

ISC. Oh, our historical documents, so valuable information 

about our past, maps and important places of Saskatchewan’s 

heritage — these are all things that fall under the purview of the 

Information Services Corporation. So these are all, and quite 

frankly, these all belong to us collectively as the people of 

Saskatchewan and should remain in the hands of a Crown 

corporation or the public, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not in the hands 

of a private corporation. 

 

So I want to talk a little bit with respect to Bill No. 69, An Act 

Respecting Information Services Corporation. One of the things 

that jumps out about this bill actually is the fact that selling our 

Crowns, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a broken promise. It’s a broken 

promise. The Sask Party has committed not to sell our Crowns, 

which interestingly enough they’ve done some of it by stealth, 

contracting out in little bits and pieces here and there. But this 

piece in particular is — and hoping the people would not notice 

that they are privatizing by stealth — but this one is not 

particularly stealthy. This one is right out there in the open that 

ISC is being privatized. 

 

So let’s talk a little bit about this broken promise. So let’s go 

back to the 2007 election campaign. I’m just looking at that 

right now that where it says, page 29 of the Sask Party 

platform, publicly owned Crowns that work for Saskatchewan, 

“Keeping Saskatchewan’s Crowns, Crown corporations public 

and working for Saskatchewan people is an important part of 

the Saskatchewan Party’s plan for securing the future.” That’s 



December 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2377 

in 2007. Doesn’t mention anything about privatization. It 

actually says quite the opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Then we can actually go to 2008 and the Information Services 

Corporation annual report. So that when we talk about broken 

promises we . . . The Sask Party has reiterated on several 

occasions the fact that they were committed to not privatizing 

our Crowns. So the ISC annual report in 2008, what does it 

have to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker? You might be wondering. 

Well I will let you know. So quote, the then minister had this to 

say, so the minister of Crown corporations: 

 

My priority for the future remains the same: to ensure that 

Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations remain publicly 

owned and provide high quality services at a low cost. 

This is a promise that our government made to the people 

of Saskatchewan, and it is a promise we will keep. 

 

So that’s just from 2008, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So when we talk 

about this broken promise, so we’ve got 2007 where the 

government has firmly said that they aren’t going to privatize 

Crowns. We’ve got 2008, the ISC annual report where they also 

say, we’re not going to privatize the Crowns. And then we can 

go to just over a year ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just over to a 

year ago, and we have the Sask Party platform here. And page 

44 actually — I know the minister mentioned this in his 

remarks — what does it say here? 

 

Prior to forming government in 2007, the Saskatchewan 

Party fully supported the Crown Corporation Public 

Ownership Act. Support for public ownership of the 

Crowns has been reconfirmed over the last four years. 

 

I know the minister got up and said, well you know, this is just 

the Crowns under The Crown Corporation Public Ownership 

Act. But the reality is I think that that . . . I’m trying to think of 

a parliamentary term that one could use properly, that one could 

use to best describe that, but I’m finding it hard to find a 

parliamentary term. But the reality is that — and I know you’re 

eager to hear what I have to say about that — but the reality is, 

I think that this is . . . Truth is, the reality is when you . . . It’s 

like the fine print, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’ve said this, and 

this is the big, bold statement that people understand. But down 

below where there’s a little asterisk, the little, little, little tiny 

asterisk, then that is where this Sask Party government is 

saying, you should have looked at the asterisk. This is really 

what we were talking about. 

 

But that’s I think . . . As I said, I’m struggling for a 

parliamentary term. But I think that that is not a good way to 

conduct yourself as a government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our 

citizens expect our governments to be straight with us and give 

us the straight goods and let us know what their plans are. And 

I think the minister, looking at page 44 and falling back on it 

and saying, well it was only the Crowns under The Crown 

Corporations Act, I think is not the way that a government 

should do business. 

 

You can also I think talk a little bit about surprises the people of 

Saskatchewan didn’t vote for just over a year ago, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So that wasn’t mentioned. It was not mentioned in the 

platform. There’s many opportunities that this government has 

had to let people know that in fact they were interested in 

privatizing. They didn’t say so in their platform last year. This 

government didn’t say so in the Throne Speech last year. They 

didn’t say so. So this is one of those surprises, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that citizens in Saskatchewan did not vote for. 

 

So I think we could talk about some of the other surprises that 

people in Saskatchewan didn’t know they were getting as well. 

So not only did we not know we were getting the privatization 

of our Crowns, but we didn’t know that this government was 

going to go ahead and add three more MLAs. I know that has 

come as a surprise to many citizens here in Saskatchewan who 

have other priorities other than paying for the additional cost of 

three more politicians, which they would prefer to spend money 

on things like supporting seniors in purchasing drugs, in social 

housing, in keeping a film industry here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. So another surprise actually. 

 

Interestingly enough, had you read the platform actually, the 

Sask Party’s platform, another one of those surprises — and I 

briefly touched on the film employment tax credit — but let’s 

talk about page 35 of the Sask Party platform where this 

government actually . . . This is one of those surprises not 

unlike the privatization of ISC where this government actually 

boasts about “providing a 10 per cent increase in funding to 

SaskFilm in the last budget and increasing funding for the Film 

Employment Tax Credit.” 

 

So this is one of those surprises, the cutting of the film 

employment tax credit just a few short months later after 

putting in a document that you were taking to the people of 

Saskatchewan saying, this was your vision for Saskatchewan. 

You’re boasting actually about a program, and then just a few 

short months later you cut it. So this is not one of those . . . This 

is one of the surprises the people did not expect and did not 

vote for. I have not heard one person that I’ve spoken to say 

that that was a good idea except for the members on the other 

side of the House. And hard-pressed to find people . . . We’ve 

been hard-pressed to find people actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

who think privatizing our Crowns are a good idea. 

 

[15:30] 

 

The reality too is ISC has been a highly profitable company for 

the people of Saskatchewan. So why do Crowns . . . What are 

some of the reasons that we incredibly common sense practical 

people in Saskatchewan believe . . . Why do we need Crowns? 

Well part of it is about making sure services are provided to 

people throughout the province in underserved areas where 

private businesses might not be able to or be inclined to offer 

those services. But it’s also about providing good cost or good 

affordable services to people in Saskatchewan. And looking 

actually again at the ISC report in 2009, a message from the 

president actually, I’d like to read this. It says: 

 

We began 2009 by reducing fees for Saskatchewan 

families in marriage, divorce and estate planning 

situations. It was the second phase of a strategy that began 

in August 2008. Together, these fee reductions saved 

Saskatchewan families $6.1 million in 2009. It is what our 

customers told us they wanted to see. We listened and we 

delivered. 

 

So that’s one of the values of having a Crown corporation, Mr. 



2378 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2012 

Deputy Speaker, is that it allows you the opportunity to provide 

affordable services to the people of Saskatchewan. Whereas 

when you privatize something, by virtue of privatizing, the 

reality is private entities exist for very different reasons than 

Crown corporations, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and can find it hard 

sometimes. 

 

Obviously private organizations or businesses need to make a 

profit, and so it becomes more imperative to make a profit 

sometimes, whereas that is not always the case with Crowns. 

Crowns exist to be able to ensure . . . Some of the reasons they 

exist again to make sure underserved areas have the services 

that they need but to provide value for Saskatchewan citizens. 

And that I would say is a part, a huge part of the culture here in 

Saskatchewan. Recognizing that together or for the benefit of 

everybody, we do some of these things, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I know that one of the other issues . . . So ISC last year, $17 

million in profits, $17 million in profits to the people of 

Saskatchewan. So what can that $17 million do and assuming 

that that $17.2 million grows? Well I know, again, for people in 

Saskatoon Riversdale and in communities in the North, for all 

across Saskatchewan, there are many things that that $17.2 

million can do. The social housing has not been something this 

government has concentrated on. This government has very 

much concentrated . . . When you look at the housing 

continuum, we’ve got on one end social housing; you’ve got in 

the middle affordable housing, and then you’ve got 

market-based housing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

This government has concentrated on the affordable housing 

piece, but there’s a huge piece that’s missing, the social housing 

piece that this government has not, has chosen not to 

implement, a housing-first strategy that ensures the people who 

have some challenges, whether it’s mental health issues, 

addictions, putting some money into a housing-first strategy to 

ensure that we have people . . . Excuse me, Deputy Speaker, 

there’s a fair bit of noise going back and forth here, so it’s hard 

to hear oneself think over all of this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So housing first anyway, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Housing first, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, is about making sure people who have 

mental health and addictions challenges and other challenges, 

homelessness challenges, have the opportunity to have a roof 

over their head and then have the opportunity to put the 

supports around them so they are surrounded, they have a good 

roof over their head, and then can deal with the other challenges 

in their lives. 

 

So that 17.2 million? That is a program or something that ISC 

and the profits from ISC can go to support — affordable drugs 

for seniors. There was an increase in drug costs for seniors and 

young people in this last budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which I 

know it was . . . You have five or six more prescriptions, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and I know many people, I know many people 

for whom those five or six prescriptions creates a huge financial 

burden. One hundred and twenty dollars might not sound like a 

lot to some people, but if you’ve got $120 increase for six 

prescriptions, it’s a lot of money out of some people’s pockets. 

 

The film employment tax credit — which I know, you know, 

that I like to talk a great deal about, Mr. Deputy Speaker — but 

the film employment tax credit, for the cost of the film 

employment tax credit, we’ve lost an entire industry. There was 

a report by the chamber of commerce that saw that the return on 

investment was incredible, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The real cost 

of the film tax credit, they calculated to be about $1.3 million, 

and the return on investment annually was more than $44 

million in spinoff. 

 

So where could some of this ISC money, the money that comes 

into our coffers every year because ISC is a Crown 

corporation? We could have kept a film industry alive here, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. The reality is we have chased hundreds of 

people, we have chased . . . This government’s narrative has 

very much been about attracting and retaining young people, 

but we’ve seen those people flee Saskatchewan because they 

cannot make a living in the film industry now. 

 

I mentioned today in a member’s statement a company, actually 

a Gemini Award-winning company, who is now just actually as 

of a couple of weeks ago has moved to Victoria, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, a company that priorized training First Nations people 

in the film industry. So that would be something that perhaps 

we could have thought about supporting and continued to 

support. But instead this government has chosen to go about an 

ideological approach of privatization which makes absolutely 

no sense. The people of Saskatchewan trusted and believed that 

this government was not going to privatize our Crowns, and 

this is exactly what this government is doing. 

 

I’d like to talk a little bit about the possible . . . There has been 

a report done that says that oh, we could get 90 to $120 million 

if we sold ISC, one-time profit. So you sell it and the money’s 

gone. And this government hasn’t been stellar in that regard. 

When an asset is gone, what do we have in its place? You have 

some money temporarily in the coffers, but I can tell you 

there’s many people who haven’t felt the benefit of money 

coming into the coffers here in Saskatchewan. So I think it 

actually would . . . Part of the problem actually if this 

government goes ahead and passes this bill in the spring, the 90 

to $120 million, I think that they perhaps have a financial hole 

to fill. And unfortunately we heard today from the auditor 

some, I think, not great news, but it’s exactly what the NDP has 

been saying. Our Finance critic has been saying this as long as 

I’ve been in this place, and I’ve been in this legislature for three 

years. So what is part of the problem here? 

 

So I’d actually like to quote from the auditor’s report here. This 

was this morning, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

“The ‘creative accounting rules’ that the Government uses 

for the GRF allows it to communicate to the people of 

Saskatchewan that the GRF budget is balanced and there 

is a surplus when in actual fact, there is not.” For the year 

ended March 31, 2012, the Government reported a surplus 

in the GRF of $352.3 million. What it should have 

reported was a deficit in the GRF of $46 million. 

 

So the government has been running billboards that are 

boasting of a balanced budget, but this is a small . . . As the 

Finance minister got up and said, well the GRF is just one 

portion of the bigger picture. Well you know what, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? This government is only communicating one portion 

of that financial picture, and a portion that does not give 

citizens the accurate view of what’s going on, Mr. Deputy 



December 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2379 

Speaker. So they can spend thousands of dollars on billboards, 

but that doesn’t mean it’s true. You can say it as many times as 

you want, but that doesn’t make it true, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that this government is not running a balanced budget. 

 

I think interesting as well is just last week we had a mid-term 

financial report. And I think even more concerning about the 46 

million in this last fiscal year . . . So what’s going on today? 

And this is why I’m talking about the hole, that this government 

needs to fill that hole as quickly as they can and find some 

money in short order by privatizing our Crowns, particularly 

ISC. 

 

So I’d like to quote from the auditor’s news release here too 

this morning. It says, the auditor, Ms. Lysyk, says this: 

 

If the Government used proper accounting rules, the 

forecasted GRF surplus of $56.2 million in last week’s 

2012-13 Mid-Year Report would have actually been a 

deficit of $528.3 million. 

 

Half a billion dollars, Mr. Deputy Speaker, half a billion 

dollars. That is a pretty large financial hole that needs to be 

filled. Unfortunately the sale of ISC garnering 90 to $120 

million would not even begin to fill that hole. So I don’t know 

what else will be up on the block at some point in time, but I 

think we have some big concerns about that, on this side of the 

House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this is just the start. 

 

And they’ve used some creative accounting and haven’t been 

. . . The ads that this government has been running have not 

quite provided the full picture for people of Saskatchewan — 

well not even close, actually, not even close to the full picture. 

And we know it’s because they have some accounting 

challenges, shall we say, that they could easily fix and have 

been encouraged to fix now for several years, not just by the 

NDP but by the opposition. And the reality is every other 

jurisdiction, most Canadian jurisdictions now are using 

summary accounting principles because it’s important to give 

the citizens of your province one picture, and that’s the accurate 

picture and the full picture. 

 

So I know also with this bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister 

has gotten up and said that we’re only going to sell, we’re only 

going to sell a portion of ISC, so some of it will be retained in 

the people of Saskatchewan’s hands. But there’s problems with 

that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the legislation that’s before us, 

Bill No. 69, does actually not say that. That’s not entrenched in 

legislation. That’s the word of the minister, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, which could change at the whim of this minister or 

any other minister. So the reality that Saskatchewan people 

would retain 40 per cent of ISC . . . First of all, we have a 

question with the government selling any of it. But the reality is 

the minister can get up and say that we’ll retain 40 per cent of 

ISC, but that’s actually not in the legislation, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So that is a problem. 

 

There’s many, many problems with this bill and with 

privatizing our Crowns, especially when you said you weren’t 

going to do it. When you say that you’re going to do something 

and you completely go back . . . And I said, I just read into the 

record three places — the 2007 platform; the 2008 ISC annual 

report with a note from the minister; and this current platform, 

the 2011 platform, not current but the most recent platform — 

three occasions where this government has reaffirmed its 

support for our Crown corporations. And what does it do less 

than a year later? It privatizes ISC. 

 

And ISC’s absolutely vital to all of us. As I said in the 

beginning of my remarks, this is about our information as 

citizens. And this would make Canada or make Saskatchewan 

one of two jurisdictions in all of the country where it’s not held 

in public trust basically. Ontario does something similar. It’s in 

private hands as well, but I would not say that that’s leading the 

way. I think that that’s falling behind. This is our information. 

As I said, whether it’s your birth certificate, your death 

certificate, your mortgage, you’re registering your property, 

Crown land, this information belongs to us, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and should not be in the hands of a private 

corporation. 

 

And with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that I have 

colleagues who have much to say about ISC, and we will have 

many opportunities going forward to chat and discuss this more 

and point out where we think the government is going wrong in 

this regard. But with that, I would like to move to adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 

69, The Information Services Corporation Act. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Bill No. 80 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 80 — The Power 

Corporation Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise today to speak to Bill No. 80, An Act to amend 

The Power Corporation Act. This is an Act that does a couple 

of interesting things and also deals with some housekeeping 

items, as the minister indicated in his comments. I believe 

yesterday it was introduced, second reading. 

 

And just to start off with, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister 

made his comments indicating first of all that SaskPower needs 

more borrowing capacity. That’s one of the changes I’ll speak 

to in a minute. He’s also talking about some of the 

infrastructure or changes that the corporation’s planning and 

why they need this increase in their ability to borrow. And also 

the proposal for the borrowing limit, it’s almost doubled, Mr. 

Speaker, so it’s a significant amount of money. But I will be 

talking about that in a little while. 

 



2380 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2012 

There’s a couple of other things that the bill is doing. There’s 

several housekeeping items, and some are just clarifying 

existing powers. And then finally, there’s a new protection from 

nuisance claims, when we see the increase in claims for class 

action nuisance law suits. So this is a trend that we see 

happening both in the United States and in Canada. So the 

minister’s indicated there’s some changes there. So although 

there’s not a huge number of changes, some of them are very 

significant, and I think what I propose to do at this point is just 

to go through these changes one by one. 

 

So the first subsection that’s being added is a new subsection 

3(2.2) and 3(2.3), and these are the ones I was just mentioning 

that deal with class action lawsuits. And what’s explained in the 

explanatory notes to the bill is that there’s always difficulties 

with a defence of statutory authority in these types of lawsuits. 

And because nuisance lawsuits are often oriented towards the 

plaintiff, there’s a focus towards a plaintiff in these lawsuits, 

that there’s a chance that SaskPower could be found liable even 

where activities were reasonable within their statutory mandate. 

And that, according to the bill’s notes, is not entirely within the 

public interest. 

 

So what the proposed changes do is it removes personal 

liability for the minister, directors, officers, and employees of 

the corporation from damage claims as long as they are acting 

in good faith and under the authority of the Act. So this is a 

statutory defence or a statutory removal of liability for the 

people that are involved in the decision making in the authority. 

This is also, according to the notes, in accordance with other 

provincial legislation. 

 

So it seems to be in order to ensure that the SaskPower has a 

defence, even when they’re acting in good faith, to the types of 

class action nuisance lawsuits that have been brought against 

emitters. The explanatory notes do make the point that 

generally these lawsuits don’t get very far, but the problem is 

the amount of the costs used to defend itself in these, even 

when there is no legitimate claim. And this is very expensive. 

So I think in terms of protecting the public and our Crown 

corporation here against these kinds of nuisance claims, it 

certainly seems to make sense that these kinds of protections 

are being afforded to the corporation and its directors. 

 

The second change that we see is a change to clause 8 of the 

original Act. And the marginal note for clause 8, just to give it 

some context, is the purposes and powers of the corporation. So 

there’s a change being made here, and it’s based on the 

standards for electrical reliability set up by, it’s called the North 

American Electric Reliability Corporation, which establishes 

reliability standards for bulk power.  

 

And so now that SaskPower is in an agreement with NERC 

[North American Electric Reliability Corporation], N-E-R-C, 

they act as our independent auditor for SaskPower. And the 

change that’s being made here is, I just want to find the clause. 

The words “standards for the design and operation of” are being 

removed and substituted with “design, operation or reliability 

standards . . .” So this just brings into sync the work that NERC 

does in terms of reliability standards. So SaskPower is working 

on developing the appropriate methods to ensure their 

compliance, but it was necessary to modify the subsection so 

that the scope of the standards being referenced include 

reliability standards in addition to design and operating 

standards because reliability standards are distinct. So that 

seems to be an appropriate change, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The next change that’s being made to the Act is section 8.3, and 

this is still under the purposes and powers of the Act. And it’s 

8.3 is the powers in relation to refusal or disconnect. And this is 

where the company can actually shut off people’s power or 

refuse to give them power — an extraordinary power to cut off 

power. And the only thing that’s being changed here, it’s a very 

small change, and it’s basically adding the word “or agent” 

after the word “employee”, in both 8.3(1) and 8.3(2). So it’s a 

minor change. 

 

But in the explanatory notes, it recognizes that SaskPower may 

use contract auditors to assess compliance with standards. So 

they may not be hiring their own employees; they might be 

subcontracting out. And this is certainly something we see as a 

pattern with this government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 

contracting out of services through our Crowns,` which seems 

to become more and more frequent. And therefore although the 

Acts were originally intended for these types of activities to 

take place within the house of the corporation, of the Crown 

corporation, we now see contracting out. And so this is another 

example of where legislative change is required in order to 

accommodate this government’s trend or habit to contract out 

work from Crown corporations into the private hands. 

 

Just like I got my fibre optic cable the other day, and when the 

people showed up at the door, although SaskTel phoned and is 

arranging for fibre optic, it was certainly not a SaskTel 

employee that’s doing the work. They’re being contracted out. 

So it’s this kind of change that is requiring legislative change, a 

change in process. 

 

Sections 8.3, there’s two new sections being added to that — 

8.3(2.1) and (2.2). And I think the numbering here is getting a 

bit confusing and the legislators may want to reconsider how 

they’ve done the numbering here because it’s becoming quite 

complicated. But at any rate, these are new sections, and they’re 

just saying that it’s some additional powers of the corporation 

to enter on land and carry out inspections, and they can’t do that 

without the consent of an occupier of the land. And it’s just 

saying that these are necessary so that they can monitor 

compliance. 

 

And the same with changes to 8.3(4) where the sections are 

being modified to ensure that the reliability standards can be 

followed again. So it’s just making sure that these reliability 

standards, that SaskPower’s able to ensure that it’s in 

compliance. So it gives powers to enter and take action that 

they feel necessary in the event that there’s something wrong. 

 

The next section that’s being added is 8.4. It’s a new section, 

8.4. And this is a bit of an interesting change, and again I think 

it sort of signifies the changes in business at SaskPower. And 

what this is doing is clarifying SaskPower’s capacity to 

contract. And because it’s a statutory corporation, it doesn’t 

have the same sort of legal powers of a natural person, of an 

ordinary business corporation. What this section’s trying to do 

is to clarify that any subsidiaries, basically, of SaskPower also 

have the capacity to contract. 

 



December 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2381 

And there’s a new definition of a designated corporation, and 

this is described as a corporate body, even other than a Crown 

corporation, in which SaskPower holds securities — either 

directly or indirectly, other than by security only — to which 

are attached votes that may be cast to elect a director, and of 

course Crown corporations designated by Lieutenant Governor 

in Council. 

 

So the explanation in the notes is that it ensures that there is 

clarity there so that market activities can occur independently 

outside of SaskPower’s objects and purposes by creating a 

stand-alone market activities power. And this just allows them 

to take into account some other kinds of transactions other than 

its original purpose to provide, generate electrical energy. 

Sometimes SaskPower’s purchasing natural gas to do that, so 

they’re entering into contracts with other providers that are 

outside of the actual process of creating power and providing 

power to people. 

 

Another change, the next change I’ll talk to is the change to 

section, subsection 10(3). And in that case, this was a 

recommendation coming from 2005 where the board of the 

Crown Investments Corporation had suggested, the next time 

this legislation was coming up for amendment, that this item be 

changed. And what it used to say is that whenever real property 

or corporations buying or selling real property that’s worth 

more than 150,000, it requires Lieutenant Governor in Council 

approval. And the section’s being amended to say no longer is 

the limit of 150,000 there, but the limit shall be fixed by 

Lieutenant Governor in Council. So . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Oh, I’m being corrected. I’m saying it wrong, and I 

apologize, Mr. Speaker. This is Lieutenant Governor in 

Council, although I think it would be spelled the same way in 

Hansard. So I’m glad the members opposite are listening. 

That’s good news. 

 

At any rate, the Lieutenant Governor in Council will now have 

the authority to establish the base limit for these types of sales. 

This always brings concern to me as a member of the 

opposition because when these changes are made by the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council, there’s no scrutiny by the 

opposition nor is there an opportunity for public comment. 

These are actions of the executive arm of government, and I’m 

on the record before saying this is concerning. 

 

I can understand why, and I know how difficult it is for our 

public servants to prepare documents that go to Lieutenant 

Governor in Council. And certainly $150,000 in terms of real 

property is not a large number these days, so it makes sense that 

the amount be higher. I think it’s preferable to actually have the 

amount in the legislation so that we understand and it’s brought 

to the attention of the public what the actual limit is where they 

have the authority to sell or buy. I agree 150,000 is not very 

high, but certainly giving the discretion to the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council without review by the official opposition 

or the public is of concern. And I’m just taking note of that. 

 

Section 14 is also being changed somewhat, and this is the 

expropriation powers. Basically what this is doing is clarifying. 

There’s two types of expropriation in the SaskPower Act. 

There’s one in part 2 and there’s one in part 3. And the part 3 

process is quite straightforward, and all that SaskPower needs 

to do there is give notice to the register of land titles. But then 

in part 2 it’s more of a complicated process, and it requires an 

application to a judge for an order which would then vest the 

property to be expropriated. 

 

And I think the history of expropriation law is significant here, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, because this is a very extraordinary power 

that governments have, and it’s not one that’s taken lightly. 

And when Crown corporations are given that extraordinary 

power to actually take people’s land without their consent, 

that’s something that needs to be, I think, guarded very 

carefully, and the public interest needs to be protected here as 

best as possible. You can see where it’s necessary for this type 

of thing when SaskPower’s installing a major line, or any of the 

Crown utilities. But when it involves taking people’s land 

without their consent, that is a very extraordinary power that the 

government has and in this case has passed on to a Crown 

corporation. 

 

So I think the attempts being made here are just basically to 

modernize the language and also make it clear that for these 

types of takings, where it’s just for a power line, with or 

without substations; or a pipeline, with or without pumping 

stations; or protection cable, control cable, and communication 

cable to be used underground, that in that case, we don’t need 

authorization of the Lieutenant Governor in Council. The only 

time the Lieutenant Governor in Council needs to authorize the 

expropriation is where they’re taking land, taking and 

expropriating land or buildings for the corporation’s purposes. 

 

So there’s different layers of takings. And what this is 

attempting to do is say that Lieutenant Governor in Council 

approval is still required for the major takings, but that it’s no 

longer required for the minor takings. And that was also in the 

original section 14 but the language has been clarified. And I 

think the interpretation, the legal advice that the corporation got 

in this case, or the Crown Investments Corporation, is that there 

was some confusion about the interplay between part II and part 

III of this Act in the expropriation, and then the application of 

The Expropriation Procedure Act. 

 

[16:00] 

 

So it’s being amended to clarify, but what they’ve also done is 

taken an opportunity to reformat the section just to reflect 

modern legislative drafting preferences. So more subheadings 

and less long paragraphs, so that’s the modern style. 

 

Section 15 of the existing Act is also being amended, and it’s 

just furthering the process about expropriation. So it was 

recommended that section 15 also be amended to reflect 

modern drafting style and introduce gender-neutral terms. 

 

So now we see in section 15(4) we’ve got gender-neutral terms 

like the chairperson and vice-chairperson of the corporation, 

rather than the chairman or vice-chairman. It’s interesting that 

the gender neutrality is being used here but of this board, a 

public board, there are 13 members on the board and the Chair 

and Vice-Chair are men. They continue to be men, and only 

two of those members of the board are women. So again we see 

a real gender inequity on this particular public board that has 

appointees being put in place by this government. 

 

So I just thought I’d take an opportunity to comment that while 



2382 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2012 

it’s fine to make the language gender-neutral, we expect more. 

We expect this government to actually make those positions 

equal in terms of the gender representation on that particular 

board and all Crown boards, which we’ve discussed in previous 

times here in the legislature. 

 

Section 23(1) is being amended with some language to actually 

make the two words “pipe lines” into one word, and that’s 

happening as well in section 24. Section 29 is being amended 

just to change pipelines to poles, structures, wires, conduits, or 

pipelines. So in section 29, it’s just to clarify that SaskPower’s 

existing powers apply to all necessary equipment and materials, 

including the newer technologies. So it’s modernizing some of 

the language that we see in the existing Act. 

 

Sections 30.1 and 30.2(1) are being repealed, and those just 

deal with some changes when The Land Titles Act was changed 

in 2000. These were transitional provisions and they’re just 

simply no longer required. The same goes with the amendment 

to subsection 31(1) and 31(2), 32(2). Those are just 

amendments to fix old language. 

 

We see some significant changes though to section 33, and this 

is regarding lands next to power lines. And right now the 

corporation can enter on lands next to power lines to do things 

like trimming trees or removing them or taking care of 

obstructions to make sure that there’s nothing in the way of the 

cross arms or the wires or any attachments to the power poles. 

So this is something that already happens. What the proposed 

changes do is clarify the two words of transmission and 

distribution lines to include all the modern language-related 

structures — wires, conduits, communications equipment, 

cables, or pipes. And there’s a new definition section in this 

section, right at the beginning of it, that defines pipeline, that 

defines power line, and defines right-of-way as well. So this is 

just again some modernization of the language that’s there. 

 

One of the things I find interesting is the new section 33.1. And 

this is an interesting, I think, invasion on property rights of 

individuals because here we see that . . . I’ll read you the 

section. It says: 

 

Every person who purchases or otherwise acquires any 

lands that are subject to any of the corporation’s rights set 

out in section 31 to 33 acquires those lands subject to the 

corporation’s rights”. 

 

So what you see here, there’s a statutory right in SaskPower on 

all sort of rights-of-way like roads, where they can, there is an 

authority for SaskPower to put lines in those areas, roads, 

streets, lanes, or other public places. Now in the event where a 

road allowance is being closed and sold to a private individual 

because a road allowance is no longer required, this section 

allows the statutory authority of SaskPower to continue even 

though it’s now private lands. And that’s a bit of an 

extraordinary invasion into private rights that I can see from the 

Crown corporation’s perspective why it’s something they 

desire. But it certainly isn’t something that’s desirable from the 

point of view of a private landowner. So if you’re getting a road 

closure, there’s an extra 6 acres that are being added to your 

quarter section because the road’s never being used. It may not, 

the landowner may not even be aware that they’re purchasing it 

subject to a statutory right that this new clause in the Act is 

affording. 

 

I think I’m going to move on now to probably the most 

interesting section of this bill, and it’s the amendments to 

section 43(1). And simply the amendment there is the limit on 

the borrowing power of the corporation. Currently the limit is 

$5 billion and the government is raising its authority to $8 

billion. The explanation here is that SaskPower is going 

through a period of high capital expenditures. There’s aging 

infrastructure and there’s major reinvestment required. And 

also as we know, there’s increasing needs for electricity in the 

province, so SaskPower’s going to need infrastructure 

expansion. 

 

Now this is concerning, I think, in some ways. First of all, it’s 

almost doubling the borrowing capacity of the corporation. And 

the other indication that we have is that in SaskPower’s 2012 

business plan, they’re saying that their total debt obligations 

will increase from 3.7 billion to 11 billion by the end of 2021. 

So its debt obligations are increasing threefold within a 

nine-year period basically. So that’s doubling almost every 

three years. 

 

And what we see happening here is that this government, rather 

than using the profits from SaskPower to help deal with those 

infrastructure needs, they’re actually taking the dividends and 

using it to balance their budget rather than reinvesting those 

profits in the corporation. So we see a corporation desperately 

needing to almost double its borrowing capacity. And then we 

see a government taking those profits that the corporation 

makes, raising the rates of pay, and then siphoning off all those 

profits. And now we see that SaskPower needs to borrow . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Requesting leave to introduce a guest. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The member from 

Regina Rosemont has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Regina Rosemont. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — To you and through you, Mr. Speaker, 

seated in your gallery, I see a bright young man that’s entered 

this Assembly here this afternoon and is observing proceedings. 

This young man, his name is Jeremy Campbell and he’s a 

student at the University of Regina. He is studying, I believe 

he’s in his second year of sciences. And I know he’s a strong 

student. He works incredibly hard. I believe he works in a 

marketing capacity with an important company in this province 

as well. Jeremy is observing proceedings this afternoon. 

 

I know Jeremy as well, I got to know him for a short period of 

time, Mr. Speaker, a few years back when I served as his Social 

Studies teacher and I believe, IT [information technology] 

teacher as well over at Sheldon-Williams. And I recall actually, 



December 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2383 

Mr. Speaker, he took on a project, and it was a broad-based 

study, independent project of their choice. And at that point 

Jeremy Campbell in grade 9 studied the New Democratic Party, 

Mr. Speaker, and I didn’t let him know he was sort of after my 

own heart at that point in time, but he’s gone on from good 

studies there and continues to care about his community, to 

further his studies, and to focus on improving his province as 

well. 

 

So I ask all members of this Assembly to join with me in 

welcoming a young student leader here today, Mr. Jeremy 

Campbell. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 80 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That was 

certainly way more interesting than the comments I’ve been 

making, so I appreciate the efforts of my colleagues to 

introduce. 

 

But I’m getting close to the end, and I just wanted to make a 

comment on a couple of the final changes to the SaskPower 

corporation Act, and that’s in relations to section 59. These are 

the relocation easements and . . . Well the first one is the 

relocation easement clause, 59.01 and it’s just basically making 

a couple of changes to further the authority of the corporation. 

It clarifies SaskPower’s ability to administer the power system 

and grid for the benefit of the entire province in the event of the 

triggering event of a power emergency. 

 

So in this case, this allows the corporation to ration power or 

redirect it if necessary, and prioritize allocation of supply of 

power. So the changes that are being made are basically . . . Oh, 

I’m sorry; that’s 59.02. 59.01 changes are just about consent 

agreements required by landowners. So in the event of an 

emergency, it provides more clarity on when SaskPower can 

get access to land. 

 

It’s 59.02 which is a new clause which gives SaskPower clear 

statutory rights to curtail, ration, or prioritize the allocation and 

supply of power in the event of a power emergency, which is 

defined. So this is also to bring it consistent with provisions in 

other comparable utility legislations and in particular The 

Manitoba Hydro Act. So that’s basically the changes that we 

find in here. As I said, I find it’s unfortunate that SaskPower’s 

required to increase its borrowing capacity almost to double, 

when we see its debt load is going to triple in the next nine 

years and yet we see a government that, rather than reinvest in 

the corporation, is using its profits to help them balance their 

budget or alleged balance the budget, and also that we don’t see 

the strengthening of our Crowns through this process. So that’s 

the big change, I think. And all the other changes are seemingly 

acceptable clarity changes that seem to work. But I think we 

need to take a close look at the dangerous debt load that these 

corporations are being forced to take on. 

So that’s the extent of my comments. I’m sure other of my 

colleagues will want to comment on this well, so at this point I 

would like to move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 80, An Act to 

amend The Power Corporation Act. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The member from 

Saskatoon Nutana has moved to adjourn the Bill No. 81, The 

Power Corporation Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 81 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 81 — The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair of 

Committees. A pleasure to rise in debate today and glad to rise 

particularly on this subject, Mr. Chair of Committees, or Mr. 

Speaker. We’ll just leave it at that — Mr. Speaker. 

 

Anyway the project itself, the Global Transportation Hub, is of 

some age, Mr. Speaker, and certainly the former government, 

we were quite happy to play a partnership role in this project 

getting going, Mr. Speaker, and we followed with great interest 

the progress and the difference or evolution of the file since, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, again it’s in that sort of vein that we’re very 

interested to see The Global Transportation Hub Authority Act 

come forward today for the legislature’s consideration. The 

GTH [Global Transportation Hub] of course, Mr. Speaker, I’ve 

had the privilege of being out through that neck of the woods. 

The 2,000-acre development, you know, it’s not just a 

significant development in and of itself, but the attendant 

changes that have been required in terms of supporting 

infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, the partnership with the city of 

Regina . . . Interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, the way that a 

corporation like Canadian Logistics, not just employing people 

from Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, or throughout Canada, but I 

know for a fact there’s a strong Bangladeshi contingent at work 

out in CLS [Canadian Logistics Services], and again what that 

means for not just those families and that corporation getting 

the good workers but the way that that makes for a more 

diverse and vibrant Saskatchewan and Regina region, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We’re very interested to see this legislation come forward in 

terms of the sort of organizational evolution of the GTH, Mr. 

Speaker. Because again if the bringing the governance 

structure, the governance framework more in line with the 

activity being undertaken, and if this is indeed a normal step 

forward in terms of evaluating where the entity is at and then 

bringing the governance framework more in line with the 

opportunity, then good on that, Mr. Speaker. And we’re glad to 

see that happen because again Global Transportation Hub is a 



2384 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2012 

tremendous opportunity not just for Regina and region, Mr. 

Speaker, but indeed for the province. So that the government 

should be vigilant in terms of making sure the governance 

structure is appropriate to the task at hand is as it should be. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Again, having first been established as a statutory 

appropriation, as an agency of the Crown, then evolving into a 

Treasury Board Crown in June 2009 and now, Mr. Speaker, the 

evolution further into an authority on a par with what is 

anticipated, for example, under the various port authority 

legislations throughout the country, Mr. Speaker, but also the 

airport authority legislation or even where we are here today, 

Mr. Speaker, in the beautiful Wascana Centre. The Wascana 

Centre Authority structure is referenced in the minister’s 

second reading speech as well. 

 

But those are the things we’ll be looking to see, you know, 

where the similarities are, how appropriate those developments 

are, and whether or not they do indeed see this very valuable 

project, not just for Regina and region, but for the province, Mr. 

Speaker, indeed for Western Canada to make sure that that 

tremendous opportunity that is there in economic terms, Mr. 

Speaker, to make sure that that is indeed realized. 

 

Again if you can align these factors correctly, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan is well situated west of Regina and is well 

situated in terms of not just rail connection but also adjacent to 

the airport, adjacent to the Highways No. 1 and 11, and the way 

that that can serve for the transfer of goods through the GTH. 

You know, again it was a fairly sound idea and we were 

thankful for the, or appreciative of the successes that have been 

made. But we also watch with concern, Mr. Speaker, when 

there are things that we have a question about or would seem to 

indicate a bit of a sidetrack from the great success that this 

vicinity should be. 

 

We’re also concerned, Mr. Speaker, when it seems to in some 

places where opportunities aren’t realized in terms of potential 

businesses locating to the GTH, but also in some cases losing 

that competition to other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. Again if 

it’s on sort of straight opportunity and the advantage of the 

transportation location and maybe other jurisdictions are 

providing different inducements, that’s one thing, Mr. Speaker. 

But if it’s because the authority itself is not being properly 

managed or the business community and these opportunities not 

being properly engaged with, that’s another, Mr. Speaker. And 

in terms of making sure that the government is doing that job in 

terms of keeping the GTH competitive and to make sure that 

opportunities are being realized and not squandered, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s something that we watch very closely. 

 

In terms of what happens now as well, Mr. Speaker, we know 

that there are some conflicts that have arisen throughout the 

fairly brief history of the GTH overall. And one thing we’ll be 

interested in, Mr. Speaker, is how those conflicts are, how they 

continue to relate to the GTH with this change in legislation. 

We’ll be interested to see if there’s different sort of resolution 

mechanisms that are possibly brought to bear, or if in fact 

questions of liability are being dealt with through legislation as 

opposed to properly addressing them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ll be interested to see how the grants in lieu negotiations 

work with the city of Regina, again in terms of providing that 

supporting infrastructure and those supportive services that 

make a 2,000-acre development like the GTH go. We’ll be 

interested to see how those negotiations go, and in relative 

fairness to both sides of that equation, Mr. Speaker. Again 

people are often fond of saying that there’s one taxpayer. And 

certainly as a taxpayer in the city of Regina and as a taxpayer in 

the province of Saskatchewan, I know that various fellow 

taxpayers are going to be interested to see what kind of a fair 

deal is arrived at, or the relative fairness of that deal, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We’ll be interested to see how the new authority fleshes out the 

actual board for the new authority, how that impacts on senior 

management, how that impacts on the accountability provisions 

that are there for an organization like this. Previously, Mr. 

Speaker, the kind of accountability that you’d have through the 

legislature or through the work of the Provincial Auditor, we’d 

be interested to see how that persists with this change in 

organizational structure. 

 

And we’re going to be interested to see how again the city of 

Regina, obviously a very valuable partner, is involved in the go 

forward. And how the senior management of the corporation of 

which there seems to have been some turmoil, some turnover, 

Mr. Speaker, again to see change in the position of the CEO 

[chief executive officer], and again it’s, you know . . . What the 

grounds were for that, we’re interested in knowing, Mr. 

Speaker. But we’re also interested of course in who’s brought 

in to make the project to put it on a better footing, lead that 

team forward, and realize the opportunities inherent in the 

GTH. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, there are different sort of professional 

capacities on the CV [curriculum vitae] of the individual 

currently heading up that team, that one of the latest endeavours 

of that individual was Enterprise Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

And Enterprise Saskatchewan, of course such a roaring success 

that the government wrapped it up in last year’s budget. We’ll 

be watching to see how that leadership complement works out 

in terms of making sure that this opportunity is realized through 

the GTH, and how this project goes forward. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, oftentimes you know people by their 

records. You know them by their history, and again it’s for the 

opposition, I think, cause for some concern and is something 

that has definitely caught our interest. Because again at base, 

Mr. Speaker, this is a project that we, as the previous 

government at the time, were quite happy to be associated with 

and to provide some of those initial sort of pushes for the 

project to move forward. 

 

This is a very valuable opportunity for not just, as I’ve said, Mr. 

Speaker, not just for Regina and region but indeed for the 

province. And again if we’re going to realize this opportunity, it 

takes not just proper management but proper resourcing and 

proper support. 

 

Again in the minister’s second reading speech there was a fair 

reference made to the kind of work that’s been undertaken for 

the serviced land and the additional highway infrastructure that 

need to be brought to bear. Again, Mr. Speaker, those 



December 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2385 

expenditures are as they should be. But any time there’s public 

money involved, Mr. Speaker, we want to be certain that that 

return to the taxpayer is worth the money being put forward in 

the first place. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, what sort of broader planning work is 

enabled by this piece of legislation or broader sort of work 

within the community in terms of making sure that the 

consequences in terms of traffic on the west side of Regina . . . 

to make sure that again this doesn’t become a hardship for 

people that didn’t realize they’d be, you know, living on a 

trucking route and the fairly significant transportation units that 

are flowing down places like west Dewdney, Mr. Speaker. 

These are all things that we’ll be watching to see how this, 

whether or not this legislation helps the situation or whether or 

not problems will persist and grow larger. 

 

I know that there are a great many of my colleagues that are 

very interested in this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. I know 

that we’ve got some broader work to do in terms of consulting, 

not just in Regina and region, but also to do some comparative 

work around the appropriateness of the legal vehicle being put 

forward here today for the future for success with the GTH. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, the kind of experience of other 

jurisdictions in terms of transportation hubs and making sure 

that if there are lessons to be learned from other jurisdictions, 

Mr. Speaker, we want to make sure that those are being learned 

and that they’re turned into a competitive advantage for, again, 

what can be a very valuable opportunity for the province of 

Saskatchewan and the Global Transportation Hub. So in order 

to facilitate that work, Mr. Speaker, and in order to make sure 

that we’re able to do that work with due diligence, I would 

move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 81, The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 81, The Global Transportation Hub 

Authority Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 45 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 45 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan Telecommunications) 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on the 

debate on Bill 45, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012, make some 

comments. And I know that the minister has made opening 

comments when he did his second reading to the bill and kind 

of give us an explanation of areas where they’re going. And it’s 

about long-term debt and the borrowing of SaskTel, a 

communications corporation. 

 

And I want to start out with saying about SaskTel, the good 

work that SaskTel employees do. The company itself truly as 

our Crown corporation, and my colleagues today were talking 

about, you know, ISC, a Crown corporation and one that’s 

being sold off. And I want to talk about that because it’s 

interesting to look at some of the stuff that’s being proposed 

and the concern that, I guess, my colleagues have raised, I have 

raised, and a number of, I guess, media individuals have raised 

about some of the bills and our Crowns. Our Crowns, and we 

hear that should be protected, government’s commitment, and 

we’ve heard that. And I think, you know, my . . . the colleague 

here on our side of the House with the official opposition, I’m 

proud that she raised a lot of concerns today and debated the 

bill on Bill 69. And I want to refer that because that’s a Crown 

corporation, which SaskTel is. And you want to protect the 

Crowns. 

 

And government says one thing, and then she pointed out very 

clearly, whether it was in their platforms in some of the reports 

from CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] 

and CISC about the minister’s commitment and continuing the 

government’s commitment to protecting our Crowns. Well we 

know that that one generates a lot of wealth to the province, to 

the people of our province, just like SaskTel as well truly is a 

telecommunications . . . SaskTel is a leader out there, and we 

see that with the cellular service. 

 

But I guess the minister talks about — and we’ll get into it — 

he talks about some of the housekeeping items that he wants to 

clear up, but also about the purchasing, the way cabinet is given 

powers, or the way it’s handled, whether it’s 100,000, 200,000, 

depending on whether they’re buying property or selling. But 

we’re going to get time to go into it and have some of those 

discussions. And it’s going to warrant further discussion, and I 

realize that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to be clear where I’m coming from. 

And I want to commend, again I go back to this, because I don’t 

think sometimes our Crown corporations get the information 

that they need to get and, I guess, the compliments that they do, 

whether it’s the workers that are out there, front-line workers 

installing the lines so that people can have telecommunications, 

can have home service, whether it’s TV . . . That is a great part 

of what SaskTel does. And I know the government’s going to 

be asking for increasing that. 

 

But we see what the front-line workers do, the ones that work in 

our stores that provide the service, whether it’s the service calls 

that have to go out, whether it’s the operators, a number of 

different areas. And we’ve seen where some of the good things 

that SaskTel has been doing has been sold off by stealth, quietly 

— 411, a number of different areas, you know, that we could 

look at. 

 

[16:30] 

 

But I mention that only because when we were talking about 

Bill 69 and we were, you know, really concerned. And I think 

the public in general didn’t ask for that and are clear that they 

want our Crowns protected. 

 

And I’ll go back to Bill 45 and I will talk about it. But I want to 

show, Mr. Speaker, some of the relationships to our Crown 



2386 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2012 

corporations. And when a government decides that they want to 

try to sell them off, or anytime the government makes a move 

on the Crown corporations, you want to make sure that we’re 

debating the bill. We want to make sure that we’re 

understanding it. We want to make sure that we’re talking to 

individuals, organizations, the good people that are working for 

SaskTel. We want to make sure that they have an understanding 

and if there’s any . . . I guess, can they clarify some of the 

information we’re getting? 

 

And sometimes, you know, they’re housekeeping items. And I 

know they may be simple and, you know, it’s just bringing it 

forward here and trying to . . . But we have to make sure 

because we’ve got a number of areas where their minister and 

cabinet’s going to have some powers and a different way of 

doing things. So we want to watch that. And I know they’re 

saying, well that’s clear because it’s buying property to put up 

cell towers. And that’s one area they looked at, referring to the 

cost. And it’s holding up SaskTel from providing cellular 

service to communities, and nobody wants to see that 

happening. 

 

But we want to be cautious. Sometimes when you, I guess, 

open it up or you allow certain provisions in there, what impact 

will that have in the rest of the province in where the 

government . . . And how will they use that legislation? 

Because once it goes through the process . . . And we know, 

we’ll do our part as the official opposition. We talk to 

individuals that will be impacted, whether it’s employees but 

also in committee, you know, when it does move to committee. 

 

But here’s a venue and an opportunity in the legislature to ask 

some of those questions and kind of be free of really pushing 

the issues and trying to find out and digging at stuff. And 

committee is a process and it is a different process. So this is an 

area where, Mr. Speaker, we can go. And right now we’re 

clearly trying to find out, like, where do we want to go and 

what’s the intention of the government? 

 

So when I say that . . . And I want to get into some of the 

communities and I know that are out there trying to get cellular 

service, and some of the communities that recently have 

received cellular service, and probably where some of the 

communities that maybe the government had issue with 

purchasing property to put up their cell towers. So I want to be 

clear that we know that maybe there’s been some challenges for 

SaskTel. And we don’t want to limit when SaskTel’s ready to 

put up cellular service to a community. We don’t want to limit 

it. 

 

But that brings me to another matter, and I know my colleague, 

the member from Athabasca, has been raising petitions pretty 

well every day in this House that he’s here. And my colleagues 

have raised a few of them for him about cellular service in 

some of the communities in the west side of our province, in the 

North. And those have been challenges that the communities 

are facing. And all they’re asking for is a fair opportunity to 

have cellular service for safety, but for communications. And 

that’s an interesting area to go on. 

 

And I just, you know, Mr. Speaker, want to kind of refer to 

some of the communities. I know it was, that he talked about, 

was Dillon. He’s talked about . . . Well quite a few of them, you 

know, that he’s talked about. And I just want to make sure I 

have that. I know it’s here somewhere. But anyway, having said 

that, there are communities that are wanting to have, you know, 

access to cellular service. And whether it’s Dillon, Patuanak, 

he’s mentioned a number . . . Turnor Lake. He’s mentioned a 

number of them in the petition and, you know, I know the list 

goes on. And he refers to the members and individuals that 

have signed that petition asking for cellular service. 

 

So this might give, you know, the minister and cabinet and 

SaskTel the opportunity to purchase some of the property. Now 

I’m not saying that the property that they’re going to be 

purchasing in these northern communities are going to be over 

100,000. Could be 200,000, 300,000. I’m not sure. We have to 

see. But if they’re not, then the provisions would be clear. And 

maybe we would encourage them to put in some of the service 

to some of those communities. So it’s interesting, you know, to 

see the amount of signatures that, you know, the member from 

Athabasca has raised, and the awareness. The people are saying 

it’s time to make sure that communities have access to cellular 

service. 

 

And that brings me back to this. It’s about safety. It’s about 

doing business. And there’s a lot of business going on in 

northern Saskatchewan. And some of these communities are 

some of the areas where business people want to have access to, 

you know, telecommunications. But cellular service gives them 

that added I guess sense of security when they’re calling for, 

whether it’s safety issues, people travelling. So we’re trying to 

encourage that. I know some of the communities, and some of 

these are smaller communities, but they would like to have 

cellular service and should get that. And I think the community 

members, the leadership, people signing that petition have 

made it clear that they would like to see that. 

 

But having said that, I know the minister has mentioned again 

that some of these items are housekeeping. Some of them will 

give, you know, I guess the cabinet the ability to, and the 

minister the ability to allow SaskTel to do the good work it’s 

doing. And you know, at the end of the day it’s nice to talk 

about it and go through some of the bill, like Bill 45, to look at 

some of the items that they’re going to be increasing and where 

they’re going. And I know that some of the challenges that 

SaskTel . . . We don’t want to create challenges for SaskTel 

because it does an excellent job. 

 

So sometimes you look at some of these items and like I said 

earlier, Mr. Speaker, are housekeeping items, and we can clear 

them up simply by having some dialogue and going through the 

debate in committee. But sometimes where truly there are other 

challenges that we are faced with, and we want to ensure that 

the plan that’s unveiled here, the government’s bringing 

forward when it’s making amendments, it’s legislation that’s 

going to benefit SaskTel. It’s going to benefit the people of our 

province. Because our Crown corporations are truly, you know, 

truly something that all people in the province are proud of, 

want protected, and want to make sure that they have access to 

the resources they need. 

 

And you know, we’re looking in here and SaskTel of 

borrowing, and there’s a provision in Bill 45 that allows 

SaskTel . . . And there’s going to be a provision . . . [inaudible] 

. . . where the government talks about bonds, and if that’s the 



December 4, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2387 

case, investing, SaskTel investing and borrowing on some items 

that could be more than 30 years. So the minister has some 

areas there where he’s doing some housekeeping items that 

wants to clear up. And I know that we’ll have to go through the 

debate and we’ll have to go through and ask some questions. 

And we’ll have that venue to do that in committee. I know our 

critic will go through in committee. And we have individuals 

that are on the committee. We’ll go through and ask some of 

the questions that need to be cleared up to make sure that we’ve 

done our work. 

 

And I know that individuals will go home. And we’ll check 

with SaskTel, with the employees to see are these provisions 

needed, and talk to senior staff within SaskTel to find out, are 

some of the proposed housekeeping items that we’re, the 

minister’s asking and has presented in Bill 45, are they simple? 

What impacts will be on Saskatchewan people? So there are 

many challenges that we see could be there. They may not, but 

again we want to make sure. 

 

But at this time I know there’s more comments that could be 

made and will be made on this item, Bill 45. I just wanted to 

share my views of what I see. And again I’m prepared to 

adjourn debate at this time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 45, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Saskatchewan Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 79 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 79 — The 

Representation Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’ a 

pleasure to stand and enter into the debate on No. 79, An Act 

respecting Representation in the Legislative Assembly. And of 

course we’ve talked at length about this. 

 

This has been a major issue in the past session and of course 

we’re here tonight talking about the next step — the actual 

boundaries, the constituencies that we have — and it’s an 

important one. It really is a short Act, but it really means a big 

fundamental shift in what we’ve done as a legislature. 

 

And of course this is a bill that we have severe concerns about. 

Not so much about the work that has been done . . . And I do 

want to say that we do appreciate the good work that has been 

done by the committee in the circumstances that they were 

given. Clearly we want to acknowledge that. And I think in 

Saskatchewan we have a unique approach to making sure that 

there is fairness. And I think that we can see that the work that 

was done by the three folks who made up the committee clearly 

represented the best interests and struggle to make sure that the 

interests of the people of Saskatchewan were represented, 

considering the circumstances that they found themselves in. 

And so I do also want to, along with the minister, acknowledge 

the leadership of the Honourable Mr. Justice Neil Gabrielson 

who served his people in the province exceedingly well. I agree 

with that and of course, the representatives from both sides of 

the House to make sure the job is done as well as it can be, 

considering that we have some difficult choices to make. 

 

So having said that, we are here now with seeing three more 

MLAs, and we find this an ironic situation because clearly in 

this government’s move to be accountable to every election 

promise they make, this was not an election promise that they 

made. In fact there was not a word about it, and it is truly ironic 

because, you know, we all share in the pride of the growing 

population of Saskatchewan. That is a good thing, and we think 

that’s an important part of our economy. But it’s also important 

that people see and feel that we do good work in the Chamber 

and that we’re effective and that we’re efficient and that when 

we’re scrutinizing the budget that we’re, in fact, not taking 

advantage of it ourselves. 

 

And this really flies in the face of it where you have now a 

swelling of from 58 to 61 MLAs — no campaign, no work on 

the election trail on that — and I’m not sure if these folks . . . 

And we’ve said it before and we’ll say it again and frankly we 

will keep saying it, and this’ll be a major issue when we go 

forward in the years and months ahead that we’ll be talking 

about, how do you have a government on one hand talk about 

lean efficiency government but yet they are wanting three more 

MLAs? 

 

And when you take a look at where we stand among other 

provinces — and we’ve reflected on this and, you know, if I 

have the time today maybe we’ll talk more about this — when 

you compare Ontario that has nearly 100,000 people per riding 

and here we are with much fewer. And so we have some real 

problems with this. 

 

I have to disagree with the minister when he spoke about noting 

“that there was absolutely no direction provided in the 

legislation as to where these three new constituencies were to 

be situated.” So it may be splitting hairs that it was not in the 

legislation but clearly we heard a lot of talk through media and 

other ways where the Premier had seen where these three new 

MLAs would go because of the population. So it wasn’t quite 

as independent as it’s made out to be because there was some 

direction, perhaps not in the legislation but in other ways that 

clearly the message was loud and clear as to how this should be 

done, you know. 

 

And as well I have to take exception to the minister’s 

comments, “It’s the voters who elect the members of the 

Legislative Assembly, and in our view it is the voters who 

should . . . be the focus of the constituency boundaries process.” 

And what he’s referring to in that, now he doesn’t say it but the 

implied reference is to the fact that for the first time in many 

years those young people, those younger than 18, are now left 

out of the equation, left out of the formula. 

 

And I think everyone in this province, it’s their business who is 

representing them in their riding. I serve everyone in my riding. 

I just don’t say, are you a voter? I serve absolutely everyone. 

And so I think that’s a key element. And we’ve had this 



2388 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2012 

discussion. We’ve gone around, and we will continue to raise 

this as unfair, especially for young people, because we want to 

make sure and we want to send a clear message to young 

people that their presence counts, you know. And I’ve said this. 

We have them come to the House and we introduce them and 

we say, welcome to your legislature. But by this bill we’re 

exactly doing the opposite. And the minister was very clear. He 

says we’re here really to focus on, and he says that should be 

the focus in terms of voters. And we think that’s fundamentally 

wrong. We represent everyone. Everyone. And that’s why we 

think they should have been included in the formula. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think there is some real questions about this, 

and we have some real concerns about what this means and 

what kind of message this sends at the primary level of not 

campaigning. Everybody knew that the province was growing. 

The population just didn’t happen in the last little while since 

the election. It’s been growing for several years now. And so it 

was no surprise, no surprise at all, that we have more people in 

the province. And why they didn’t raise this during the 

campaign, we have some questions. And I think that clearly that 

we need to address that because people expect more. They 

expect more from their elected officials, of which I am one, and 

we think this is inappropriate. 

 

We could do the work with 58. Clearly that means more people 

in each riding but that’s okay. I think we have the technology to 

resolve that issue. And if we don’t think that is, then we should 

have campaigned on that. And I just want to make sure that that 

goes on the record, that still we have a problem with 

unannounced, with unannouncing or making sure we don’t talk 

about those kind of changes. You know, we’ve seen what other 

areas do, what . . . They have task forces or public hearings. 

And of course when we get into consultations, we know this 

government has some real issues about that. But we should 

address the public concerns about that. 

 

But I know that there’s many other issues that people want to 

speak to, and I will wrap up my comments. But I do want to 

once again acknowledge the good work by Honourable Mr. 

Justice Neil Gabrielson serving as chairperson, and with the 

two commission members, Stuart Pollon and Mr. Harry Van 

Mulligen serving as members. They’ve done a great job, as I 

said, within the circumstances that they found themselves in 

and that is what we find themselves in. But we will not forget, 

we will not forget how this all came about because we do think 

this a problem, and we should have done better. We could have 

done better. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I want to now adjourn the second 

readings on Bill No. 79, An Act respecting Representation in 

the Legislative Assembly. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 79, The Representation Act, 2012. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the work of committees this evening, I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:49.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2359 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 2359, 2382 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2359 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2359 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2359 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2359 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2360 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2360 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2360 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2360 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2360 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2360 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Improving the Lives of Working People 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2360 

 Mission Canada Observer Team 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2361 

 Mispon Aboriginal Film Festival 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2361 

 Diamond Jubilee Medal Recipients 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2361 

 Saskatchewan Veterinarian of the Year 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2361 

 20th Anniversary of A Prairie Alphabet 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2362 

 Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2362 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Changes to Labour Legislation 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2362 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2362 

 Reporting of Provincial Finances 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2364 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2364 

 Inspection of Slaughter Plants 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2366 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2366 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 85 — The Saskatchewan Employment Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2367 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 82 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2012 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2367 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2368 

 Bill No. 83 — The Foreign Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services Act 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2369 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2370 

 Bill No. 84 — The Common Business Identifiers Act 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2373 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2374 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 69 — The Information Services Corporation Act 

  Chartier ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 2376 

 Bill No. 80 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2012 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2379 

 



 

 Bill No. 81 — The Global Transportation Hub Authority Act 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2383 

 Bill No. 45 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2385 

 Bill No. 79 — The Representation Act, 2012 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2387 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


