




















































Hansard: April 17, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 30A  TUESDAY, APRIL 17, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1055 

 April 17, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to ask leave for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked leave for an extended 

introduction. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to grant leave? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — It gives me great pleasure and honour to 

introduce a most outstanding young man and constituent of 

Regina Douglas Park seated behind the bar to my right. 

Accompanying Steven are several members of his support 

network. First of all his mom, Donalda Jones, up in the west 

gallery, and dad, Dale. Beside Steven is his brother Daniel. Up 

in the gallery as well are Ken Ripplinger, Roberta Ripplinger, 

Marina Rist, Cheryl Milne, and Verna Mang. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know the good work of the Kinsmen and in 

particular, Telemiracle. We all know as well, Mr. Speaker, that 

all the good work of the Kinsmen as a result of Telemiracle 

could not happen without the contributions of the very generous 

population and of course the scores of volunteers just like 

Steven who work tirelessly on behalf of those who are in need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Steven set a goal to raise $10,000 for Telemiracle 

and ended up raising $2,000 over that goal — $12,000, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m sure you’ll agree, Mr. Speaker, that raising this 

kind of money is no small feat. Steven started to raise money in 

late January with bake sales, steak nights, appeals to family 

members, and with the great support from the folks and staff at 

the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre. When asked why he’s so 

passionate about his support for Telemiracle, Steven’s reply 

was simple, and I quote, “I like to help folks, and I know a lot 

of people who need help. I feel really good about what I’ve 

done.” And well you should, Steven. 

 

We thank you, and I would ask all members to please join me in 

congratulating Steven and welcome Steven and his support 

team to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you, a group seated in 

the eastern gallery of the legislature. And they are the 

embodiment, I think, of the motto of Saskatchewan. As they’ll 

note on their tour, it’s on the coat of arms. It’s Multis e gentibus 

vires “from many peoples, strength.” And this group from Open 

Door Society’s English as a second language class, here with 

their teacher, Roshnie Thaver, is very much the embodiment of 

that motto of Saskatchewan and what makes Saskatchewan 

strong and a great place to live. 

 

They’ve come to Saskatchewan, to Canada from Afghanistan, 

Iran, Russia, the Ukraine, Burma, and South Africa, and it’s 

really good to see them here today at their Legislative 

Assembly. And we’re thankful to have them here in the 

province, and we look forward to their many continued 

successes here in Saskatchewan. Please join with me in 

welcoming these individuals to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to 

all members of the Assembly, I’d like to join the member 

opposite in welcoming these individuals, this class, to their 

Legislative Assembly. We know how important our 

increasingly diverse, dynamic, and cosmopolitan society is. 

And we’re delighted to see that as part of their work, they’re 

seeing civics in action, an opportunity to come to their 

legislature and see open and free dialogue and debate. We know 

how important that is. It’s a defining feature of Saskatchewan. 

And here they are, not just witnessing it but also helping to 

contribute to it. I invite all members to join me in welcoming 

our guests to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re joined 

here today in the west gallery by someone who’s very important 

to students and education all across Saskatchewan, none other 

than Ms. Sandi Urban-Hall, president of the Saskatchewan 

School Boards Association. It’s a pleasure to have Sandi join us 

here today. 

 

We should also recognize that Sandi has recently been elected 

the president of the Canadian School Boards Association and 

will be representing Saskatchewan in education and in a very 

proud way, I know, and in an important way. I’d like to thank 

Ms. Urban-Hall for her years of service to education in the 

province, to Prairie Valley schools, and for the good work that 

is to come. Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. Please join with 

me in welcoming Ms. Sandi Urban-Hall. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would 

like to welcome Ms. Sandi Urban-Hall, trustee of Prairie Valley 

School Division and president of the Saskatchewan School 

Boards Association to her Assembly, as well as congratulate her 

for her unanimous election for the president of the Canadian 

School Boards Association. Ms. Urban-Hall was first elected as 

a trustee in 2003. And she served on the executive of the SSBA 

[Saskatchewan School Boards Association] since 2006 and is 

presently serving her third term as the president. 

 

We look forward to having her lead us through what promises 

to be a year full of challenges and with confidence that her 

guiding vision of student achievement and opportunity will 



1056 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

serve the association, its board members, and the students of 

this province well. And soon she’ll be serving the students of 

Canada as well as just Saskatchewan. So welcome to your 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

would like to join with the member from Douglas Park in 

welcoming a very special family. But I’d like to point out that 

Mr. Dale Ripplinger was just awarded the Realtor of the Year at 

the Regina Real Estate Association’s 100th anniversary dinner. 

Dale has won this prestigious award before, and it’s no surprise 

then that his family members, such as Steven, have become 

very large contributors to the community because their father 

has set an absolutely incredible example. You don’t get to win 

Realtor of the Year based on sales. You get to win Realtor of 

the Year on the work that you do within the community, of 

giving back, and Dale Ripplinger has given back extensively to 

the community of Regina. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for protection for late-night 

retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know that in 

the early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray Wiebe 

was shot two times and killed from his injuries. He was 

working at a gas station in Yorkton, alone and unprotected from 

intruders. And we know that armed robberies such as the one 

that took place in Regina in January this year and the 

devastating news we had this morning of the Fas Gas 

convenience store and gas station was held up for the third time, 

the third time in six weeks during the graveyard shift, show that 

Jimmy’s law is needed to give workers added protection in the 

workplace. We know other provinces have brought in several 

safety precautions, and we urge this government to do the same: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Langham and Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the management and accounting of 

our provincial finances. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 

financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 

people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 

taxpayers, and businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions today are signed by concerned 

residents from Weyburn and from Kisbey. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 

today on behalf of seniors who are calling on the Sask Party 

government to support and pass the senior’s bill of rights. 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that many Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed 

incomes and are victims of physical, emotional, and 

financial abuse; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

social and economic security and a right to live free from 

poverty; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights, which would 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current regulations 

being enforced are creating challenges that are of concern for 

our traditional trappers. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued; and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation and 

regulations with respect to trapping regulations and 

firearms use in consultation with the traditional resource 

users. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And it’s signed by many good people of northern 

Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1057 

30th Anniversary of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, 30 years ago on April 17th, 1982, 

Queen Elizabeth proclaimed in force the Canadian Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms, a key element of the new constitution 

which represents Canada’s respect and commitment to human 

rights. I’m pleased, Mr. Speaker, to rise in the House today on 

the 30th anniversary of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms to 

recognize this very important milestone in Canadian political 

history. 

 

Let us take this opportunity to reflect upon why people came to 

Canada in the first place. They came to this country to seek 

freedom. In many cases people came to this country to flee 

persecution. However for the most part, the attraction to Canada 

has been the promise of human rights, civil liberties, and a 

chance to pursue happiness in a secure environment where 

lives, property, and security are guaranteed by the state. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have managed to create a peaceful country 

where people from every corner of the world of every religion, 

every political persuasion, every cultural group, and all 

ethnicities can come together and build a tolerant society where 

we respect each other. The Charter of Rights and Freedoms, Mr. 

Speaker, enshrines Canada’s dream of a respectful, fair, and 

equal society of which we are so proud. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all my colleagues to join with 

me today in recognizing the importance of the Charter of Rights 

and Freedoms to our country and to our society. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thirty years ago 

today, Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau and Queen Elizabeth II 

signed the Charter of Rights and Freedoms entrenching this Bill 

of political and civil rights into the Constitution of Canada. 

 

The Charter is trendsetting and influenced countries such as 

Israel, South Africa, Hong Kong, and New Zealand in the 

development of their constitutional documents. It greatly 

expanded the scope of judicial review, guaranteed rights, and 

gave judges power to enforce the stated changes. The plan was 

announced in 1980 to include fundamental freedoms, 

democratic guarantees, freedom of movement, legal rights, 

equality, and language rights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1981 the kitchen accord was negotiated by the 

federal Attorney General and various provincial Justice 

ministers to ensure that provincial approval would be needed 

for certain constitutional reforms. The notwithstanding clause, 

otherwise known as section 33, allows parliament or provincial 

legislatures to override certain provisions of the Charter, a 

uniquely Canadian invention. 

 

The Charter is a source of pride for Canadians and polls have 

shown strong support describing the Charter as a good thing. 

The Charter is a source of national values and unity and 

functions as a symbol for all Canadians, representing the core 

values of freedom. 

 

I encourage all members of this Assembly to applaud the 

dedication of citizens from all political stripes in the 

development of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Celebrating the Sikh Community in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, on Sunday, April 15th, I had the 

honour of attending a Vaisakhi celebration at a Sikh temple in 

Saskatoon. Vaisakhi is an important celebration in the Sikh 

calendar, having both religious and cultural significance. From 

a faith perspective, it commemorates when Khalsa was 

established in the year 1699, recognizing that all humans are 

equal. The Vaisakhi celebration also coincides with the New 

Year and the beginning of the harvest in Punjab, the birthplace 

of Sikhism. Needless to say, it is a colourful event and the 

highlight of the year for the community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sikh community is a very important part of 

Saskatchewan and especially Saskatoon. Since the introduction 

of the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program in 2005, 

many Sikh families from abroad and other provinces have been 

choosing to make our province home. And this is very much the 

case with my constituency of Saskatoon Massey Place. These 

families are committed to enhancing the cultural and economic 

vibrancy of our province and are truly living up to our 

provincial motto “from many peoples, strength.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to extend my sincere thanks for the 

hospitality that was shown to me on Sunday, and I ask all 

members to join me in recognizing the important contributions 

made by the Sikh community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Humboldt Broncos Win Canalta Cup 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I gladly rise 

today, as the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy remains 

seated, to congratulate the Humboldt Broncos on defeating the 

Weyburn Red Wings with the series victory of 4 to 2 to win the 

SJHL [Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League] championship and 

bring home the Canalta Cup.  

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the fourth SJHL title in just six years for the 

Humboldt Broncos, a very accomplished team, no doubt. The 

Broncos will now advance to play in the Anavet Cup, squaring 

off against the Portage Terriers. I am confident that the Broncos 

can beat their Manitoba rivals and sign their name to the last 

ever Anavet Cup. Game 1 kicks off this Friday, April 20th in 

Humboldt. Furthermore, the Broncos will look for their third 

national title on home ice when the RBC [Royal Bank of 

Canada] Cup returns to Saskatchewan for the first time since 

2005. I know the community of Humboldt has been very 

excited to host the RBC cup in May of this year, and I can only 

imagine how much excitement will grow as we get closer and 

closer to that first puck drop, Mr. Speaker.  

 



1058 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

I would like to extend my congratulations to the Humboldt 

Broncos and their successes so far. I’d also like to congratulate 

head coach Dean Brockman on leading the Broncos in yet 

another victory-filled season. I ask all members to join me on 

cheering on Saskatchewan’s best as we watch them to continue 

to make their way to the top. Go Broncos.  

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Northeast. 

 

Saskatchewan Highways 

 

Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday during question period, the member from Athabasca 

suggested that professional consulting engineers design 

highways that are “less safer.” Why the member would seek to 

undermine the credibility of professional consulting engineers is 

beyond reason, since the practice of relying more heavily on 

consultants began in 1997 under the Romanow NDP [New 

Democratic Party] government and during his brief stint as 

Minister of Highways in the spring of 2007. That the NDP 

would suggest work being done by private engineers is unsafe 

is entirely wrong and frankly, Mr. Speaker, offensive. 

 

As the Minister of Highways indicated earlier, “Every engineer 

treats safety as a high priority whether they work for the 

government or in the private sector.” During 16 years of NDP 

government, highway safety certainly was an issue since the 

NDP was not fixing this province’s highways. In fact the former 

NDP deputy premier told citizens to fill their own potholes, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Since 2007 the Saskatchewan Party government has made 

investment in provincial highways a priority. In our first four 

years, we invested $2.2 billion in highways. In this year’s 

balanced budget, Mr. Speaker, we have committed $581.5 

million. There is still more work to be done after 16 years, Mr. 

Speaker, neglect by the former NDP government. And we, 

along with the Highways ministry staff and our professional 

consulting engineer partners, are absolutely committed to safety 

for our highways. Mr. Speaker, the member from Athabasca 

should apologize to consulting engineers for suggesting their 

work is unsafe. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Support for Habitat for Humanity 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

rise in the House to talk about a Habit for Humanity sod turning 

that the member from Kelvington-Wadena and I had the 

privilege of attending in Nipawin on April the 13th. The 

celebration was about making dreams come true, and about 

what can be achieved when people work together to achieve a 

common goal. Our government was pleased to have contributed 

$50,000 in Nipawin’s first Habitat for Humanity project and to 

see another Saskatchewan family achieve the dream of owning 

their own home. In 2012-13 I am also pleased that our 

government is providing an additional $1 million to help 

Habitat construct 20 more homes across the province. 

 

Since March of 2011 our government has invested 344 million 

in new initiatives including the affordable home ownership 

program, the rental construction incentive, the Summit Action 

Fund, Headstart on a Home, and the corporate income tax 

rebate. We expect that these investments will result in the 

development of more than 12,600 new homes for Saskatchewan 

people, homes that offer security, shelter, well-being, and a 

sense of belonging. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate Habitat for Humanity 

and its many partners and volunteers for putting home 

ownership within reach of Saskatchewan families and for 

building stronger neighbourhoods and communities. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

“I like to help folks” 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

once more to celebrate the highlights of our outstanding young 

guest. Mr. Speaker, the accomplishments of this extraordinary 

young man is an inspiration to all. We have met Steven 

Ripplinger who has been working hard to raise money for the 

Telemiracle Foundation and with amazing success. Mr. 

Speaker, Steven has muscular dystrophy, but that has not 

slowed him down. And when asked about his passion for 

Telemiracle, we heard what his response was, and I quote once 

more: “I like to help folks and I know a lot of people who need 

help.” Mr. Speaker, a true reflection of Steven’s generous spirit 

and an excellent reflection of Saskatchewan grit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know that Saskatchewan leads the nation 

per capita in terms of volunteerism. Obviously no finer example 

than that of Steven Ripplinger. From his table outside the 

Wascana Rehabilitation Centre cafeteria, Steven spread the 

spirit of Telemiracle as he turned to Wascana Rehabilitation 

Centre employees and families to support his cause. Steven has 

been supporting the Kinsmen Telemiracle Foundation for more 

than five years and by his own admission, he does not know 

exactly how much money he’s raised. But, Steven, whatever the 

amount, we are thankful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all the members, I would like to 

congratulate and thank Steven and his family on his great 

contribution to our community, the Kinsmen Foundation, and of 

course Saskatchewan. Steven, we wish you every success in 

your future endeavours. Thanks for coming. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Electoral Representation 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier has introduced 

legislation that will significantly change the electoral process. 

The Premier’s going to remove young people under the age of 

18 from the equation when we draw up the new electoral 

boundaries. Who did the Premier consult before he made this 

decision? Has he heard from the Children’s Advocate? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1059 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve had a conversation 

with the Children’s Advocate on this matter, and he shares the 

position taken by the opposition. On this matter, we’ve agreed 

to disagree. We think that the appropriate measure for 

determining electoral boundaries are the people that actually 

vote in an election. 

 

In the past, and in some constituencies in some other provinces, 

they use registered voters. They use voters lists. And in some 

other ones, they use population at large. We think that what 

we’ve chosen to do by using people that are of the voting age, 

we will have the most fair and equitable distribution of electors. 

And that’s the process we’ve chosen to do. 

 

With regard to our obligation, how we meet the needs of 

children, we do that by committing resources to them through a 

variety of different ministries — through Health, Education, 

and Social Services. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve done a better job 

of it than the members opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Social Services 

and youth likes to stand in her place and talk about the work she 

does to protect children and to recognize their rights to fair and 

equal treatment. On March 26th the Minister of Social Services 

and youth said, “We are breaking down the silos of government 

to serve our children better, and we’re getting better at it.” My 

question to the Minister of Social Services: what does she think 

about the Premier’s decision to eliminate people under the age 

of 18 from the electoral boundary calculation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, come the next election, I 

think all MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] would 

be able to look their electors in the eye and say to them, we 

have developed a process that will determine the number of 

seats and the number of voters in each constituency so that it is 

fair and equitable and distributed appropriately. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has a strong record of what it is 

doing for children in our province. And one of the things that 

we’re doing with children is we are creating jobs here so that 

they are coming back to this province in droves from other 

jurisdictions. We are pleased and proud of the fact that more 

people are moving to the province. And as those people move 

back, if they are above the age of 18, we are ensuring that they 

have the vote and they will be appropriately accounted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will ensure that there are enough schools, that 

there are enough other facilities, that children in our province, 

we’ll be looking after. But to count them in an electoral map is 

not an appropriate or fair method of doing things. We will 

account people that can vote and are of legal voting age, and 

that is the appropriate and fair, reasonable way of doing things, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, my questions have been to the 

Premier and to the Minister of Social Services and youth, and 

the Minister of Justice has taken the response. Now he said, 

let’s look our electors in the eye in April 2016, if that’s when 

the election is. How are you going to look at those people who 

turned 18 between 2011 and 2016 and say, well you weren’t 

even included in calculating these boundaries? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier, and I’d invite the 

Premier to answer this question, is: will he tell the people of 

Saskatchewan why he’s made this particular decision without 

consulting the people of Saskatchewan? It’s important that he 

go to the people of Saskatchewan when he makes these kind of 

changes to our democracy. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in the last election, 

Saskatoon Nutana had 11,843 voters; Massey Place, 11,520. 

Mr. Speaker, my constituency of Saskatoon Southeast had 

16,343. And I want to be able to look at those voters and say 

that your vote counts just as much as it does in Saskatoon 

Centre or anywhere else in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with regard to children, we have the largest 

income tax cut in Saskatchewan history, the largest property tax 

cut in Saskatchewan, the largest debt reduction in Saskatchewan 

history, and the largest investment in infrastructure in 

Saskatchewan history. We are building a new children’s 

hospital in Saskatoon. We are building schools. We are building 

nursing homes. We are fixing hospitals. We are fixing 

highways. With that government over there, when they were in 

office, we had leaky roofs and creaky roads. We are not going 

down that road any more, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Public Servants Seeking Elected Office 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night in the 

Human Services Committee, the Minister of Social Services 

refused to answer questions about why a civil servant in her 

ministry had been refused permission to run in a civic 

by-election last fall, despite the individual’s supervisor not 

having concerns about a conflict of interest. My question to the 

minister: can she please explain to this House why Steven 

Cormons was not allowed to participate in the democratic 

process? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 

to the member opposite. I want to first of all put on record that 

we fully support the right of every government employee to run 

for public office. But we also know that employees, at the same 

time that they’re carrying on their current position, have to 

examine whether a political office will put them in a conflict. 

So that’s what we were doing. And I think that’s what the NDP 

did because, as far back as 1986, we had a form which is called 

“Approval for outside employment and activity and/or 

disclosure of outside activity or interest which may create a 

perceived conflict of interest.” This is the type of form or 

process that went through. It was revised in 2011. And this 



1060 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

discussion is to ensure that the public interest, that a conflict 

isn’t perceived. But, Mr. Speaker, after the discussion last night 

we have made an effort to make sure that we are looking at not 

only Ministry of Social Services, but of the Public Service 

Commission. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What the minister 

fails to state in her response is that the individual’s supervisor 

said that there was no conflict. And even if there was a conflict, 

Mr. Speaker, the individual would be able to recuse himself 

from a decision if something came up if he was a councillor. 

 

It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, because when we look at the 

current Sask Party MLAs, we know some served as civil 

servants. We know that some worked for Crown corporations. 

We know that some worked in health regions. My question to 

the minister: why this double standard for employees in her 

ministry, and what message does this send to civil servants 

across Saskatchewan? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After our 

discussion last night, I had the opportunity to talk not only to 

the ministry but the Public Service Commission, and I 

understand the process they went through. But I felt and our 

ministry felt that maybe it was time that we talked to the 

Ombudsman, and this morning, or this afternoon, we have done 

that. And in light of that discussion, we are in the process of 

asking the Ombudsman to review the conflict of interest policy 

and advise whether there are changes required. Mr. Speaker, we 

want to ensure that everybody has the opportunity to hold 

public office and make sure that there is no conflict of interest. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Tuition Fees and University Funding 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday students at 

the University of Saskatchewan learned that there will be an 

average tuition increase of 4.7 per cent. Students studying 

public policy and public administration will see their tuition 

jump by 13 per cent. Mr. Speaker, for students who are 

studying finance, the increase will be a whopping 29 per cent. 

My question to the minister: did he know that his government’s 

actions would result in a tuition increase of up to 29 per cent at 

the University of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, our track record in 

supporting our post-secondary students in institutions is rock 

solid. It’s $3.5 billion over the course of five years, Mr. 

Speaker. In fact, Mr. Speaker, our track record supporting the 

University of Saskatchewan is very significant. At the 

University of Saskatchewan alone, over the course of five 

budgets, we’ve invested more than $1.5 billion to the University 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know how significant it is for the institution to 

have the autonomy to set its own track. We also know how 

important it is to have the partnership. That’s why when we 

make reference to, for example, Brett Fairbairn, who is the 

provost at the University of Saskatchewan, he suggests that 

these incremental increases — in fact, Mr. Speaker, the average 

is about 4 per cent — these incremental increases are preferable 

to sudden large spikes. Because as the NDP know, Mr. Speaker, 

the members opposite know, in 2004 what they saw for the 

average student was a spike of 18 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s part of their track record, Mr. Speaker. Because at the 

University of Saskatchewan over the years, Mr. Speaker, that 

they were in power, tuition went up by 99 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. That was irresponsible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we’re doing is making sure small incremental adjustments 

in tuition, Mr. Speaker, make sure that affordability and 

accessibility are balanced with having the necessary 

requirements and necessary resources so that the institution can 

also focus on excellence. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What the minister 

conveniently leaves out is that when tuition went up in the 

1990s the government was facing massive deficits, something 

that members opposite on that front bench know a thing or two 

about, if they were actually willing to talk about it. 

 

The NDP froze tuition, Mr. Speaker, in 2005. Since 2005, 

provincial revenue has gone up 61 per cent and provincial 

spending, Mr. Speaker, has gone up 71 per cent. But students 

are no longer feeling the benefits like they did between ’05 and 

’08. Mr. Speaker, under the Sask Party alone, under their watch, 

we’ve seen average tuition has jumped nearly 16 per cent under 

this Sask Party government. 

 

My question to the minister: with provincial spending going up 

71 per cent since 2005, how is it that this minister can justify to 

students that their education should be less and less affordable? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, let me just quote the University of Saskatchewan 

Student Union president, Scott Hitchings, who has called the 

increases yesterday reasonable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As far as wanting to talk about the fate of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m happy to talk about the financial state of the 

province. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the only balanced 

budget of any province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we focus not simply on supporting our students, 

but also making sure that the conditions for growth also 

continue. Mr. Speaker, that’s why we have paid down more 

than 40 per cent of our debt, more than $3 billion, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, today there are more than 11,000 jobs open 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1061 

and available on the saskjobs.ca website, Mr. Speaker. We have 

the lowest unemployment rate in the country, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re focusing on the success of the students while they’re in 

their studies, but most importantly that they can stay in 

Saskatchewan and succeed right here in their careers. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is the latest in a series of 

blows that we’ve seen to students at the U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan]. Last month, Mr. Speaker, we came to learn that 

this Sask Party government was transferring almost $100 

million of debt on to the university books. We also learned, Mr. 

Speaker, that this government was choosing to shortchange the 

university when it comes to their operating grant. A 

StarPhoenix editorial recently, Mr. Speaker, called this action 

short-sighted. And for many students it is a cause for concern, 

Mr. Speaker, because they know that as tuition increases and 

financial pressures are felt on the campus, tuition will continue 

to increase in the years to come. 

 

My question to the minister: what does he have to say to the 

students who wonder, the students who wonder how this Sask 

Party government can have millions of dollars for more 

politicians but they insist on making students pay more, making 

education in the province less affordable, less accessible? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 

factually incorrect when he starts talking about what it’s going 

to cost. It’s not going to cost anything extra to have extra 

MLAs. It’s going to ensure better representation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we can say, Mr. Speaker, what we can say is 

we’re going to ensure, we’re going to ensure, Mr. Speaker, that 

we continue to make investments like the 3,000 per cent 

increase in student residence, Mr. Speaker. But we’re also 

going to take the words of Richard Florizone, Mr. Speaker. U of 

S financial position is the result of a very strong support of the 

Government of Saskatchewan in recent years, support that has 

given us an envied position among our peers. Mr. Speaker, at 

the University of Saskatchewan, students can see the success of 

these investments. 

 

Whether we’re talking about new investments in residence, 

whether we’re talking about making sure that we were able to 

complete a project started by the members opposite, the 

Western College of Veterinary Medicine that they simply put 

tarps on, Mr. Speaker, we continue to make investments — $1.5 

billion, Mr. Speaker — for the students on that college campus, 

Mr. Speaker. We know how significant that is for today and 

into the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for the Film Industry 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 

know there are members in this House who believe the film 

employment tax credit is a good thing. But interestingly 

enough, especially in light of this government’s decision to axe 

the credit, they’re not all on the opposition benches. 

 

I’d like to quote from the June 2001 Hansard where the 

member from Wood River had this to say, “The tax credit, film 

tax credit has contributed greatly to the overall growth of the 

province. Not only from a cultural aspect but also in terms of 

overall economic growth.” And he had this to say, “The Film 

Employment Tax Credit tell us this. You give a tax credit, you 

create more jobs, you get more young people working, and you 

get more economic spinoffs.” 

 

To the minister: does he agree with the member from Wood 

River, his colleague around the cabinet table? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We 

certainly welcome the member’s question. We need to begin by 

reading some of the facts into the record, Mr. Speaker. Most of 

the film employment tax credit is actually paid out to 

companies that don’t even pay taxes in our province. In fact 

over 98 per cent of the funding is paid out as a direct grant and 

less than 2 per cent is paid out as an actual tax credit to 

companies that pay income tax in our province. 

 

Here are the facts. We know from the last four years that we 

have facts for — 2006, ’07, ’08, and ’09 — that in that period a 

total of $45.3 million was paid out under the program. Of that, 

$44.7 million was a direct grant. There was hardly anything for 

tax reduction at all. In fact the average income tax payable that 

was reduced is less on average than $10,000 per year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our goal is a win-win program that supports the 

industry by reducing income taxes payable in our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s not just the 

member from Wood River and the Minister of Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing who has spoken in favour of the film 

tax credit and the benefits to Saskatchewan when we provide 

incentives for businesses to work in our province. The current 

Minister of Social Services had this to say in the House in May 

2001: 

 

For proof, all we have to do is take a look at what 

happened to a small sector of the economy that’s dealing 

with a film employment tax credit. We see more jobs, 

more young people, more economic spinoffs. It just 

doesn’t get any plainer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Thousands of people from across the province of all political 

stripes would agree with the Minister of Social Services: it does 

not get any plainer. While in opposition, members of this 

current government spoke in favour of this tax credit and were 

in fact encouraging the government to create other tax 

incentives for businesses too. 

 

To the minister: how is it that this government said one thing 



1062 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

while they were in opposition and are doing the exact opposite 

now? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, here’s what’s actually on the table. The Premier 

suggested a real tax credit program that reduces the income 

taxes of Saskatchewan-based film companies. The Premier’s 

also suggested turning over the sound stage facility so that it 

can be run by the film industry for the film industry. Mr. 

Speaker, the Premier has also suggested more research into 

digital production, which we know is the future not only of the 

film industry, but of all creative industries here in this province. 

We’ve heard the Premier’s suggestions. We now await a 

response from the film industry with great interest. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Because after all, Mr. Speaker, we know the 

Premier knows best. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, not that long 

ago, there was even more support for the tax credit from 

members who now sit on the government benches. In April of 

2001, the current Minister of Health was in favour of this tax 

credit. He had this to say: 

 

. . . but in the long-term, we can see that we would attract 

more business, not just in the film industry — which this 

is targeted for which we [do] applaud, we agree with — 

but there’s so many other areas that we could look at this 

for. 

 

To the minister: when did the applause come to an end? When 

did this government decide the film industry was no longer 

worth it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ll 

never have enough time to read contrary opinions, but we’ll 

start and we’ll do the best we can. There was a very 

enlightening interview on CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation] radio, Thursday, March 29. The program was Blue 

Sky, with host Garth Materie. He was interviewing Professor 

Bob Tannenwald from Massachusetts who said, “I think film 

tax credits are highly cost-ineffective ways of creating 

economic development.” He said, “There are much more 

cost-effective ways of creating jobs and income for 

Saskatchewan than film tax credits.” He also went on to say, 

“Film tax credits rob Peter to pay Paul. They don’t pay for 

themselves and the competitive aspect of each province offering 

film tax credits is irrational and self-destructive.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve got more to read here too. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Tourism Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, last Monday Dick DeRyk, the 

Chair of the committee that helped create Tourism 

Saskatchewan, spoke against the government’s decision to 

remove Tourism Saskatchewan as an arm’s-length agency. 

 

Mr. DeRyk pointed to CEO [chief executive officer] Linda 

Haverstock’s history as the Liberal leader and said the 

government decision is politically vindictive and poorly thought 

out. The minister responded by saying, no other province has a 

stand-alone tourism agency. My question to the minister: he is 

removing the film tax credit even though almost every other 

province has one. How can he stand with a straight face and say 

the reason for the decision is no other province has a 

stand-alone tourism agency? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, we welcome the 

question and the opportunity to answer that particular question. 

We are following the lead of provinces in creating a Crown 

corporation for tourism because it is a recipe for success. We 

are not following their lead with respect to the film employment 

tax credit because it is a recipe for failure. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the minister likes to reference 

to the 2009 review as evidence of his consultation and the 

reason for the decision to remove Tourism Saskatchewan as 

arm’s-length agency. The minister is picking and choosing what 

he wants out of the report. On page 35 the review clearly states, 

“One of the key areas of agreement among all parties to this 

review is Tourism Saskatchewan should remain an arm’s length 

organization from government.” 

 

My question to the minister: prior to the budget and the 

government’s decision to remove Tourism Saskatchewan as an 

arm’s-length agency, who did he consult with? Who told him 

they want government to take complete control of the tourism 

industry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, 

Mr. Speaker, I have to wonder if the members of the opposition 

have actually read the whole tourism review report. If they did, 

they would know that it calls for a single point of entry into 

government for the tourism industry. That’s what a Crown 

corporation is going to do. If they had actually read the whole 

report, they’d know that it challenges our government to take 

more of a leadership role with respect to supporting the 

industry. That’s also what the Crown corporation will do. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if they’d read the whole report, certainly 

they would know that every other province has already brought 

support of its tourism industry back into government. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s what the Crown corporation is all about. I 

suspect they take time to read the whole report because right 

now all they’ve got is, they’re standing up there with their hair 

on fire saying, we’re social democrats and we oppose the 

creation of a Crown corporation. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s just 

not working. 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1063 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, in light of all the concerns I 

have heard from members of the tourism industry, and I know 

the minister has also been receiving letters, emails, telephone 

calls, my question to the minister: will he pull the Bill and leave 

the Tourism Saskatchewan as an arm’s-length agency? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for . . . excuse me, the 

Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — It’s close enough, Mr. Speaker. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we too have our testimonials. Here’s one 

from Chris Brewer, president and CEO of the Saskatchewan 

Snowmobile Association, who writes: 

 

I would like to pass along congratulations for the 

development of the new Crown corporation that will host 

Saskatchewan’s tourism interests. This is a very positive 

move forward for Saskatchewan [he says] and it’s been a 

long time coming. Keep up the good work [he advises]. 

We look forward in working with you and all your people 

in keeping Saskatchewan the best place to live and play. 

 

And Greg Dionne, the Chair of the northern tourism 

Saskatchewan region says: 

 

I would like to pledge my support to the Government of 

Saskatchewan for the bold step they have taken and to 

help make tourism in Saskatchewan what it should be, a 

leader in economic growth. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s fine and dandy, but 

I know for a fact Tourism Saskatchewan did out a survey. Over 

600 people responded, members responded. Almost 70 per cent 

disagree with this government’s decision to turn Tourism 

Saskatchewan into a Crown corporation. So again, I’ll repeat 

the question. My question to the minister: will he pull the Bill 

and leave Tourism Saskatchewan as an arm’s-length agency? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, before the election the 

NDP supported Crown corporations. Now that the election is 

over, things are obviously different. Now they’re against Crown 

corporations and they’re sounding the alarm, worried that we 

might actually create one. Mr. Speaker, there’s only one reason 

they would oppose that, and that’s because it’s a Sask Party 

initiative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is disrespectful of the industry and it’s party 

politics at its lowest. As pointed out in the review, everybody 

else is going down this path. It’s a recipe for success, and we’re 

going there too. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 298 through 349. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled questions 

298 to 349, right? Tabled. I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answer to question 350. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 350 has been ordered. [Inaudible 

interjection] . . . I already said orders of the day. It’s 

government orders. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 36 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 36 — The 

Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a 

second time, and on the proposed amendment moved by Mr. 

Vermette.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 

again I’m very pleased and honoured to stand today in the 

Assembly to speak at length about the challenges with this 

proposed Bill. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as we sit and spend the afternoon talking 

about the challenges on Bill 36, I think the people back home, I 

would certainly encourage them to do a number of things, as I 

did in my previous comments, is to start writing letters and 

sending emails and getting petitions going to do one thing that I 

think 99 per cent of the people of Saskatchewan want. And that 

is to have less politicians as being proposed by the 

Saskatchewan Party government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amount of politicians we have in the Assembly 

is fine. We have 58. And what’s happened now with this 

particular Bill is the Saskatchewan Party wants to increase the 

number of MLAs in this Assembly by three. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s one of the reasons why, as an opposition, we’re standing 

up today. We’re standing up to tell the Sask Party government 

we don’t need more MLAs at the cost of millions of dollars, not 

because you’re simply cutting programs that are very essential 

to Saskatchewan. And what you’re doing with those savings is 

you’re hiring more politicians, Mr. Speaker, which I believe is 

not something that people of Saskatchewan want. 

 

Last week, Mr. Speaker, when we had the conversation on this 

particular Bill, I asked a very simple, very humble question to 

the Saskatchewan Party government. And the Saskatchewan 

Party government, the challenge that they got from the 

opposition at the time was to have a public debate, Mr. Speaker, 

and then have a plebiscite, a public vote as to whether the 



1064 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

people of Saskatchewan want more politicians as opposed to the 

programs that were identified for cuts under the Sask Party 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And some of those cuts, Mr. Speaker, were very harmful and 

were very, they were poorly thought out. And Mr. Speaker, 

they’re doing more damage in the long run to Saskatchewan 

than ever before. And I think that’s really important that the 

people back home, whether they’re listening to the Assembly in 

Regina or Saskatoon or Lloydminster or Buffalo or La Ronge, 

it’s important for them to know that you can indeed be part of 

the process that changed the Sask Party government’s mind 

about adding more politicians and at the same time cutting 

programs that are really important to the people overall, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now I was going to . . . Certainly I want to be able to get some 

of the quotes from the Children’s Advocate because I need to 

explain, I think, for the sake of people that are out there that are 

not sure what this Bill is about, I want to be able to explain to 

them back home what exactly is happening. Mr. Speaker, what I 

want to point out is this Bill, Bill 36, that’s what the Bill 

number is, and what is being proposed by the Saskatchewan 

Party. 

 

The title of the Bill is to deal with the constituencies 

amendments Act, which means they’re going to redraw all the 

constituencies in Saskatchewan, relook at how the 

constituencies are designed. And they look at a number of 

different factors. And what they want to do is go from there to 

see how many more MLAs that they need to add, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s what the Bill is actually about. 

 

And what the Saskatchewan Party want to do, Mr. Speaker, is 

they want to add three more politicians at a cost of millions of 

dollars to the people of Saskatchewan over time. And we don’t 

think that’s a very good idea. So that’s what this Bill does. It 

requires the redrawing of boundaries and the constituency, and 

the net result is the Saskatchewan Party want to have three more 

MLAs, Mr. Speaker, added to this Assembly. 

 

And quite frankly from my perspective, Mr. Speaker, not only 

is the manner in how they’re redrawing the boundaries is of 

some concern, but the fact that they’ve eliminated children from 

their assessment to the process. They’ve cut programs and so on 

and so forth. And nowhere else have we heard throughout 

Saskatchewan, certainly from the opposition perspective, that 

people want more politicians. That’s not exactly what we heard 

at all from any corridors, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that’s what is happening with Bill 36, and I want to really 

begin to point out to the people back home that may not have 

heard the first address in which we spoke about why we don’t 

need more politicians. Mr. Speaker, I’m going to rattle off some 

of those numbers that I rattle off time and time again because 

it’s important that people know what is the reason for adding 

more politicians in Saskatchewan. 

 

The argument that the Sask Party make is, we have greater 

population so we need more MLAs. The answer is not at all 

factual, Mr. Speaker, because they’re gerrymandering the 

process, which is a serious, serious problem to do one or two 

things: (1) is to eliminate the counting of children when they do 

these constituency boundaries; and (2) is they’re cutting 

services, Mr. Speaker. They’re cutting services, whether it’s in 

Highways or health care or whether it’s a film tax credit. 

They’re cutting all these great programs and these great people 

for the simple reason and the simple excuse of adding more 

politicians, Mr. Speaker. And that’s something that’s really 

important that the people of northern Saskatchewan, of eastern, 

southern, and central Saskatchewan, and western Saskatchewan 

ought to know. 

 

I think it’s important that if we look at the Bill itself, Mr. 

Speaker, what typically happens is they will go through a 

census every four years or six years, I’m not sure of the exact 

time frame, and that census will determine what the different 

population numbers are throughout the region. And those 

census numbers could be skewered. They could be mixed up; 

they could be wrong at times. A good example of that is the 

northern town of La Ronge, that’s a good example. My 

colleague was explaining to me that some of the conversations 

he’s had is where they think there was some serious mistakes 

made in the census for that particular community and that I 

guess they’re doing a recount now. And my colleague, the 

member from Cumberland, has been very, very instrumental in 

making sure we’re aware of the issue, which is great for us to 

know. 

 

And that’s one of the things that’s really important, is many 

times they do make mistakes in the census. And there’s 

examples of the mistakes made in the census throughout the 

whole part of our province. So I think it’s important that people 

know that after the census, whether there’s mistakes made or 

not, that we have to go forward with those numbers unless 

there’s a very strong appeal. And in the case of La Ronge, I 

guess, there is a new count coming in. The appeal has been 

successful. The member from Cumberland and I want to 

congratulate the mayor of La Ronge who’s done a great job to 

make sure that this issue was raised with the appropriate people. 

And that’s something that we need to highlight, that sometimes 

there are errors made in a number of areas when it comes to the 

census. 

 

So when you look at how this particular government wants to 

redraw all the constituency boundaries, Mr. Speaker, they’re 

clearly going to manipulate the process. They’re going to 

manipulate the process to try and do a number of things, and 

you can see evidence of that right in the actual Bill itself, Mr. 

Speaker. And by manipulation I’m talking about the fact that 

when you usually do up a boundary, you include everybody — 

every man, woman, and child, every minority, every elder, 

every working parent, every elderly person. It doesn’t matter 

where you’re at in the world, that you should count. 

 

But what happened was the Saskatchewan Party, in their effort 

to gerrymander the process, they are now going to exclude all 

the children under the age of 18, Mr. Speaker. So as they do this 

new boundary constituency assessment and they work through 

this Bill, typically every government includes everybody. The 

Saskatchewan Party is saying, no. If we include everybody, we 

might run into problems with our electoral plan here, so we 

need to manipulate it a bit further and we need to exclude 

young children under the age of 18. Then if we could get them 

off the way, if we could get these children off the way, then 

maybe we can again manipulate the process so we can fix up 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1065 

this electoral boundaries to our liking. And not only will we do 

that, but in the process we will cut programs. We will cut 

services. And we’ll do so at will. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

exactly what the problem is with this particular Bill. 

 

Now I want to go back to the point that I made, Mr. Speaker, 

and this particular Bill. The amendment that we proposed on 

Bill No. 36, which is An Act to amend The Constituency 

Boundaries Act, 1993, because: 

 

The Bill excludes, in determining the constituency 

boundaries, the counting of [all] the young people of 

Saskatchewan, who deserve to be counted to determine 

the representation within this Legislative Assembly; and 

further, 

 

The Bill increases the number of members of this 

Legislative Assembly by three, which is an unnecessary 

increase of politicians to represent the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the points are very, very clear. They’re very, 

very straightforward in the amendment. We’re saying, how 

you’re doing it is wrong. The people of Saskatchewan didn’t 

ask you to add more politicians. They asked you to do a number 

of things. And those things were not to go to war with labour. 

Those things were not to go to war with the teachers. Those 

things were not to go to war with the film industry, those people 

that were working for years and years with the government, the 

highways workers, and so on and so forth. The people of 

Saskatchewan didn’t ask this government to do that in the last 

election, didn’t ask them to add more politicians, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s exactly what they’re trying to do with this Bill, at the 

same time excluding all the young people. And that is 

absolutely, totally unfair, Mr. Speaker, and people have to hear 

about this far and wide. And that’s one of the reasons why I’m 

very pleased to stand up today to again petition the people of 

Saskatchewan, to appeal to the people of Saskatchewan to stand 

up and tell the Saskatchewan Party government that this Bill 

No. 36 is wrong. We never asked for that. We didn’t want more 

politicians. And if we did have more politicians, we didn’t want 

the process gerrymandered to try and benefit the Saskatchewan 

Party. And that’s exactly what this Bill is going to try and do, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:30] 

 

So again I want to again make the reference that I did in some 

of my earlier statements about how the amendment that we 

propose would correct the injustice that is being proposed by 

the Saskatchewan Party government for their own political 

agenda, Mr. Speaker. And I look at the point and when people 

ask me, well how is this done in other jurisdictions? How is it 

done in Alberta? How is it done in Manitoba? How is it done in 

BC [British Columbia]? How is it done in Ontario? Like all the 

provinces that skirt our border, how do they do the constituency 

boundaries? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what we have to ask the question is that for 

every constituency boundary, how many people are in each of 

those boundaries, Mr. Speaker? And I think in Saskatchewan, 

it’s roughly about 17,000. I’m not sure of the exact amount, but 

this is of course going by memory. But I think it’s about 17,000 

in every boundary, where the people of Saskatchewan have 

17,000 per area. 

 

Now in Alberta I think it’s 51,000. In Manitoba I think it’s 

21,000, if the number is correct. In Ontario it’s 120,000 people 

per area, that that’s how they do their count. So I think it’s 

important that people know that out of all the provinces in 

Western Canada, Saskatchewan has the lowest amount of 

people per area, per constituency, which is at roughly 17,000. 

 

Our neighbouring province of Manitoba which has a similar 

population, a very similar population, Mr. Speaker, they have 

the number of constituencies, people within those defined areas, 

roughly about 22,000. So we have 17; they have 21. I believe 

Alberta’s got 51. I think BC’s got something like 58; and 

Ontario, of course the granddaddy of them all, they have 

120,000 constituents . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to caution the member on 

repeating himself. He has given those numbers in Hansard on 

page 938, 940, 988, and 989, and twice on 990. I think that the 

member has repeated those enough, and I would ask him to 

carry on his debate with new information and new debate rather 

than repeating himself. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Now, Mr. Speaker, these debates took over a 

period of a number of days. And, Mr. Speaker, based on some 

of the communication advice that I got, if you don’t reflect the 

numbers at least 11, 12, 13, 14 times, people back home don’t 

register those numbers. So I think it’s important that we 

continue with those particular information about what areas and 

how many people per areas of our neighbouring province 

because this is a new debate, a new day, and there’s obviously 

new audiences. And I think it’s important . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I caution the member not to debate the rulings 

of the Chair. This is one debate even though it’s taken place 

over a number of days. The member may continue without 

repetition. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to again point out 

that one of the arguments that we had made over time here is 

that the fact that we want to make sure that the whole issue of 

fairness is something that we think about during the process of 

this particular debate. And I think we want to continue 

emphasizing the whole notion of the fairness, and to make sure 

that people out there know all the facts attached to this 

particular Bill. And we talked about the numbers of the 

different jurisdictions that have much, much more than we have 

in terms of the density of the constituents per area, and we can 

go into those numbers ad nauseam here because people have to 

know them. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that that information is 

certainly getting out there. 

 

Now under this particular amendment that we talked about, Bill 

No. 36, An Act to Amend the Constituencies Boundaries Act, I 

want to talk about how this may impact a number of 

communities in my constituency. If you look at the number of 

communities I have, there’s approximately 25 polling stations. 

Some of the communities have a couple of polling stations. 

 

But in my particular region I’ve gone to, whether it’s Garson 



1066 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

Lake or whether it’s Descharme Lake or whether it’s to 

Patuanak, Mr. Speaker, and all those trips that I take, and to all 

those communities that I visit and all the meetings that I 

attended — and I’m going to ask my colleagues as well — I 

don’t think anywhere in those meetings that we have attended 

where people are saying, as our MLA we’d like you to go 

forward to Regina to argue for more MLAs. I’ve not heard that 

in any corridor that I have gone to or any home that I have 

visited or any public function that I’ve attended. And I would 

also suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Party 

members probably never got that as well. 

 

And now the point that I would raise is that they speak about 

trying to do things in a manner in which the public may not be 

fully aware of what the issues are. And I don’t think that’s fair 

at all because had they ran on adding more MLAs and more 

politicians in the last election, Mr. Speaker, I think they would 

have got an earful, Mr. Speaker. No question about that in my 

mind. 

 

So why are we doing it three months after the last, or five or six 

months after the last election, Mr. Speaker? It’s because they’re 

hoping that people forget. And that is not a fair assessment to 

make. And again as I’ve gone to my constituency — Beauval, 

Green Lake, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Buffalo Narrows — not once did I 

hear them say we want more MLAs. What we’ve been hearing 

them say, the people of northern Saskatchewan say is, we want 

adequate housing. We want training and employment for our 

young people. We want to have affordable medicines for the 

elderly people. Those are the real issues, Mr. Speaker. Those 

are the real issues that the people of the North are advocating 

for and asking for when I travel to their homes and to their 

communities. They’re asking for decent, safe highways. 

They’re asking for opportunity in their own lands. They’re 

asking for respect for the fact that they have traditions and 

customs and they have lifestyles. And they have all these things 

that they’re asking for and to be acknowledged for that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in all these conversations, in all these 

conversations I have not once heard as their MLA, can you go 

get more MLAs? Because, Mr. Speaker, that’s not what the 

people of Saskatchewan want. They want programs. They want 

services, and they want them as quickly as possible, Mr. 

Speaker. And what they’re seeing is the continual disregard and 

disrespect from the Saskatchewan Party on many fronts, and 

this is the latest attack on democracy, compliments of the 

Saskatchewan Party. And again that’s an important message. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I, again, travel my area, I meet with many 

elders and many of the old people, many of the older people 

that talk to me about a bunch of issues, a bunch of issues that 

really have provided challenge for them overall in many ways. 

And, Mr. Speaker, and whether it’s affordability, whether it’s 

housing repair, whether it’s health care, whether it’s help in 

trying to make sure that they have opportunity for their 

grandchildren, or whether it’s a way that means they can build 

up their community and build up their hope and build up the 

future. Mr. Speaker, I have great, great teachings from the 

elderly people. And they often talk about some of the 

challenges that they had as young people and now some of the 

challenges that they have today. 

 

In all those discussions, whether I’m sitting there talking to an 

elder in Patuanak, as I mentioned, or Green Lake, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s all about having a decent amount and a healthy amount of 

acknowledgement of their issues. That’s what they’re talking 

about. And when I talk to them about these issues, Mr. Speaker, 

not once did I ever hear any of them say, let’s have more 

politicians, Mr. Speaker, not once. Their issues are very, very 

direct. They’re very basic, and they’re very straightforward. 

 

Now what this government has done, when we talk to the elders 

about the challenges that they face, is they increased the drug 

prescription plan. So now some of these elders are paying more 

for their drugs. And that is actually something that the elders 

don’t appreciate and don’t like. And secondly, the other point 

that they raised is that they’re paying more for ambulance care. 

And that is all, that’s all added onto the challenge they have 

now trying to make ends meet on a monthly basis, Mr. Speaker. 

When you sit down with an elder, given their fixed income, 

what’s probably really important to a lot of the elders is making 

sure that they have heat for their home, that they pay their rent, 

that they have power in their home, that they have food in their 

home, Mr. Speaker. And sometimes, the last thing that the 

elders look at, Mr. Speaker, is even the whole notion of getting 

their regular medicines. There’s many times I think a lot of 

elders cannot afford some of the medicines that they need. And 

a lot of times they simply don’t buy those medicine, and they 

take great risks with their health and therefore their lives. 

 

And I wanted to make sure that we tell . . . that that message 

gets to the Saskatchewan Party, that it wasn’t about more MLAs 

as proposed in Bill 36. What they’re asking for is fairness. What 

they’re asking for is some help. What they’re asking for is to 

make life as they age a lot better, a lot easier, and to at least in 

their old age grant them the sense of peace and grant them a bit 

of serenity in terms of knowing that the future is bright for 

Saskatchewan and that that new Saskatchewan includes them, 

Mr. Speaker. And that’s something that obviously is not part 

and parcel of the Sask Party’s thinking. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when I talk to the elders, it’s these issues that 

they make reference to. These are the points that they’re 

bringing forward to me as their MLA. And not once have I ever 

heard an elder saying, oh, by the way, on your way to Regina, 

can you try and get some way to get us more politicians. Not 

once did anybody ever say that in any of the travels that I’ve 

undertaken as an MLA. And, Mr. Speaker, I would ask my 

colleague members . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . My 

colleagues in the Assembly are saying, absolutely not, that 

nobody’s ever asked for that. And I can almost guarantee you, 

Mr. Speaker . . . And I dare any one of the Sask Party MLAs to 

get up and stand up and say, yes, somebody did ask me to have 

more MLAs. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s very quiet over there 

because the fact of the matter is nobody wanted this. Absolutely 

nobody wanted more politicians, and that’s what the Sask Party 

is trying to do with this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I will point out that we need to meet with a number of 

different groups and organizations, and the elders being one of 

them. I want to highlight what their concerns are. Their 

concerns are not what’s part of Bill 36. Now let’s go to the 

young kids, Mr. Speaker, the young children that this Bill 

excludes. And like I mentioned at the outset, I’ve got many, 

many . . . I’m very lucky in a sense of having some very healthy 

grandchildren. And I’ve got some grandnieces and 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1067 

grandnephews, Mr. Speaker. In our family, the future looks 

bright based on the fact that these young children are really, 

really trying hard in school. They’re well-disciplined. And of 

course they hold the future for certainly my family, and I have 

great confidence in that future because of them. 

 

Now how does this affect them overall? Well when you come to 

any community in northern Saskatchewan or any community as 

a result of this Bill, automatically every grandchild, every 

great-grandchild, every child that’s out there under the age of 

18 are no longer counted in the Sask Party world. Based on this 

particular Bill, every grandchild, great-grandchild, and child 

that’s under the age of 18 are no longer counted under this Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, and that’s a shame. That is an absolute shame 

because people out there have great hope and pride for and to 

their children. 

 

And now we see with this particular Bill the Sask Party saying, 

based on our political agenda, based on the fact that we need to 

get this thing done, we are not going to count the children 

because that’ll skew our plans up overall, and thus we will not 

be able to achieve the creation of three new positions which 

require three new constituencies and three more MLAs. That’s 

exactly what is happening here. 

 

So the people out there that are listening, that are paying 

attention to the Assembly on this fine afternoon, Mr. Speaker, 

the fact of the matter is the Saskatchewan Party has said plainly, 

as a result of this Bill, when we do our assessment on each 

constituencies, we’re not going to count any children or 

anybody under the age of 18. And that’s full stop, period. 

That’s what is being proposed in this Bill. 

 

Contrary to what was done before, Mr. Speaker, when you done 

a electoral boundaries, what you actually done, every 

government done, is they counted all the people within that 

area. They made sure everybody counted, Mr. Speaker. Now 

what happens obviously if you look at that particular scenario, 

the Saskatchewan Party don’t want to do that. Why? Because it 

really messes up their plans to gerrymander this constituency 

boundaries Bill to try and position themselves to be the 

benefactor of having more MLAs. That’s what they’re trying to 

do, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why from our perspective as an 

opposition MLA and certainly as an opposition caucus we’re 

saying absolutely not. 

 

We don’t want to see Bill 36 come through. We don’t think it’s 

a great idea. Adding more MLAs is not what the people of 

Saskatchewan want. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how much 

louder and how many more times you’ve got to say it in this 

Assembly for the Sask Party to get the message. And I think 

they are getting the message from a lot of their people because 

on this side we tell them ad nauseum that people in the province 

didn’t ask you to do this. It wasn’t anywhere part of your 

election platform. It wasn’t discussed during the campaigns. It 

wasn’t even spoken about. Five months after the election, six 

months later, all of a sudden, bang, this Bill comes out of 

nowhere. 

 

And all of a sudden we’re starting to see that there was a 

ulterior plan, that there was a motive that they had in their plan 

all this time to really begin to change how the democratic 

process works in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I say to them 

as a collective, shame on all of you because that’s not what this 

is about. You’re supposed to be fair and open and honest with 

the people of Saskatchewan, and this Bill is contrary to all those 

practices. They know it. We know it. And the vast majority of 

people in Saskatchewan are starting to realize, Mr. Speaker, that 

they’ve been had as a result of some of the activities attached to 

this Bill, Bill 36. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out as well, you look at some 

of these points, look at some of these points, and I talk about the 

children again. I spoke about the elders. I’m going to speak 

about the children again at greater lengths, Mr. Speaker, at 

greater lengths. 

 

[14:45] 

 

You know I listened to the Minister of Justice talk about how 

could I look my constituents in the eye when we have more in 

this constituency than that constituency, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, look them in the eye and say, did you guys want more 

politicians? Same principle applies. And look them in the eye 

when you say, do you want your children counted in the future 

of Saskatchewan? Look them in eye and say, oh, we didn’t 

propose this because it was a new thought. Absolutely not, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This has been on the books for a number of years with the Sask 

Party. It’s all been planned by the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 

Speaker, and this was their most opportune time, following an 

election where they hope nobody make any deal about this, 

where there’s come and go and it’d be pretty much done. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s not what they anticipated, was to have the 

opposition grab this particular Bill and talk to the people of 

Saskatchewan as we are doing so today. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would point out to the many families that are 

out there, and you’re starting to see a disjointed, confusing 

message from the Saskatchewan Party because you don’t know 

what exactly is meant by the Bill, by this Bill, where it excludes 

all your children and grandchildren that are under the age of 18. 

And you begin to ask the questions, well what happens if they 

turn 18 next year? Well they don’t count next year. What 

happens if we again go and find out that we’ve actually had 

some bad information as sometimes Census Canada makes 

some very, very big errors in how they count people. Well that 

doesn’t matter after the fact, Mr. Speaker.  

 

What they’re trying to do is get this Bill through this session so 

the people in the next two or three years will forget about this 

Bill, will forget who bought them more politicians and less 

programs and less workers, Mr. Speaker. But our job as an 

opposition is to make sure that people never forget. That our job 

every day and every opportunity is to get up here and tell 

people, don’t forget that this is how you were treated in 2007 or 

2012 and the fact that after the election of 2011, that these guys, 

the Saskatchewan Party brought in this Bill that really it’s 

something, the people of Saskatchewan, that nobody, nobody 

wanted at all. The people of Saskatchewan did not want this 

Bill. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s important is that the amendment 

that we propose, and this is really important that people out 

there listen to the amendment to their Bill that the province put 



1068 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

forward. And the amendment is, this amendment that we 

propose reads as follows that: 

 

“this House declines to give second reading to Bill No. 36, 

An Act to amend The Constituency Boundaries Act, 1993, 

because 

 

The Bill excludes, in determining the constituency 

boundaries, the counting of the young people of 

Saskatchewan, who deserve to be counted to determine 

the representation within this Legislative Assembly; and 

further 

 

That this Bill increases the number of Members of this 

Legislative Assembly by three, which is an unnecessary 

increase of politicians to represent the people of 

Saskatchewan.” 

 

That’s what our motion is on the Table as we speak, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And we’re asking all the people of Saskatchewan to take notice 

of this Bill, take notice of Bill 36 where the Saskatchewan Party 

is trying to add three more politicians into the mix. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s not so bad if you were to do it properly, fairly, 

and to make sure that there was some good reference to other 

jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, that I spoke about earlier. And what 

we’re finding out, Mr. Speaker, is that they didn’t do any of 

that. 

 

And there is nothing here in this Bill that is about fairness and is 

about doing the right thing. It is all about a political process and 

manipulation that is worse, Mr. Speaker. That’s what this is 

about. This is about manipulation, and as I mentioned in 

previous points, that this an affront to democracy as a whole. 

And, Mr. Speaker, people have to know about that. People 

throughout the province have to know. 

 

Now as I mentioned at the outset, the young children. And 

again I go to a number of communities. And I want to point out, 

Mr. Speaker, that during my travels, one of the great values of 

being an MLA is you get to meet many people. You get to meet 

many families. You go to many functions, and you try and meet 

them in different aspects of their life, Mr. Speaker. And as I 

travelled . . . And one of the examples I want to make about the 

value of the young people in northern Saskatchewan and why 

they should be counted in this Bill is because in northern 

Saskatchewan, there are so many tremendously gifted and solid 

young people, Mr. Speaker. It’s amazing the amount of young 

people we have coming out of the North. And the fact that these 

gifted young people are going to be building the future of our 

area and our province, it gives me great confidence in their 

future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to talk about a group of young kids that I met in 

Buffalo Narrows. I took a tour of the school one day, and I met 

a bunch of young kids that were grade 8, grade 9 kids. And we 

spoke to them about a number of things, Mr. Speaker. And 

these are the young, bright minds of the future. And as I sat in 

that room and I listened to these young grade 8 and 9 kids, you 

know, they spoke about a number of things that were really, 

really important to them. And the environment was important 

for them. Training was important for them. The future of 

Buffalo Narrows was important for them. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

sat there for almost two hours with these students, and they had 

a wide variety of concerns. And the insight that these young 

kids had at Twin Lakes High School was amazing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the things that they spoke about that I thought was really 

important is the whole future of politics. You know, they asked 

me my history, how I got into it, where I was from, what helped 

me get to, you know, to become a MLA. And I spoke about 

education to them, the value of education, the value of the 

teachers at Twin Lakes School, the values of the board that 

governs the school, the value of constantly pushing themselves, 

of striving to be really good, whether it’s in sport or academics 

or whether it’s in community building. I told them it’s all about 

making sure that the future looks bright for not just yourself and 

your family but your community and your region. 

 

And we had those good conversations back and forth. And what 

kept on, crept into my mind, Mr. Speaker, when I talk about this 

particular Bill, is all those young, bright minds at that meeting 

and in that forum, all those young kids under the age of 18 were 

now excluded from this electoral process as a result of Bill 36 

that was presented to this Assembly by the Saskatchewan Party 

government, Mr. Speaker. And to me I think that would be a 

great shame. And I’m not sure, I’m not sure how I go back to 

them, Mr. Speaker, and engage that same young group again, 

knowing that this Bill is going to exclude them in any kind of 

political process to determine the constituency boundaries. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s important that people out there know that 

that’s an absolute crying shame when that happens in this day 

and age. 

 

So I want to point out, when we sat and talked to those young 

people, what was some of the other issues that they brought 

forward, Mr. Speaker. And I’m simply, I’m simply advocating 

on their behalf when they talk about things like the future of 

their community. They also brought forward the whole issue of 

the environment, that they were concerned about the quality of 

lakes. They’re concerned about what is happening in their area. 

They’re talking about the commercial fishing industry. They’re 

talking about the construction industry, the mining industry. 

 

And these young, inquisitive minds, you know, these grade 7 

and 8, I can tell you right now, Mr. Speaker, that some of the 

thoughts and some of the questions and the points that they 

raised during this forum was absolutely beautiful. And the 

reason why it was beautiful, Mr. Speaker, is because they had a 

good grasp of what’s going on. These young kids in grade 8 and 

9 at the Twin Lakes School in Buffalo Narrows, they had a 

good grasp of what’s going on. 

 

They understood the fact that there’s this huge activity in the oil 

and gas in Fort Mac [Fort McMurray], they call it. And they 

also knew that some of the activity around that area was also 

having an impact on the environment. And they asked questions 

about that. How much impact is the Fort McMurray oil sands 

having in our region? Because it’s only about 70 or 80 miles 

from here. And certainly they had those discussions. And they 

wanted to bring a message I think forward, and I think they’re 

going to continue working on that message is, how do we begin 

to mitigate those damages to our environment overall as a result 

of all the tar sands activity in Alberta? 

 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1069 

Now the young people there want to see some action on that 

front, Mr. Speaker, and that’s what I mean when I was actually 

. . . I was astounded by the depth in which they were talking 

about this issue, and that’s important that the people of this 

Assembly, the people of Saskatchewan know that these young 

kids, whether they’re in your school or whether they’re in my 

school or whether they’re in your neighbouring community 

school or whether they’re in preschool, Mr. Speaker, they ought 

to count when you determine the future of Saskatchewan, given 

the fact that they’re bright, articulate, they’re intelligent, and 

they’re committed to our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what this Bill does, what this Bill does when you start 

looking at the constituency boundaries and the design of those 

boundaries, they’re not taking into account that grade 8 or that 

grade 9 class in Twin Lakes School at Buffalo Narrows. They 

no longer count when you’re looking at designing a 

constituency boundary because the Saskatchewan Party said 

we’re going to not do that any more. We’re only going to 

involve those people of the age of 18 and older. Anybody under 

the voting age is not included in our Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is a crying shame. That is a crying 

shame because it’s not right. It is not the right thing to do. Why 

are we doing it in that fashion, Mr. Speaker? I just don’t 

understand. I have no idea. I cannot grasp why the 

Saskatchewan Party would exclude all these young, bright, 

articulate people because they’re not the age of 18. Why would 

they do that, Mr. Speaker? That’s the biggest question that I 

have of this Sask Party government as a result of this Bill. Why 

are you excluding the young people when you’re doing this 

kind of work? Why? That’s the biggest question I think overall, 

Mr. Speaker. And I think quite frankly that question is going to 

be answered over time. 

 

Now what I’m going to tell the people of Saskatchewan is that, 

as you look at those young kids and you talk to them, and 

there’s many great grandparents and great parents and they 

really educate their children. They talk to them about the future. 

They position them well. They’ve got some good, strong 

support, and they have great love and they have great hope for 

their children. Everybody has that, Mr. Speaker. Now what 

happens if some child gets up and says to you, well I’d like to 

get involved in this process, but I can’t because I’m now under 

the age of 18. Don’t I count? Don’t I count? And, Mr. Speaker, 

based on this Bill, they don’t count. Based on the Saskatchewan 

Party’s Bill 36 to redraw the constituency boundaries, they 

don’t count. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to ask a number of people and 

organizations that might be paying attention to this Assembly 

this afternoon, whether it’s a school group or whether it’s a 

bunch of students or whether it is a bunch of professional 

people or seniors, Mr. Speaker, why don’t we start a 

movement? Why don’t we start a process — why don’t I count? 

A process where we would phrase a movement of some sort 

saying, why don’t I count, so we’re able to defend our young 

kids, Mr. Speaker, our grandkids. When we look at the political 

process and the future of Saskatchewan, I would challenge 

people out in every part of this province to stand up and begin a 

movement, why don’t I count? Because that’s the most 

important thing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That’s what this Bill does. It takes away the recognition of our 

young people and of our youth and of our children and of our 

grandchildren when we determine the political future of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And they have said, the 

Saskatchewan Party has said to these young people, you don’t 

count on how we do this. We are not including anybody under 

the age of 18, and that’s it, Mr. Speaker. And that’s kind of a 

shame, as I mentioned at the outset. All these young people that 

we speak to, a lot of young people, it’s discouraging to hear 

when you look them in the face and say, well you don’t count 

because this Bill excludes you. 

 

Now I would challenge every single member of the Sask Party 

caucus over there is to talk to these young people and explain to 

them why they don’t count in the assessment. Now the minister 

obviously talked about looking his constituents in the eye and 

saying, well I got more constituents here; how could I look 

them in the eye? That was his message. Well our immediate 

response was, how could he look them in the eye and saying, 

well the last election I didn’t ask for more MLAs and now I am. 

And how could you look at the young children in every riding 

in the eye saying, well you don’t count. Why you don’t count? 

Because we have an agenda and we’re going to fulfill that 

agenda, and that agenda requires that we don’t count you. But 

we’re going to simply make the motion, and we’ll talk to you 

later about how you could count. But that comes later. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is not fair to a lot of young people and 

young families out there in Saskatchewan. It’s an absolute 

shame, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill is still being proposed by that 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that as again going back to the 

reference of these young children, and as you watch them begin 

to get involved with the debate around the room, it was really 

nice to see that they were having their points and their 

counterpoints. And they spoke about a lot of things. But 

paramount to I think the feeling in the room, I really wanted to 

make them feel that their issues and their points and the points 

and the concerns they were raising did matter. It did count, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And absolutely, I still absolutely believe that to this day that all 

the points that they raised, their issues were important to me. 

Because as they grow older, they’ll certainly have more 

influence on our lives. Because as adults right now, you know, 

we’re going to count on them to be the next health care worker. 

We’re going to be counting on them to be the next politician or 

be the next teacher, and the list goes on. And these young 

people are there, and we’re trying to build up our future through 

them. We’re trying to make our future strong through them. So 

why would we exclude them? Why? Why would we exclude 

them? That’s the biggest fundamental question — why? 

 

So I’m going back to my point. I would really encourage 

classes or people out there that may be listening to begin a 

campaign of why don’t we count, a campaign that you’d have a 

petition. You’d have presentations in front of the Assembly. 

You would have videos. You would do the Internet thing. Like 

there’s all kinds of opportunities, very cost-effective ways in 

which you can begin to mount a campaign on why don’t I 

count. 

 



1070 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

[15:00] 

 

And that’s the important thing, I would say. I would share it 

with the young people that are out there or to the parents that 

feel really strongly about this. I would say to them not to be 

used or manipulated in this process as dictated by Bill 36 by 

allowing your children to not be counted. I would say to them: 

stand up; get those young people organized; get them 

motivated. If they want to get your help, then great. If they want 

to do that on their own, that’s even greater. Get them involved 

because this is not fair to the democracy of Saskatchewan, but 

more so it is fundamentally not fair to those young people under 

the age of 18 whom this Sask Party government is saying 

doesn’t count when we redraw our constituency boundaries, a 

practice that was done previously where everyone counted and 

everyone was included, Mr. Speaker. So that’s one of the things 

that I think is important when we talk about our amendment. 

The fact is that it is the number one point we raise: why are the 

young people excluded from what we’re trying to do today, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I look at some of the other points that a few 

of my colleagues made in their presentation. And I think it’s 

important, as we heard from members from the city here, from 

Saskatoon. We’ve heard people from La Ronge. And we also 

hear, we know members from the other areas of the province as 

well, the people in general, they don’t want to see more 

politicians. I think that message is getting through. And I think 

there’s going to be more and more people that are going to 

bring this issue forward. And as much as the Sask Party 

members want to deny that it’s not an issue, Mr. Speaker, they 

know it’s an issue, and the people of Saskatchewan know it’s an 

issue. 

 

The media is starting to pick up the information that this is not 

necessarily a smart thing to do at all. In fact I wouldn’t mind 

getting that quote from one of the papers where they 

characterized the motion to have three more MLAs, and I think 

the reference was the silliest idea ever, and it may even be 

stronger language. I think the language that the media used in 

reference to this Bill, Bill 36, to add three more MLAs, and I’m 

quoting here, Mr. Speaker, and I do believe my quote is right, 

but the media referred to this as the stupidest thing that the 

Saskatchewan Party’s done. And those are quotes right from the 

media, Mr. Speaker, because again I think they realize and the 

people of Saskatchewan realize that this is not what they ran on. 

This is not what this is about. This is kind of an odd thing to 

come out of nowhere. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in the opposition, we don’t think it’s an odd 

thing that came out of nowhere. We think this is part of a deep 

plan that the Saskatchewan Party has to manipulate and 

gerrymander that process to their benefit, pure and simple, Mr. 

Speaker, and straightforward and cut, as I’ve presented. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am going to ask the question about . . . 

And this where the numbers again, I go back to the numbers. It 

doesn’t make any sense that we have those kind of numbers in 

other jurisdictions and yet we’re trying to argue that we need 

more here. We have the lowest number of constituents now, Mr. 

Speaker, compared to all our Western Canadian provinces and 

yet, and yet if you look at the notion that these guys are saying 

we need more, we can’t, we just can’t see the logic. We just 

can’t see the logic at all, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why it’s 

important that we tell people out there, we need to have you 

engaged. 

 

So again this whole notion of why we need more is a big 

question mark. And how we’re going to determine those 

boundaries, well we’re going to exclude the young people. 

Another question mark. Where does this thing come from? Like 

who proposes? Another question mark. Why didn’t you talk 

about this before the election? Another question mark. Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have these question marks 

all over this Bill. And those questions are fairly, fairly 

straightforward. Where in God’s green earth did any of the 

Saskatchewan Party candidates during the last election tell 

people, we are going to add more MLAs? And I can’t find any 

evidence of them saying that anywhere, Mr. Speaker. Not one 

person. 

 

And that’s what’s important, Mr. Speaker, is that they don’t 

want to have a, as I challenge each and every one of them, to 

have a public debate, Mr. Speaker, and to also have a plebiscite, 

a binding plebiscite on this matter. And you know, as I 

mentioned in some of the earlier points there was absolute 

silence from the government benches. Nobody has mentioned a 

peep once that challenge was out there, Mr. Speaker, because 

they know deep down that when you exclude children from the 

process and you try and manipulate the process to your 

advantage, then you’re not going to be too loud and proud about 

that, Mr. Speaker. So I want to again point out that it is quite 

amazing that, that you look at some of these points that they’re 

raising and it doesn’t make any sense at all. 

 

And one of the points that was actually pretty funny back home, 

and I know a few people watching the proceedings, when I 

make reference to the fact that this government made comments 

about how PEI [Prince Edward Island] does this. Prince Edward 

Island — it’s the smallest, the smallest province in the country. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they looked far and wide to find some other 

province that’s done this and how they’re doing it. And they 

didn’t talk about Manitoba. They didn’t talk about Ontario. 

They didn’t talk about Alberta, didn’t talk about the territories. 

Mr. Speaker, they said, well down in PEI, way down east in 

PEI, that’s how they do it. That’s how they do it in PEI. So 

what Saskatchewan is going to now, now going to copy exactly 

what PEI does for their election. 

 

And that’s how silly this whole motion is, Mr. Speaker, and 

how silly this whole Bill is. Because quite frankly, you look at 

this, and they’re going down to Prince Edward Island now to 

get leadership on how to rig elections, Mr. Speaker. And that is 

an absolute shame. That’s an absolute shame. It’s almost . . . 

It’s a joke as far as I’m concerned when you do that kind of 

activity to try and justify cropping up a Bill such as Bill 36, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There is no question in my mind that you look at the amount of 

people that are being excluded and it’s not very fair at all. 

Because you look at, I think it’s a quarter of a million, almost 

25 per cent of our provincial population are people under the 

age of 18 years of age. Those 25 per cent of the people that are 

excluded under the age of 18, Mr. Speaker, I would ask them 

now, in a very public way, I would ask them to get organized. 

And whether you want to name it why don’t we count campaign 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1071 

or some other campaign, get it going. Because you have so 

much opportunities through a letter writing campaign, through 

petitions, through social media, through school group or 

organization, through the local council, the mayors, and 

certainly through the school divisions. Get involved and ask 

them why don’t we count in this whole process? 

 

Because it’s important that the people of Saskatchewan send 

this government a message. We elected you to do certain things. 

You’re doing things contrary to that. And one of the biggest 

things and the biggest evidence of how we’re doing things 

contrary to that is Bill No. 36. So I would ask all the schools 

and any groups and organizations that are out there, is to get a 

campaign going. Get a campaign going to tell this government 

that you don’t support Bill 36. And furthermore that if they 

insist on moving forward with Bill 36 that we ought to have a 

public vote, a plebiscite on this matter, and make it a very open 

public debate. Let’s hear all the arguments. Let’s sit down and 

hear all the arguments as to why this thing is important to the 

Saskatchewan Party and go from there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again we hear a lot of mute silence across the way, Mr. 

Speaker, because that’s something that they don’t want to do, is 

go back to the people to ask them if they want more MLAs. It’s 

the people of Saskatchewan that say, absolutely not. The people 

of Saskatchewan say, no way, Saskatchewan Party, do we need 

more MLAs. We reject that idea, and we don’t want them. And 

that’s exactly what the people of Saskatchewan would say, Mr. 

Speaker, if they had the opportunity, if they have the 

opportunity to a public vote on this Bill, Bill 36. 

 

So come on, accept the challenge to have a public vote on this, 

and let the people of Saskatchewan decide. And if the people of 

Saskatchewan decide to have that option, well it’s their choice. 

And we would obviously sit here and we would support that 

choice, Mr. Speaker. But give them the opportunity to decide if 

they want this Bill done or not, Mr. Speaker. They simply won’t 

afford that opportunity to the people of Saskatchewan that want 

to stand up and say, no to more politicians. They want to say, 

yes, include our young kids, and above all else don’t use 

millions of dollars for politicians at the expense of some very 

essential programs, Mr. Speaker, such as support for medicines 

for seniors, such as a film tax credit and such as making sure 

that the kids have decent services in school and certainly have 

the protection to be a child in this great province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I just want to point out that there was . . . If 

you look at some of the arguments that the Saskatchewan Party 

have made — and this is what they’re telling a lot of people too, 

and I understand there was a few interviews that were given by 

a few of the MLAs on the Saskatchewan Party side — and 

when they’re asked about the specific question, some of the 

backbenchers were asked specifically about this question, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve seen a few of their videos and a few of their 

interviews. And right on cue, Mr. Speaker, every single one of 

those, I think three or four backbenchers that were making 

comments, right on cue they grabbed their song sheet. And they 

said, oh, we have a balanced budget. That’s what they said back 

in response, you know, to this question. 

 

And people everywhere, you kind of looked at each other and 

said, that wasn’t the question. The question is, why are you 

putting this Bill through to add more politicians? Again, you go 

back to the song sheet: oh we’ve got a balanced budget. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, you know that’s an absolute . . . For brand-new 

MLAs to do that, to not have good thoughtful responses to 

really hard-hitting questions, Mr. Speaker, this shows the exact 

amount of thought that was put into this Bill by the 

Saskatchewan Party, which was minimal. Their political agenda 

was what was the objective. And quite frankly I think overall 

that communication even with their own backbench was 

minimal at best, Mr. Speaker. But now they’ve got to sing from 

the same song sheet, and let me tell you that tune that they’re 

singing is not something that the people of Saskatchewan want 

to hear too often for too long. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that in Quebec, in Quebec 

they have a population of 7.9 million people, almost 8 million 

people. And they have 125 members in their National 

Assembly. Of course what’s important is that I talked about 

Alberta’s numbers. I talked about Manitoba’s numbers, BC’s 

numbers, but I haven’t spoken about Quebec’s numbers, Mr. 

Speaker, and I think that’s really important. They have 125 

members of their Assembly, which they call the National 

Assembly. They have 63,800 constituents for every 

constituency represented in the National Assembly. Mr. 

Speaker, if you do that 63,000, that’s three and a half times 

more constituents that they have in Quebec than what we have 

in the province now. So if you look at Saskatchewan compared 

to Quebec, they have three and a half times more people in their 

constituencies than we have in ours. 

 

So now we’re trying to figure out, well if they have that 

problem in a challenging Quebec, why aren’t they asking for 

more seats, Mr. Speaker, there? And not one single MLA in 

Quebec or any member of the National Assembly is asking for 

more MLAs or more of their kind in the National Assembly. 

They’re not asking for more politicians there, Mr. Speaker. So 

why is Saskatchewan doing that? Three and half times more 

people per riding in this area than we have, and not one of them 

in the National Assembly are asking for more politicians, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s our whole point when you look at Quebec. 

 

Now I go back to the point that if you exclude the young 

people, that’s something that needs to be addressed. And I laid 

out the challenge here that’s quite clear and quite direct. I spoke 

about the value of our young kids, and I made particular 

reference to the school in Buffalo Narrows, the Twin Lakes 

School. And when I sat with those grade 8 and 9 students, Mr. 

Speaker, I can tell you that they want to be actively involved in 

politics. They want to be able to be counted, and they have 

great aspirations for the region, for their families, and for their 

future. So why aren’t they included? Why aren’t they being 

counted in this particular Bill? They have absolutely no idea, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I’m going to go back. I’m going to be visiting these same 

kids, and I’m going to tell them exactly what the problem is 

here. That’s because we have not had, we have not had the 

opportunity to hear what they say that they’re not being counted 

nor they’re being assessed when they do the provincial 

constituency boundaries. And that’s something that I think 

really has to happen, Mr. Speaker. It is clearly what has be 

taken into account is you’ve got to figure out a way how you 

can engage young people, not exclude them. 



1072 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

Now, Mr. Speaker, on the Aboriginal communities per se, both 

the Métis communities and especially the First Nations 

communities where this has the greatest impact, I would 

suggest that the population of young people in the Aboriginal 

community is greater, much greater than that of the 

non-Aboriginal community. And I would hazard a guess, Mr. 

Speaker, anywhere from 65, up to 65 per cent of some of these 

reserves, First Nations lands and the Métis communities, the 

huge amount of these communities, whether it’s inner city or 

whether it’s on a reserve itself consist of young people, very 

young people. And, Mr. Speaker, this has a more profound 

effect and impact on them than any other group, I would 

suggest. Not trying to diminish the other groups, but because of 

the population and the density of young people, of how they’re 

being excluded, Mr. Speaker. And that’s exactly what I think 

the Saskatchewan Party want to do. They want to exclude that 

density of young people that are in the First Nations land so that 

they don’t count in the future when they do these 

constituencies. That’s the objective, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if you look at some of the First Nations that 

dot our province, and again, there’s been a lot of MLAs that 

have visited a lot of the First Nations communities and the 

Métis communities in time, and I would ask anyone of the Sask 

Party MLAs, did they have those conversations? I would 

challenge any one of them today to stand up and say, yes, 

during the election somebody said to me, we want more MLAs. 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s not a peep from across the way 

because not one of them were told that they wanted more 

MLAs. And that’s what they refuse to acknowledge, and that’s 

what they refuse to address as a result of this particular Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now I would go back to the whole point, and obviously when 

you look at the population stats from all the other different 

areas, it’s something that people out there in Saskatchewan are 

beginning to know. They’re beginning to know the numbers of 

Alberta. They’re beginning to know the numbers of Manitoba. 

And now they know the numbers in Quebec. They know the 

numbers in BC, and of course in Ontario. And so they’re 

saying, well if that’s the case, why is the Saskatchewan Party 

advocating for more MLAs? Well that’s the big question we 

have. Why is the Saskatchewan Party advocating and promoting 

more MLAs in the province in a time when they talk about 

austerity in their budget, Mr. Speaker, in a time when they cut 

programs that are essential to the future of Saskatchewan, at a 

time to go to war with working people? Why all of a sudden are 

they trying to add more politicians instead? It just doesn’t make 

any sense in any way, shape, or form, Mr. Speaker. And that is 

something that people have to, have to certainly address. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I spoke about it very earlier, when you look 

at some of the young people that are being excluded. I’m 

assuming that the commission that will be established as a 

result of this Bill will begin their work, in probably the next 

three to six months we’ll have some idea what’s going on in 

terms of what they’re proposing. And what will happen now 

again when they do that work, the Bill is fairly clear that 

anybody under 18 will not be included in the assessment of 

these constituencies. So therefore, you know, there’s some 

parameters that this new commission has to work under, and we 

are certainly going to argue and look very carefully as to how 

they deal with the commission members. 

 

But I want to point out that you can find some really good 

commission members, but if they have the process spelled out 

to them, they have the parameters of what they’re allowed to do 

and, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that sometimes the confined 

space in which this commission can move in is going to be so 

problematic overall that what’ll simply happen is that at the end 

of the day the Sask Party will get their wish as to how they want 

to gerrymander the constituency boundaries and therefore try 

and benefit from that process. And they will have that set up 

through the Bill and it will be no fault of the commission. It’ll 

be no fault of the commission, Mr. Speaker. That’s exactly what 

was going on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s kind of a silly thing to do when you look at that overall 

because it doesn’t make any sense at all, doesn’t make any 

sense at all unless you buy the argument from the opposition 

that it’s all about a political agenda. It’s all about a set-up; it’s 

all about manoeuvring their political agenda to benefit them, 

Mr. Speaker. And that’s the shameful part is they try and deny 

it. And as much as they start denying it, Mr. Speaker, it’s no 

question in our mind, no question in my mind in particular that 

this is obviously a ploy on their part to get political and to 

certainly set themselves up in the future. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to go to the Children’s Advocate, if I 

can. The whole process of . . . As a result of this Bill, there is 

almost a quarter of our population that are going to be excluded 

from this government’s Bill to determine the constituency 

boundaries — 235,000 I believe. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s an 

absolute shame. 

 

Now the Canadian Coalition for the Rights of Children, I want 

to quote that today for the people that are listening and 

watching and the kids that are out there — the grade 8 and 9 

kids that I spoke to at Twin Lakes, the grandchildren that are 

out there, and my grandchildren. I spoke about them last week. 

Now the Canadian Coalition for the Rights of Children says Bill 

36, this Bill is a challenge to the rights of children, something 

the organization of the Canadian Coalition for the Rights of 

Children has worked hard to protect. So the Canadian Coalition 

for the Rights of Children don’t agree with this Bill at all, that 

they’re saying that this is challenging the rights of children. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how much more blunt and 

straightforward that that organization could become, but 

they’ve said it and they’ve said it quite clearly. 

 

The Canadian Coalition for the Rights of Children is a network 

of Canadian organizations and individuals who promote the 

rights of children. Its purpose is to exchange information, 

provide public education materials about the rights of children, 

about the rights of our children and our grandchildren. On 

November 1st, 2011 the Canadian Coalition for the Rights of 

Children realized a report titled Right in Principle, Right in 

Practice. Now, Mr. Speaker, “Right in Principle, Right in 

Practice assesses how well Canada [as a country] achieves the 

goal of creating a society where every child can realize their full 

potential.” 

 

And I want to be able to read that again. They commissioned a 

study and the report that’s called Right in Principle, Right in 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1073 

Practice. That’s what it’s called. And what this report does, 

“Right in Principle, Right in Practice, [it] assesses how well 

Canada achieves the goal of creating a society where every 

child can realize their full potential.” And, Mr. Speaker, those 

are really good statements, solid, strong statements when we 

talk that the right of every child to realize their full potential. 

One of the key points or subcategories of the report is, every 

child counts. 

 

Well not with Bill 36, Mr. Speaker. Not with this Bill and the 

Saskatchewan Party government’s decision to exclude children 

under the age of 18 in the electoral boundary count, Mr. 

Speaker. And there’s no question in our minds when we argue 

here in the Assembly as politicians that we have our job to do, 

and that is to contest what we think is an unfair practice of the 

Saskatchewan Party and to try and hold them to account. 

 

Now these other groups and organizations that watch the 

Assembly and see what’s going on, like the Canadian Coalition 

for the Rights of Children, they feel that this Bill 36 is a 

challenge to the rights of children. And, Mr. Speaker, it is 

amazing that these organizations get involved with that kind of 

activity to the extent they have been, and I commend them for 

that. I commend them for monitoring and for watching what 

happens in this Assembly and all the other Assemblies when the 

rights of the children are being compromised in some way, 

shape, or form for some nefarious objective. And, Mr. Speaker, 

I would suggest that objective is more political in nature, and, 

Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Coalition for the Rights of Children 

are not happy that this has been done. 

 

Now folks out there need to know that the Coalition for the 

Rights of Children is a network of Canadian organizations and 

individuals who promote the rights of children. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, if every child is going to reach their full potential, they 

also have to be involved in their community. That we have been 

talking about. And part of being involved in their community is 

being involved in the electoral process, and it’s knowing that 

they count. Now the Canadian Coalition for the Rights of 

Children understand that, that the children have rights. They 

need to be recognized. They need to be respected. They need to 

be nurtured. They need to be allowed to grow. They need that 

freedom, Mr. Speaker. They need to be able to spread their 

wings. There’s no question about that. That’s what this is all 

about. 

 

And the Canadian Coalition for the Rights of Children, well 

they obviously are not a political organization as well. Their 

primary focus is to look at, how can I make that particular area 

of this world better for children? And it’s a shame that the 

Canadian Coalition for the Rights of Children has to pay 

attention to Saskatchewan in this day and age. It’s an absolute 

shame. And what drew them to Saskatchewan to make an 

assessment on whether this is a good deal or not was Bill 36, 

Bill 36, an Act in which this Sask Party government has 

excluded every child under the age of 18 when they do the 

electoral boundaries. And, Mr. Speaker, that was not spoken 

about during the election. 

 

Now what would have been really nice, Mr. Speaker, is that 

during the election, if any of the Sask Party MLAs were to go to 

the doorstep and say, hi, I’m thinking of adding a few more 

MLAs, but in order for us to do this, we have to exclude all the 

children in the house and exclude your grandchildren. And 

we’re doing this because PEI is doing it. You know, this is how 

PEI is doing it. You know, imagine how many doors would be 

slammed in their faces, Mr. Speaker, if that’s what they 

approached the people with. And the amazing thing is, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s what this Bill does. That’s what this Bill does. 

 

So it would be nice if we could have the opportunity to tell the 

people of Saskatchewan that’s exactly what the Bill is doing. So 

I want to reiterate, and I wonder how many people would say 

what a great idea it is to add more MLAs. And had the Sask 

Party done that, Mr. Speaker, during the election, then I think 

there would have been a whole different story today, Mr. 

Speaker. No question about that, that they hid this from the 

people of Saskatchewan. They had this thing thought out long 

ago, Mr. Speaker. They had this thing out long ago. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Coalition for the Rights of 

Children, as I mentioned, is a network of Canadian 

organizations and individuals who promote the rights of 

children. And the purpose that they have is to exchange 

information, provide public education materials about those 

rights, and that there is no question that being involved in the 

electoral process is something that the kids would like to do. I 

think they have a genuine need, and they have a general 

understanding of how politics works. Some of them get really 

into it at a really young age. And it’s a shame now that we tell 

them that as a result of this Bill, you no longer count. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again, to exclude young people under the age 

of 18 . . . The point that the rights of the children organization 

would like to raise is that if every child, every child is allowed 

to reach their full potential, they ought to know that they count 

in the electoral process as well. And the question I have for the 

Saskatchewan Party: do the members on the other side of the 

House agree that if a child is going to develop fully, they also 

need to understand politics and in particular the political 

process? I think they need to, Mr. Speaker. I think everybody 

on this side of the Assembly thinks they need to as well. So I 

think it’s really important that that question be posed to the 

Saskatchewan Party. 

 

And I go back to my whole argument about the young people 

that are out there or the groups and organizations, I think you 

need to start up a process. Start a movement where you say, do I 

count? Or do we count? Or why don’t we count? Anything of 

that sort to send a message to the Saskatchewan Party. 

 

So the whole point again, you look at the Canadian Coalition 

for the Rights of Children. The message is: what kind of 

encouragement, what message, what incentive is being given to 

people under the age of 18 to learn about politics and the 

political process if they’re being told that they don’t count in 

the electoral boundary calculation? If Bill 36 is passed, and they 

are told through legislation that they don’t count, why would 

they get involved? What incentive do they have to learn about 

the province’s political history? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, every young person, you shut them out or 

you shun them or you scold them or you isolate them, they will 

withdraw. And if they know that they’re not valued, that they’re 

not counted, that they’re not going to be part and parcel of how 

this thing is all figured out, Mr. Speaker, they will withdraw. 



1074 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

It’s a natural reaction of young people that if they’re under that 

pressure, they’ll withdraw or they’ll fight, and they’ll become 

more of a problem later on if you don’t deal with it. 

 

And that’s what we can’t understand, why in this day and age in 

2012, in 2012, in the Saskatchewan Party world, the young 

people don’t exist. Why, Mr. Speaker? That’s a question I’ve 

asked time and time again as a result of this Bill. Why? Why 

don’t they count? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s important is that we would 

ask people, as I mentioned at the outset, we would ask the 

young people to get engaged. You can actually change this 

whether you’re in Buffalo Narrows, whether you’re in 

Cumberland House, whether you’re in the inner cities, or 

whether you’re in Melfort. You can count. You can count if 

you’d begin the process to get the Saskatchewan Party 

government to understand that you should be included in the 

political process, included in the count to determine where the 

political boundaries are, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that Saskatchewan is very proud 

of and I think overall every single person is proud of, that we all 

know that on both sides of the House that Saskatchewan has an 

interesting and lively political history. We’ve got some great 

debates, and we’ve got some great leaders and great people 

throughout time that have done a great amount of service to the 

people of Saskatchewan and the country. 

 

[15:30] 

 

One of the greatest things that I think is important is that one 

that has brought medicare to the province and certainly brought 

medicare to the country and produced Canada’s greatest 

politician, and that is Tommy Douglas. There’s no question, 

Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Douglas’s history and his legacy and his 

service to the people of Saskatchewan is all known throughout 

this great province and all known throughout the country. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, somewhere along the line, Mr. Douglas had 

to be encouraged as a young person to become active in 

politics. I’m not certain how old he was when he entered 

politics, but I can tell you that he probably was subjected to a 

lot of discussion, that he was probably included, and he was 

probably certainly pushed to the limit in terms of understanding 

how politics works by many people around him. So I would say 

that he reached his full potential as a young person and a young 

man. And he realized that politics was his calling and he got 

engaged. He got involved. 

 

And that’s exactly what I think would happen here in this 

instance, that when the Sask Party’s excluding young people, 

that you don’t know how many other Tommy Douglases there 

are out there amongst the young people that don’t like what’s 

happening in this world and can actually make a great change 

and be of great benefit to the province, to the country. And 

that’s our point, Mr. Speaker, about understanding history, 

about engaging in politics as young people or at a young age 

and making sure that we send the right message to the younger 

generation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, again what Bill 36 says to young people 

under the age of 18, what Bill 36 says to young people under 

the age of 18 is, don’t worry about politics. You don’t count 

anyway. That’s what the Bill is saying, Mr. Speaker, because 

we’re not going to count you when we do our assessment on the 

constituency boundaries. And that’s really important that 

message gets through. And that’s one of the things that the 

young people are angry about, and that’s why we keep telling 

them to make sure, make sure that you get up in the morning 

and that you somehow communicate with the Saskatchewan 

Party, the MLAs, by way of Internet or social media and to 

make sure that they get the message that you should count and 

you’re against Bill 36. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out, just to make sure I 

clarify that in this whole notion of trying to get coalitions and 

people together, it’s important to know that the Canadian 

Coalition for the Rights of Children work hard to protect those 

rights. And as I mentioned, the Canadian Coalition for the 

Rights of Children is a network of Canadian organizations and 

individuals who promote the rights of children. So what they 

want to do, Mr. Speaker, is that they don’t speak out against this 

particular Bill, they just speak about affirming the children’s 

rights. 

 

That’s what they’re trying to do here, that they’re saying to all 

of us, this great organization saying to all of us that children 

matter. And my only word, Mr. Speaker, is I don’t want them to 

come to Saskatchewan as a result of Bills like this that say, well 

they’re not practising what we think is fair for the future of our 

children. And that’s the important message and the important 

worry I would have as a result of trying to make sure that 

there’s groups out there that are going to fight for the children 

and the youth. And this is one group that I want to make 

reference to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the right in principle and the right in 

practice, the report, I have it in my hand here. And I want to be 

able to read a bit about the Canadian coalition that tries to 

promote the rights of children and what they’re about because 

it’s important that we heed the words of this coalition when we 

talk about the rights of children, that we listen to what they have 

to say. That’s really important, Mr. Speaker. So I want to read 

out really quickly that: 

 

The Canadian Coalition for the Rights of Children is a 

network of Canadian organizations and individuals who 

promote respect for the rights of children. Its purpose is to: 

exchange information; provide public education materials 

about the Convention on the Rights of . . . [children]; 

monitor implementation of the Convention in Canada; and 

engage in dialogue with government officials on child 

rights issues. 

 

Now that’s what’s important, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why I 

would ask the Saskatchewan Party to heed the warning that the 

Canadian coalition is going to defend the rights of the children. 

That’s important. What we don’t want is this Canadian coalition 

to focus on Saskatchewan as a result of this Bill, Mr. Speaker 

because they’re talking about, youth matter. They talk about, 

youth matter, children matter. We have to respect their rights. 

That’s their motherhood statement. That’s their mantra. And 

these organizations are good. They’re valuable. They’re very 

effective. They communicate well, and they’re powerful, Mr. 

Speaker. 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1075 

Now do we want as a province to have them come to 

Saskatchewan saying, well we’ve got a problem with a Bill over 

there that is contrary to what our message is? My suggestion 

today is that we don’t want the Canadian coalition paying 

attention to us in that negative way. So the warning is don’t let 

them get involved through this Bill because this Bill does 

something that I don’t think that they will be supportive of, 

which is excluding the rights of the young people. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would go out to again point out that it’s 

important that we understand who the Canadian Coalition for 

the Rights of Children are because they have a lot of history. 

They don’t just pop up and say all of a sudden out of the blue 

we’re going to start making these statements. These are 

organizations that defend the rights of children, Mr. Speaker. 

And we feel as an opposition that this Bill is contrary to what 

these groups are working towards, and contrary to working for 

the rights of children. We feel that their work has a lot of 

opportunity here in Saskatchewan if the Saskatchewan Party 

continues moving forward on their Bill that excludes all these 

young kids. Now, Mr. Speaker, some of the accomplishments of 

this Coalition for the Rights of Children, and I want to read out 

some of their accomplishments: 

 

Canada ratified the CRC [Convention on the Rights of the 

Child] on December, 1991 in the presence of the coalition 

and youth delegates from each of the provinces and 

territories. 

Children from all parts of Canada have participated in 

consultation on matters that affect them, with the support 

of coalition members. Canadian children have 

participated in the World Summit for Children, the Earth 

Summit, and the UN Special Session for Children, and 

other national and international events. 

The Coalition provided policy recommendations for 

Canada’s participation in the UN Special Session for 

Children, and for Canada’s Action Plan, entitled, “A 

Canada Fit for Children.” 

The Coalition provided a vehicle for Canadian civil 

society organizations to participate in the regular 

five-year reviews of Canada’s implementation of the CRC 

before the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child. 

Canada now has representation on the UN Committee for 

the Rights of the Child; this was one of the goals of the 

coalition, [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, the Child Rights Award: 

 

The award recognizes individuals or groups who 

demonstrated exemplary efforts to respect the rights of 

children as described in the UN Convention on the Rights 

of the Child. Recipients will receive a certificate, be 

honoured in an appropriate way, and be publicly 

recognized through the CCRC [Canadian Coalition for the 

Rights of Children] website and newsletter. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is really important that people know that this 

Canadian Coalition for the Rights of the Child has had a lot of 

accomplishments. It’s a very effective organization, and that’s 

the kind of organization I think we need in Saskatchewan to 

start popping up, popping up and start working against this 

particular Bill. 

 

Now we would hope we get many of these organizations 

involved in this Bill, and that’s certainly something we would 

openly ask them to get involved. But in Saskatchewan alone 

there’s great opportunity. There’s great opportunity for many of 

the groups out there that advocate for children’s rights to get 

involved with this Bill and begin telling the government, the 

Saskatchewan Party government, that the Bill is wrong in many 

ways and excluding the rights of a child or children or youth is 

not something that we should be encouraging here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to again point out to the people 

of Saskatchewan in general that it is obviously a plan here, that 

if you look at the structure of the Bill itself . . . And I made this 

point on three or four occasions but I need to make it again, 

primarily because people should know that when you design the 

Bill you put in parameters and you put in the conduct and you 

put in the process of what the Bill is hoping to achieve. Now 

what the Saskatchewan Party will argue, and I think we’re 

going to start hearing that more and more, is this is an 

independent process. We’re going to hire a judge; we’re going 

to hire a . . . maybe get somebody in the opposition to appoint 

somebody; maybe we’ll appoint somebody; and we’ll leave it to 

them to decide. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, you’ve got to be very careful is that’s not 

what’s going to happen. That’s not what’s going to happen. 

Yes, maybe we’ll appoint one of ours and maybe they’ll appoint 

one of theirs and maybe there’ll be a judge in the middle and 

people will think that’s it. What you’ve got to understand is this 

Bill is fairly descriptive as to what rules that this committee has 

to work under, what rules that this committee has to work 

under. 

 

That’s why the number three MLAs are in the Bill, because it’s 

been determined by the Saskatchewan Party already that the 

Bill is going to include three more MLAs. And so this group 

will get together and their basic rules are yes, you can appear to 

be coordinated in how you’re going to do this work; however, 

the parameters within the Bill are fairly prescriptive and they’re 

fairly tight. So you’ve got to follow these rules. And here’s a 

list of the rules, so go out and give the public the perception that 

we’re not interfering with it: that’s what the Sask Party’s going 

to say. But, Mr. Speaker, the Bill itself it’s quite clear that they 

have their agenda and something that they will certainly work 

towards trying to achieve. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would read some of the other notes on the 

children’s rights but I don’t think that’s necessary at this time 

primarily because, primarily because you don’t want to 

compromise the potential partners that are out there. And if I 

look at the whole notion of the Canadian Coalition for the rights 

of Children, they have not been actively involved with this 

particular file. We used our reference to them primarily because 

we think that there’s a connector between what the Sask Party’s 

trying to do and versus what their work entails, Mr. Speaker. 

And that work of course is protecting the right of a child which 

we think we’re doing as a result of our amendment to Bill 36. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, for those that may not have heard the 

numbers, I want to do numbers one more time, Mr. Speaker, 

and I won’t do those numbers again. But the numbers that we 

have, Mr. Speaker, for the other provinces and I want to use 



1076 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

these again, if you look at Saskatchewan, we have roughly 

18,000 people per riding. Manitoba has roughly 22,000 people 

per riding. Alberta has 43,000 people per riding. British 

Columbia has 53,000 people per riding. Quebec has 63,000 

people per riding. And Ontario has 125,000 people per riding, 

Mr. Speaker. And that’s the comparison that I want to do. How 

does Saskatchewan stack up to Manitoba? Well they have 3,000 

more people per riding. How do we stack up to Alberta? Well 

they have tons more per riding, BC even more and Quebec even 

more. And of course Ontario, 100 . . . almost six, almost seven 

times more people per riding than what is being proposed here 

in Saskatchewan. Those numbers I think, Mr. Speaker, need to 

be told by the people, and the people of Saskatchewan need to 

be heard time and time again if they don’t agree with this 

particular Bill. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to go back to our amendment just 

briefly so people know what we’re arguing about. I’m just 

going to update the folks that are listening or may have joined 

us. Bill 36 is a Bill that the Saskatchewan Party want to put 

forward. They want to add three more politicians to this 

Assembly. But in order for them to do that, they’ve got to do an 

assessment of all the areas. And they realized that they wouldn’t 

have much luck on going through this assessment if they’d done 

it the normal practice, which is to include everybody, so they 

put another rule in to exclude the children. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s a crying shame. So we stand up today and say, well we 

don’t support that. We don’t think it’s a great idea. And so 

therefore our motion that we made as an NDP caucus is, the 

motion reads as follows that: 

 

“this House declines to give second reading to Bill No. 

36, An Act to amend The Constituency Boundaries Act, 

1993, because 

 

The Bill excludes, in determining constituency 

boundaries, the counting of the young people of 

Saskatchewan who deserve to be counted to determine 

[the] representation within this Legislative Assembly; 

and further, 

 

That the Bill increases the number of MLAs by three 

which is an unnecessary increase of politicians to 

represent the people of Saskatchewan.” 

 

Now that is our amendment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I go back to the motion or the discussion I had on the 

commission itself. The commission itself, I’m assuming, will 

consist of three people. And the people of the province have to 

really be careful here because I’m assuming, and I could be 

corrected by . . . And nothing surprises me when it comes to the 

Saskatchewan Party. But I’m assuming that the NDP will be 

able to appoint one member. All right. And then the 

Saskatchewan Party will be able to appoint another member. 

And the third person will be a judge, I believe. So under the 

argument and the assumption that they’re going to have three 

people on this commission, Mr. Speaker, we could have three: 

one from the NDP, one from the Sask Party, and of course the 

judge. 

 

And people will say, well that seems fair. That’s what the 

people would say. Well, Mr. Speaker, what the problem is is 

this commission, even though we get to appoint somebody, and 

they have fairly tight rules they have to work with — and the 

rules are referred to in our amendment and in the Bill — the 

rule talks about adding more MLAs, three more. So this 

committee has to do that, whether they like it or not. And 

number two is this committee has to exclude the children in 

their assessment for the constituency boundaries. The Bill is 

very prescriptive in terms of what they are to do. 

 

So as much as we would want to respect the commission 

members and wish them well in their work because it’s 

important that we don’t target the commission members, it’s 

important for people to know that the commission members 

have some very, very strict rules in which they operate and they 

can’t deviate from the rules. At the end of the day, if this Bill 

passes, it’s about adding three more MLAs, and it’s about 

excluding the children. That’s exactly what the Bill does, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think in the long run, people of Saskatchewan 

are going to know that. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure of the timeline and the time 

frame in which we’re able to bring forward some of the Bill 

itself in terms of making it law. But I can tell you right now that 

there is a lot of organizations out there that still are not aware of 

the Bill itself. And by way of the discussion here in the 

Chamber, we’re going to try and bring out as much of the 

information on the Bill as possible, and that’s one of the reasons 

why we’re standing up today and speaking to this particular 

Bill. 

 

Now I would point out that in the Aboriginal communities . . . I 

mentioned this very briefly, and as you know we’ve got a 

number of Indian bands. I think the number is 74. And a lot of 

the First Nations land and the First Nations area and the First 

Nations communities, Mr. Speaker, I said at the outset that the 

Aboriginal, the young kids, the young children, there’s a huge 

percentage. I think it’s something as high as 60 per cent of the 

population. The general population of some of our Aboriginal 

communities are all under the age of 24. There’s a huge 

percentage of young people that are under the age of 18. So 

how does it impact them? How does it affect them overall? I 

would say to you, Mr. Speaker, that it is obviously a huge, a 

huge challenge. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Requesting leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 

is requesting leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to introduce some very special guests here today in 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker. Specifically I have my 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1077 

mother-in-law who’s joined us here today, Barb Willows. I’ve 

introduced Barb before to the Assembly. 

 

But the reason Barb’s here today is we have a visitor here 

today, and that’s Ms. Anne Glennie. And Anne Glennie is a 

constituent in the fine constituency of Cannington. Anne in fact 

is the sister of my grandmother-in-law, so my wife’s grandma, 

and an important part of the family. And I’ve known Anne for 

many years. She grew up in Windthorst. For many years she 

was active on the farm, a strong cattle operation, mixed farm 

and as well a teacher down in the Southeast. It’s a pleasure to 

have her today. She’s active in political life, in the social affairs 

of her community, and she’s an astute individual who cares 

deeply about her province. 

 

So I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming Ms. 

Anne Glennie. But I would also be remiss not to mention Mr. 

Kyall Glennie, her grandson who also joins her today. And 

Kyall has been very active in student politics and public affairs 

and have served with distinction in this building, working in 

years previous, and currently he’s serving and working with the 

official opposition. So it’s a pleasure to have these three 

individuals here today and I ask all members to join with me in 

giving the warmest of welcomes. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 36 — The Constituency Boundaries 

Amendment Act, 2011 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m also 

very pleased to recognize Ms. Anne Glennie and of course her 

grandson Kyall and of course all the other guests. I think what’s 

important is that more than likely, Mr. Speaker, when Anne had 

Kyall visiting her from time to time she may have explained 

politics to him on a few occasions. And young Kyall being the 

astute politician he is today, Mr. Speaker, it’s the whole point 

that we’re talking about, an engagement of young people, of our 

young people in our lives in the political process. That’s what I 

think is important that we want to recognize, and certainly I 

think some of the work that’s being done by Ms. Glennie and 

certainly her grandson today is a testament to my argument 

today in the Assembly that we have to engage our young people 

as quickly and as young as we can in the political process 

because that’ll serve Saskatchewan better in the future. That’s 

the key thing. It’ll serve the province of Saskatchewan a lot 

better in the future if we engage our young people. 

 

And right now, as I mentioned in the Bill, Bill 36, is we’re 

excluding 236,000 young people under the age of 18, Mr. 

Speaker, 236,000 which is 25 per cent of our population. And 

anybody knows in this world if you exclude 25 per cent of your 

opportunity for the future, then you’re not a very good manager 

of that future. And that’s what we’re arguing here today when it 

comes to the Saskatchewan Party, that we don’t think that 

they’re managing the future very well by actions of this sort and 

Bills of this nature, Mr. Speaker, not in any way, shape, or 

form. And that’s what the important thing to note. And when I 

see elderly people that come into our lives and into our 

Assembly and they’re accompanying a young person, we know 

that they had some influence, that they had some way of 

shaping these young people’s minds and encouraging those 

thoughts and nurturing those beliefs and certainly opening up 

the future to them. 

 

And what would’ve happened now, Mr. Speaker, if we had 

elders that told young people, well I’m not going to talk to you 

about this stuff because you don’t count. Imagine a lot of 

disappointed young people throughout this province that would 

probably just end up giving up opportunities and going 

elsewhere, Mr. Speaker. Thank goodness we didn’t have that 

particular attitude when we had our elders in place teaching 

young people about the value of participating, the value of 

being part and parcel of the political process, the value of 

knowing that you matter and that you count. Those values were 

handed down from many of the elderly people in the province. 

And obviously, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan party never got 

the memo because the memo . . . They’re obviously undertaking 

now is that under this Bill 36, under Bill 36 all those young 

people who have great opportunity and a great future and have 

great potential — that’s the thing you want to point out, the 

great potential that they have to make Saskatchewan a better 

place, a better place, Mr. Speaker — they are not being counted 

in this Bill and this electoral process by that government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And that is the solid point and why this amendment is so crucial 

to this opposition and of why I think when we see elders like 

Ms. Glennie come into the Assembly here, it reaffirms to us, it 

reaffirms to us that there is value in teaching our young people 

about Saskatchewan, that there is value in teaching them to 

become independent, to become proud, to become their own 

person, and to also become involved in the community — 

whether it’s politics, the arts, or culture — that they should 

become involved in all parts of the community, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s kind of one of the things I think is really important, 

is to nurture that opportunity as many of the elders did during 

our times as young people. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that we 

should applaud that, we should embrace that, and we should 

build on that. And when we see Bills like this Bill 36 coming 

along and not doing a darn thing to help foster that attitude and 

develop those young people by simply saying to them, you’re 

not included in our count; you don’t count any more, Mr. 

Speaker, this is absolutely a shame. And, Mr. Speaker, it is just 

not fair and it’s not proper for a government to undertake such a 

measure. Now, Mr. Speaker, that is a point I think that we need 

to raise and raise it on a consistent basis. 

 

Now going back to the Aboriginal communities as I spoke to 

about earlier, Mr. Speaker, we know that in the Aboriginal 

community that there’s some difficult times. The Aboriginal 

community, like many other cultures and other peoples, we 

have our challenges as well. You know, whether it’s poor roads 

or challenging health care or housing, we know that those 

continual problems need to be addressed. And there’s certainly 

a lot of good quality people and leaders that are trying to make 

that difference. 

 

But in the communities, the Aboriginal community, both the 

Métis communities and the First Nations communities I 

mentioned earlier, the huge concentration of young people, 



1078 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

there’s a lot of young people under the age of 18 and there are a 

tremendous amount. 

 

I can remember going into the community of Pinehouse for a 

visit. And as you travel in the community . . . And I was there 

for a wedding, and we were part of the wedding party. And you 

had to obviously hop in a vehicle and drive through the 

community. And as we were driving through the community of 

Pinehouse in this wedding parade, you can see the kids come 

out of the houses — just tons of young kids, just an amazing, 

amazing amount of young kids coming forward. 

 

Then you go to the schools and you see all these young kids. 

You know, they’re learning; they’re growing. They’ve got great 

teachers as well and they’ve got great leadership in the 

community. Everything’s moving in the right direction. And 

you can’t help but get a feeling of energy and optimism and a 

great sense of pride when you see all these young people being 

nurtured and being developed and being promoted and 

supported like that. It’s an amazing thing to see. 

 

And I just simply said, you know, to the person I was riding 

with, I said, where did all these kids come from? You know, 

they’re just all over the place. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the 

amazing fact within the Aboriginal community, as you might 

know, that you go to some of these communities, there’s tons of 

children and young people in these communities. And how does 

this Bill affect them? How does it impact them as well, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Well it’s a more profound statement when you go to a 

community that has 20, 30 per cent of the young people under 

the age of 18, when you go to another community that may 

have 50 or 60 per cent under the age of 18. It has a greater 

negative effect on them by saying to them, we’re going to 

determine whether this is part of seat A or seat B. But there’s 10 

of you in this room and there’s 60 in this room that are 

considered too young. We’re only going to count those 10. 

That’s exactly what this Bill does, Mr. Speaker. And you look 

at that profound impact it has on the Aboriginal communities. It 

is not fair. Again it just smacks of . . . It’s just an attack on the 

democratic rights of those young children, and I don’t think it’s 

fair at all. 

 

And the question that you ask, why are they doing that? Why 

are they silly enough to do that, Mr. Speaker? And we ascertain 

on this side the reason why they’re doing that is simply because 

they want to make sure that they manipulate the seats to make 

the change that they feel is necessary to get three more MLAs, 

and then they can certainly gerrymander those constituency 

boundaries as they wish. And that, Mr. Speaker, is not only 

unfair to this great hall of democracy, but it’s unfair to the 

veterans and especially unfair to the children that we’ve 

excluded for a politically motivated plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I think if you look at some of the economic opportunities 

that was referenced by the chamber of commerce, and I think 

the number that they raised was $90 billion of economic 

opportunity if we engage our Aboriginal population right. And, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not 90 million. I think it’s Professor Howe at 

the U of R. He spoke at the GDI [Gabriel Dumont Institute] 

conference or something, or spoke to some document, and the 

document clearly stated that if we engage the Métis and the 

First Nations and the Aboriginal people in general in a really 

good, growing economy, it could make a net difference of $90 

billion, Mr. Speaker — $90 billion for the future of the province 

of Saskatchewan if we do it right. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s an amazing opportunity. But what 

happens now, we turn around and we say that is an admirable 

goal. It’s an objective I think we should all strive to go for, is to 

get full employment and to create great opportunity for the 

Aboriginal people. So we need not exclude them any more in 

the economy; we need not exclude them for the opportunities in 

the resource sector; that we don’t play them off in a political 

battle, Mr. Speaker. We do things right by them. That’s one of 

the messages that I think that’s really key for a lot of people that 

are out there. 

 

Now we know that those mistakes are going to cost us some 

serious money if we don’t engage the Aboriginal community. 

We know that, Mr. Speaker, and I’m coming back to my point 

on this Bill. So if it means excluding some of the population 

that we have been, up to $90 billion, it’s going to cost us for the 

future of our economy. What happens now with this Bill if we 

exclude 25 per cent of our population and that 25 per cent is 

where all our vested interest for the future is, Mr. Speaker? And 

that is of course the building on the hope and the future for a 

better Saskatchewan and a greater Saskatchewan. 

 

And I go back to my point earlier. Why are they being 

excluded? And you know why, Mr. Speaker? Because if they’re 

included, all of a sudden there’s going to be a whole different 

makeup of how the constituencies are redrawn. That’s why. 

That’s why they were excluded. For no other reason. That if we 

included the total general population in the redesign of these 

boundaries, then Sask Party would not have had the benefit of 

being able to gerrymander those boundaries to their benefit. So 

what do they do, Mr. Speaker? They bring a Bill forward. They 

bring a Bill forward that sets out the rules and say, we’re going 

to have three MLAs and you’re going to exclude the young 

people when we redo the constituencies. And we know and 

everybody in Saskatchewan know that was what the intention is 

and that’s what the objective is. And we can see right through 

it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I tell the people of Saskatchewan, pay very close attention to 

this matter and don’t play that political game at all because this 

is not what this is about. We ought to be ashamed that we’re 

going to try and do things of that sort for political benefit. We 

should include everybody and make sure everybody counts for 

the future development of this province. So I’ll go back to my 

earlier statement about the whole notion of the Aboriginal 

community and the $90 billion opportunity they have for the 

economy. This professor that done the study, you know, from 

the U of S, and that professor was fairly straightforward and he 

had some very hard-hitting facts and took some very good, took 

a great amount of time to come to his conclusion. The study 

wasn’t done overnight. And he looked at the opportunities, he 

looked at the challenges, and he looked at how they can get this 

thing done properly. How do you get the Aboriginal community 

engaged to the extent they should be engaged? 

 

[16:00] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day the one number that 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1079 

stuck out, the one number that stuck out to almost everybody in 

the province was the $90 billion opportunity. That’s the number 

that stuck to everybody’s mind. In this phrase, in this day and 

age they talk about, money talks and the other stuff walks. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we note to the 

people of Saskatchewan that that $90 billion opportunity is 

something that we need to, we need to keep in the back of our 

minds. 

 

Now the other, the position I would take when it comes to the 

Aboriginal community is that if you look at that $90 billion 

opportunity and you translate that — and I would suggest 

maybe the population, the Aboriginal population’s about 15 per 

cent now and moving up — now if we take that same kind of 

principle of 15 per cent of the provincial population, we engage 

them in the economy to the extent we should, it’s a $90 billion 

opportunity. Now what happens, now this Bill is taking 25 per 

cent of the population which is all the young people under the 

age of 18. They’re taking them out of the equation now. So 

what is that going to cost us, not just for the economy later on 

down the road, but more so for the political process itself, Mr. 

Speaker, for the political process itself? 

 

That’s the point I would raise is that, how do we determine 

those costs? I wonder if the professor can actually do that, that 

kind of cost-benefit analysis of how this Bill excludes them 

from the . . . I wonder if that possibly could be an option for 

him to, you know, to look at and try and do. That would be a 

very, very interesting work and it would be something that 

would be of huge interest to a lot of people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I want to, if you look at . . . I said at the outset, the 

Aboriginal community are a bit more impacted by this, and a bit 

more profoundly. We’re trying to, we’re trying to see, okay 

now, if 25 per cent of a general population is impacted, what 

does that mean for political development, political opportunity, 

political thoughts, and so on and so forth? We can figure . . . I 

think we can have a pretty good way of trying to figure that out. 

But on the flip side, on the Aboriginal population, when you 

exclude 40 or 50 per cent of their population — because they’re 

all so very young there — what other negative effects will that 

have on their community? Because this has a profound effect. 

 

And that’s my point, Mr. Speaker, is that it is much more acute 

in some areas when you exclude the young people in some of 

the things you’re doing than in other areas. And I make 

reference to the Aboriginal population in these communities. 

It’s much, much greater than the non-Aboriginal population. So 

the effect and the profound effect would be greater on the 

Aboriginal front, I believe, than elsewhere. 

 

So as we move forward, as grandparents and as 

great-grandparents in some cases, you want to be able to look at 

your children in the eye or grandchild in the eye and saying, the 

future belongs to you. And I often do that, Mr. Speaker. I tell 

my young daughter, my young granddaughter — her name is 

Meika — whatever you want to do, Meika, the world is yours, I 

tell her. And of course Brodey comes running around the corner 

because he wants to be involved too. And I tell Brodey the same 

thing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, like I said at the outset of my presentation, I 

have a great confidence in my future because my grandchildren 

are there and they’re bright, they’re articulate, they’re healthy; 

and I thank God for that. And I am hopeful that they continue 

being bright and helpful and productive in their future. And if I 

look them right in the face and say, look, I really believe that 

the future is going to be great, because they’re young kids, and I 

tell them that every day that I’m with them. All of a sudden, 

they’re seven; they’re eight; they’re nine; they’re ten; and 

they’re on their way. And they may not need their papa as 

much, but I’ll tell you one thing, from the early stages of their 

lives I’ve always told them that the future’s theirs, and keep 

pushing. I’ve always made sure I took the time to tell the 

grandkids that because they basically listen to me and think I’m 

a great guy because I give them money, you know, and I think 

that’s really important. But you teach them as you go along. 

 

Now under this Act, all that work would be for naught. All that 

work that I may do with my two grandchildren, the oldest ones, 

will be for naught because as they begin to do the constituency 

boundaries, I guess in our house, my daughter and my wife and 

I would count. Meika and Brodey and Mila and Nixon wouldn’t 

count. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s a crying shame because 

these kids have great potential. They have great opportunity, 

and I want to engage them as I have, not just in the advice and 

how to live life, but on the political process as well. I think they 

need to be engaged. 

 

And the question that I think is paramount, a question that is 

paramount in this Bill is that I tell that to my young kids or to 

my young grandkids that they count. And all of a sudden the 

Bill says, no you don’t count because we’re not going to 

include them in the assessment. We then turn around and say, 

well why are they not including the young people? That is the 

fundamental question to this Bill. Why aren’t these young 

people included in the assessment for all the constituencies? 

Why aren’t they included? That’s the number one question I 

have on this Bill. Why have they been excluded? 

 

And I’ll tell the people of Saskatchewan the reason why. It’s 

primarily because it does not fit the political agenda of the 

Saskatchewan Party to manipulate this process under this Bill 

for their political advantage, so therefore they’ve done the 

obvious thing, and they excluded a lot of the young kids 

because they knew it had a greater impact in certain ridings than 

other ridings. And, Mr. Speaker, that is the bottom line. That is 

the bottom line as to why they’ve done that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the things that we often talk 

about, and I really think that’s an important point to raise as 

well, the Saskatchewan Party members were accusing me of 

being supportive of more MLAs, Mr. Speaker. And what 

they’ve done, as they’ve done today with the Ministry of 

Highways is they cut and paste a lot of our closing comments in 

the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and they misinterpret, they 

misrepresent what we say in the Assembly to their advantage, 

Mr. Speaker. And you can see it. And you can see it. You can 

see it time and time again that where they have taken something 

that I may have said and used it in a different context. And 

they’re very careful how they put the wording out there, Mr. 

Speaker. And I’ve seen evidence of it. And I’ve seen evidence 

of that today from the Ministry of Highways, the Minister of 

Highways accusing me of saying that the engineers are not, are 

not qualified, Mr. Speaker. 

 



1080 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

I looked in Hansard, Mr. Speaker, and I didn’t see no evidence 

of that. I didn’t see no evidence of that, and then all of a sudden 

these guys are saying, well that’s what you said. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I sit here and I, you know, we sit back and just smile at 

them because we know exactly their political agenda and the 

games that they play, Mr. Speaker. So that’s the same thing 

they’ve done with me on this constituency boundaries, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I said, given the fact that if we had the increased services, we 

had increase in the amount of workers, we had increase in all 

these other aspects of life, then and only then can we look at 

possibly doing this, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, what 

they’ve done is they turn it around, and again they manipulated 

that process to make it look like I was supportive of that Bill. 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s no way in any way, shape or form 

that I’m going to support this Bill at all, Mr. Speaker. Because 

the people of Saskatchewan don’t want this Bill, and the 

problem is the Saskatchewan Party members know it very well. 

They know it very well that he is . . . that the people of 

Saskatchewan don’t want this Bill. 

 

But that’s part and parcel of what we do in this Assembly. 

That’s part and parcel of what we do in the Assembly. And it 

would be really nice, Mr. Speaker, it would be really nice is if 

the Saskatchewan Party in the last election, as I said at the 

outset, would go up, knock on somebody’s door and say, you 

know what, look them in the eye and saying, we want to do a 

new Bill. And this Bill is going to increase the number of 

MLAs, and we’re going to increase the number of MLAs in the 

province. And we’re not going to, oh, that little child and 

grandchild running around in your house, we’re not going to 

include them in this assessment. And we’re going to start 

cutting costs because you’ve got to save money for more 

politicians. Why didn’t they do that, Mr. Speaker, during the 

election? 

 

You know why, Mr. Speaker? They’d be challenged away from 

that house so fast. And what gives them the right to do that 

today, Mr. Speaker? What gives them the right to do that today, 

six months after that, after they went to that doorstep, Mr. 

Speaker, six months after the election and now trying to 

propose this Bill? What gives them the right to do that, Mr. 

Speaker? They never asked the people of Saskatchewan. They 

never asked them if they could do this. They never asked them 

if they could do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the point that I would point out today is, I would ask them, 

the member from wherever he’s from, I would ask him, do you 

agree, do you agree to do a plebiscite? Do you agree to do a 

plebiscite, Moose Jaw North? Does the member from Moose 

Jaw North agree to do a plebiscite on this Bill, Mr. Speaker? I 

want to hear him say, yes or no. I want to hear him say, yes or 

no. And all of a sudden, he’s very quiet. He’s very quiet, very 

quiet. 

 

You know, and that’s the problem with the Saskatchewan Party, 

they need a backbench with a backbone, Mr. Speaker. Instead 

of reading from their prepared notes when they’re asked about 

the situation, about the only thing they say, it’s a growing 

economy and balanced budget. They better not deviate from 

those words, Mr. Speaker, or they’d be scolded. And that’s the 

problem we have in the democracy today, Mr. Speaker, is 

they’re simply told what to do, and they will do as they’re told, 

Mr. Speaker. And that’s the value of having a backbencher over 

there that does not contribute nor makes a big difference overall 

to the people that they represent and the province of 

Saskatchewan as a whole. 

 

So if I’m going to ask them, ask any one of them, do you want 

to say yes or no to a plebiscite on this matter? Yes or no? Do 

you want to have a plebiscite, a public vote on this Bill? Yes or 

no? A simple answer would be sufficient, Mr. Speaker, and 

obviously not one of them has risen to the challenge, Mr. 

Speaker. Not one of them has risen to the challenge of having a 

plebiscite on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, because they’ll be told by 

the public of Saskatchewan, no way José, do we want this Bill. 

We don’t want to exclude our children. We don’t want to 

exclude our grandchildren. We don’t want to exclude our 

great-grandchildren, and we certainly don’t want more 

politicians. That’s what they’ll be told. 

 

But they refuse to do that, Mr. Speaker. And they’re hoping, 

and they’re hoping that doing this in the first term that they’re 

back after an election that they’ve done very well at that people 

will forget, Mr. Speaker. They think that people will forget but, 

Mr. Speaker, people have a long, long memory on many things, 

Mr. Speaker. And a lot of them will not forget of how their 

children and grandchildren were excluded, of how they were 

given more MLAs and less programs and services, Mr. Speaker, 

and how this was all done for one simple reason, and that 

they’re trying to position the Saskatchewan Party to be the 

benefactors of this particular move, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 

that’s about. 

 

So I think today as I sit here and I keep challenging them to a 

public vote on this and, Mr. Speaker, they’re all very quiet. It’s 

so quiet over there you could hear a pin drop, Mr. Speaker. And 

the point I would raise, the point I would raise is why don’t they 

speak up for the people? And the people, the people that have 

children and grandchildren, why don’t they speak up for those 

people and say, include our kids, include the future of our 

province in this whole Bill? Because the bottom line is why are 

they excluded is because there is a political agenda at work. 

 

That’s the bottom line and that’s what they don’t want to admit. 

But the people of Saskatchewan won’t be bound by that. The 

people of Saskatchewan won’t be told, here’s your song sheet, 

backbench. You will say as you’re told and you will not deviate 

from the script. People of Saskatchewan will get up and say, no, 

we don’t want more politicians. That’s what the people of 

Saskatchewan would say. We want more people to work in the 

front-line health care. We want more people to work on clearing 

the roads. We want people to make sure that they’re there for 

services, Mr. Speaker, for teachers, and the list goes on. That’s 

what the people of Saskatchewan would say we spend more 

money on, not more politicians, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the big question is why are they putting this Bill in? Why? 

And it’s a very simple question. And, Mr. Speaker, we don’t 

have any answers from the government and, Mr. Speaker, and 

especially from the backbench. Now again, I would point out to 

some of them that are chirping from their chairs every now and 

then, in particular the member from Moose Jaw North, that if he 

agrees to do a plebiscite, get up and say, I agree to do a 

plebiscite. I’ll certainly want to hear if he’s agreeing to do that, 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1081 

Mr. Speaker. And obviously he’s . . . I think he’s gone. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So obviously the challenge, Mr. Speaker, obviously the 

challenge has not been met. You know, so as we scurry back to 

our basement offices, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that it’s 

important to note, it’s important to note that they will not agree, 

that they will not agree to a plebiscite. They will not agree to a 

plebiscite, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the fundamental problem, 

adding more MLAs, is they know that they’re standing on very 

shaky ground. 

 

Now obviously as an opposition, we don’t in any way, shape, or 

form, support this Bill. That’s why we have this amendment. 

But, Mr. Speaker, the neutral party that sits up in the balcony 

there called the press, they’re the ones that will decide. They’re 

the ones that will decide, based on their skills of writing and 

interpreting what’s going on, they will decide whether this is a 

good Bill or not. I think from their vantage point, from their 

vantage point as media, and I think the reference that they made 

to this Bill, I don’t remember the exact phrase, but I think the 

reference was made to the stupidest thing that the Saskatchewan 

Party ever done. And I’m quoting, Mr. Speaker. And I think 

that’s important for them to know. That’s how the media 

perceived this Bill. This is how the public perceives this Bill. 

This is how the opposition perceives this Bill. This is how many 

groups out there that may be involved with this later on will 

perceive this Bill. The only people that don’t seem to get it, that 

don’t like this Bill, are the Saskatchewan Party members over 

there. 

 

And I kind of forgive, I kind of forgive the backbenchers 

because they’re new at this. This is their first term here. But 

somewhere within their own little mindset, take those song 

sheets you’re told to sing from, park them aside, and think for 

one minute what you’re doing with this Bill. You’re excluding 

25 per cent of the population of Saskatchewan which are all 

young people. You think about that, think about that. And that 

hasn’t been done before. And think about the cuts to the 

programs and services. You think about the cuts to the 

programs and services, the film employment tax credit, and 

some of the front workers. Think about those people that have 

got fired. And, Mr. Speaker, and then think about the amount of 

. . . asking the people of Saskatchewan to have more politicians. 

Think about those points. 

 

And that’s my whole point, Mr. Speaker, is that they’re not 

thinking for themselves. They are part and parcel of a marching 

order. And that’s exactly what they’ll do on this Bill, even 

though they know it is a wrong Bill to be put forward, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s the shame of this whole Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

It is not done in a fair, it is not done in a thorough, and it’s not 

done in any kind of an open fashion where people of 

Saskatchewan have a fair view on that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, public debate in any place, in any place in 

Saskatchewan, in any hall, any member of this opposition will 

gladly debate any member of that opposition or cabinet on any 

venue on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, on any Bill — on this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, in particular. But we’re prepared to go there and have 

a debate in any venue, in any community hall in any community 

in the province of Saskatchewan on this Bill, and what we argue 

versus what they argue. And then at the end of the day, let the 

people that attend that meeting or let the people in that 

community decide by way of a plebiscite whether they want 

this Bill or not. And, Mr. Speaker, I think the answer that 

they’ll get resoundingly is, no way, we don’t want this Bill. We 

don’t want more politicians. We want more programs and 

services for our elderly people, for our working people, Mr. 

Speaker, and of course for our young children. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that in my coffee I take 

cream and sugar, one and one. And I think a lot of the 

waitresses in the province of Saskatchewan begin to know. And 

that’s what’s important that in my coffee, Mr. Speaker, when I 

say one and one, it’s a helping of fairness, and certainly it’s a 

helping of support, when you talk about the mixture. And that’s 

what this Bill should have. It should have support. It should 

have fairness attached to it. And, Mr. Speaker, it has neither one 

of them. It has neither one of those, fairness or support from the 

public in any way, shape, or form. 

 

And I don’t know how many more times you got to tell these 

guys, the Saskatchewan Party guys, that quite frankly from our 

perspective, from our point of view, this Bill has no support 

anywhere. It doesn’t have any support from any quarter, from 

any person, from any organization. And I wouldn’t mind seeing 

any kind of letters they’ve got from any group saying, do you 

support the notion — any kind of letter — do you support the 

notion of having more politicians in the province? And if they 

did have any kind of those letters, I wouldn’t mind, I wouldn’t 

mind getting a copy. 

 

But what I wouldn’t mind getting, Mr. Speaker, I know they 

have it. I know that they probably got letters of concern, 

whether it’s email or text or a comment somewhere. I wonder if 

they would share with the opposition some of the comments 

they may have gotten from the different organizations once they 

travel home. Even one. If they had one, that would be great, Mr. 

Speaker. I know they have a lot more. 

 

Now again I’m going back to my comments. I’ve seen a few of 

them guys, I’ve seen a few of those guys on the . . . I’ve heard a 

few of them on the radio. I’ve seen a few of them on a few 

television interviews, particularly the backbench. And they’re 

asked the question, why are you trying to add more MLAs? 

And they say, oh, we have a balanced budget. So the reporter 

asks them again, why are you excluding 35 per cent of the 

people when you’re redrawing the constituencies, Mr. MLA? 

He says, we have a booming economy. And the other thing is, 

why didn’t you tell the people that you were going to do this 

before the last election? We need to put criminals in jail. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, that’s their typical responses, you 

know, to any kind of questions. Now I wonder what would 

happen to the backbench — not the backbench, the entire 

cabinet — if we took away the words “balanced budget,” which 

is not true, or we took away “booming economy” or “putting 

criminals in jail.” Mr. Speaker, there’d be a lot of quiet folks 

over there. They wouldn’t know what to say. 

 

And that was the most amazing, the most amazing point. I saw 

one, I’m not going to mention which of the MLAs. They were 

being interviewed by the local TV station. And the question was 

posed to them on Bill 36, why are you asking for more MLAs? 



1082 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

And the guy said, we have a balanced budget. And of course the 

entire population and the city just kind of shook their heads. 

You guys just don’t get it. If you’re going to be part of a team, 

the team has to be part of you. That’s the most important thing. 

And this Bill is contrary to fairness. It’s contrary to democracy. 

And all it’s done is . . . It hasn’t done anything but simply fulfill 

the political objectives of people that have manipulated not only 

the front bench at times but the entire backbench as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think you need to park your notes, your 

singing notes and your song sheet that you’re given and told, 

don’t deviate from this stuff. And if you behave, maybe a 

couple of months from now you’ll be in cabinet. Mr. Speaker, 

that’s not the way it should work. That’s not the way it should 

work. If there are some serious problems with the Bill and you 

fundamentally disagree with it, your response to a query on that 

Bill as to why you want more MLAs shouldn’t be, we have a 

balanced budget. Because that’s not only an insult to your 

intelligence and your capacity as an MLA; that’s insulting the 

people that sent you here. 

 

You have a free mind and free will. You should be able to get 

up and you should be able to speak what you have to speak 

within caucus. And granted if people within a caucus vote in a 

certain fashion, obviously as a team you have to accept that 

decision made by the majority within your caucus. But if there’s 

some fundamental flaws as to how you arrived at that decision 

as a collective then, Mr. Speaker, if you sit there and simply 

sing from the song sheet given to you, then you’re doing a great 

disservice to not only yourself but to the people that sent you to 

this great hall of democracy, but the people that came before 

you and especially the people that come after you. And those 

are the young people that you’ve now excluded as a result of 

this Bill. 

 

That’s the important thing I would say to the backbench over 

there, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill is wrong. You know it’s 

wrong. And you know the premise of this Bill is not as pure and 

simple as you’re told, that there are some other ulterior motives 

that are contrary to democracy and contrary to the future of this 

province. And it really limits the amount of . . . It really limits, 

in my opinion, the amount of honour that we believe we serve 

when we come here in the first place. 

 

And that’s my point, Mr. Speaker. So some of them may chirp, 

like the member from Moose Jaw North chirped now and then. 

You know, my challenge to him is, okay, you want to have a 

challenge. Let’s have a debate on this. Let’s have a public vote 

on this. And, Mr. Speaker, I will never get that from them, 

never, Mr. Speaker, simply because they refuse to go back to 

the people of Saskatchewan on this issue because they know 

they’d be told by the people of Saskatchewan, no way. No way 

do we want more politicians, when we started seeing highways 

workers being cut, when you started seeing programs like the 

film tax employment credit being cut, when you started seeing 

the services in health care being diminished. 

 

That’s not what the people of Saskatchewan want, Mr. Speaker. 

They didn’t elect the Saskatchewan Party government to add 

more politicians. And had they known that last fall, there’d be a 

lot of people in the backbench, especially the backbench, that 

would pay that price, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the challenge of 

being in a backbench. You’re supposed to be part of a team, but 

guess what? The first mistake that’s made by you or the first 

mistake that’s made out there by government, you’re usually 

the first one thrown under the bus, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So next time somebody asks you in the Assembly or asks you in 

public or asks you in a media interview, why are you trying to 

add more MLAs, don’t say, we have a balanced budget because 

that’s not an answer. You simply say that this is the reason why 

we’re going to do this: we have a growing population or we got 

this or we got that. And then you’re asked the next question 

about, why are you excluding the general population? Why are 

you cutting health? Why are you cutting jobs, and so on and so 

forth? You better have the backup answer because your first 

answer needs to qualify your backup answer. You can’t just 

simply say . . . You’ve got to know what you’re talking about. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s one of the problems that we have 

right now is there isn’t a backbencher over there with a 

backbone to stand up and tell these guys, we don’t like this Bill. 

We don’t like this Bill because we never campaigned on it. It 

wasn’t part of our platform, and then after the fact we’re trying 

to do this. And after the fact we’re trying to do this. That’s not 

what this is about. That’s not the reason you come here. And 

not only are we doing this after the fact, but we’re trying to 

manipulate it to benefit us politically, which is contrary to the 

reason why you got here in the first place, to be fair, to 

represent and to build a better Saskatchewan. That is the point 

on this Bill, Mr. Speaker. There’s got to be some rhyme or 

reason as to how you justify a Bill that nobody wants to the 

public out there. You’re wondering, why am I doing this? Why 

are we doing this? That’s what the Saskatchewan Party 

members should ask themselves. Why are we doing this? 

Because the opposition think it’s got to be one of the silliest 

ideas in the world. We know it very well. But when the media 

characterized this Bill as the stupidest Bill that they’ve seen 

from the Saskatchewan Party, isn’t that enough that a neutral 

party such as the media explains to you that this is a pretty 

stupid Bill? That’s their position. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how else to explain to the 

backbench, but you better go back and have some discussions 

because people don’t want more MLAs. They want more 

services. People don’t want to exclude our young people. They 

want to include the young people, Mr. Speaker. And above all 

else, people don’t want to be manipulated for a political agenda. 

That’s the number one issue that’s out there, Mr. Speaker, and 

that’s the point that we raised as an opposition, is that we need 

more highways workers and if you want to hire more MLAs, 

you better make sure they know how to drive a plow. Because, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what people of Saskatchewan expect in this 

day and age. They want good service, they want a fair and 

reasonable cost for some of the things that they have, and above 

all else they want to be respected for some of the decisions they 

made in the past. And if they’re not, they will quickly change 

their mind on a lot of things. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s one of the most important things 

that I want to raise today, is the fact that if this is not taken back 

to the people as we thought would be proper to do . . . Let’s 

take it back, and if the people of Saskatchewan give the 

Saskatchewan Party a ringing endorsement of this Bill, then the 

opposition will forever hold their tongue on this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. We will not say another word on this Bill if the people 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1083 

of Saskatchewan give that party the opportunity to proceed with 

this Bill. And if they don’t get that Bill: my challenge today, if 

they don’t get that support, is you pull this Bill and let it die a 

good death because that’s what it deserves. A good death, 

because it didn’t work out, it shouldn’t have worked out, and, 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan caught on to it and 

figured it out that this Bill was contrary to what was being 

proposed and the people of Saskatchewan have seen right 

through it. 

 

So I think it’s important that the people of Saskatchewan hear 

that message, and I’m telling people wherever I go, you want 

more politicians? And you know, a lot of them say to me, 

absolutely not. Absolutely not. Absolutely not. 

 

Now we hear, where’s that member from? Regina what? 

Dewdney? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Northeast. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Northeast, Regina Northeast. And the big 

thing is if you look at the Northeast, you know, he was in 

Calgary for a number of years. He was in Calgary for a number 

of years, Mr. Speaker. He doesn’t know the parameters of this 

Bill, what the Bill impacts. He doesn’t know yet, but he will. 

He was in Calgary and he was just visiting. When things were 

tough in Saskatchewan he headed for the hills, he headed for 

Calgary foothills. You know, that’s where he’s going to head. 

And then they brought him back and they got him into their 

Crown corporations. And then after he’s done here, he’ll be 

heading probably back to Calgary, Mr. Speaker. So he’s just 

visiting. He’s just visiting; we know that. 

 

And the bottom line is that when you see a two-handed 

approach of a North Battleford employee that couldn’t run, and 

yet he was working in the Crowns and he was allowed to run, 

there’s a double standard going on there. But that’s fine. We’re 

not going to argue about that. But the bottom line, the bottom 

line is that there’s always these concepts going on over there 

and this Bill further, in our opinion it further cements in our 

thinking that there is something that the people of 

Saskatchewan are going to be looking at this thing very closely. 

They’re going to not forget that this was done to them six 

months after a general election, and they’re going to remember 

that these guys cut programs and services, and they’ve done it 

in a most underhanded way. And now they’re turning around 

and giving us more politicians, Mr. Speaker. That’s their 

response. That’s their response. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Now from my perspective as a member of the opposition, we 

are going to all vote against this Bill and vote for the 

amendment. We’re going to vote for our amendment because 

the amendment that we have in front talks about including 

young people and talks about not allowing the gerrymandering 

of the constituency boundaries to the extent that they want to 

do, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we’re going to stand up for. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to watch very carefully how the 

backbench responds. The member from Arm River, you know 

he sits there and he’s going to say he’s going to be advocating 

for more MLAs, you know. And that’s one of the most amazing 

things, Mr. Speaker. I’m just still trying to figure that out. 

 

You know, here’s the guys over there that want to have more 

MLAs. And I need to explain something to the backbench over 

there, Mr. Speaker. If you have more MLAs — and let’s say for 

the sake of supporting what I’m always claiming, that there’s a 

political plan out there to have some of those MLAs go to the 

Saskatchewan Party — some of the backbench MLAs should 

actually oppose this Bill because if you get more MLAs, either 

they’ll come here or they’ll go there, it’ll limit your chances of 

being in cabinet. So some of you guys, some of you guys, some 

of you guys should stand up and say, well I don’t want more 

competition for cabinet. So on the vote day, on the vote day of 

this Bill, on the vote day of this Bill, on the vote day of this Bill 

say, no, we want to be in cabinet. We simply don’t want to be 

able to have more competition. And that’s my point. At least for 

your own self-interest, if you are prepared to sing from a song 

sheet and ask a very thoughtful question and simply say 

balanced budget, then another thing you should do to preserve 

your opportunities is not have more competition for you. So 

eliminate the competition. Don’t invite more in because that 

really creates a lot of problems for you. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think the important point I’m trying to raise 

here is that, who wants three more MLAs? Tell me who wants 

three more MLAs. There’s 49 over there that want three more 

MLAs. And out of the 49 there’s probably 30 that are confused 

to what it actually means because, Mr. Speaker, the reason why 

I’m saying they’re confused is because they don’t have any 

thought process on defending this particular Bill when asked by 

the media. You know, when you’re asked by the media a 

question on why you want something to happen to a certain 

Bill, don’t say we have a balanced budget because that doesn’t 

make any sense to the people that are listening. You need to 

explain the aspects of the Bill, why did you support more 

MLAs? 

 

And if you’re going to be asked that question in the media, 

you’d better have an answer. And as opposed to going back to 

your song sheets, or song sheet, we have a balanced budget. We 

know the budget isn’t even balanced, Mr. Speaker. It’s not even 

balanced, but that’s not the point. The point is you’ve got to get 

thinking in your own way as to how you’re going to defend 

something that you fundamentally believe in and they can’t 

defend it because (a) they may not understand it or (b) what’s 

worse is that they simply are doing what they’re told. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is unfair. That’s unfair to this hall of 

democracy. It’s unfair to them, as I mentioned earlier, and it’s 

unfair to the people that they represent. And, Mr. Speaker, that 

is a shame and that’s why we keep talking about this Bill being 

an affront to democracy where you’re looking at trying to do 

everything possible to manipulate the process, to try and 

position yourself as a party, to be benefactors of that process 

which calls for more politicians, and thus it creates this feeling 

out there that people are being used in a most negative way. 

 

Yet at the same time you’re firing real front-line workers, 

front-line workers that have served this province for years, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s why it’s important that I tell the people of 

Saskatchewan, this Bill is a Bill I’d want to debate till the very 

end, right till the very end. And we may lose that vote in this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. Chances are we will. But I want 



1084 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

everybody in Saskatchewan, every single person in 

Saskatchewan that may be watching that vote day on this Bill, 

to see which members across the way are standing up and are 

saying yes to this Bill, because they’re also saying yes to 

excluding your child and your grandchild. They’re saying yes to 

making sure they have more politicians and less programs. And 

they’re also saying yes, Mr. Speaker, they’re saying yes to the 

manipulation of this democracy in general. 

 

And that’s a shame, Mr. Speaker, because if they weren’t going 

to manipulate it, Mr. Speaker, there’s general discussion, why 

exclude the children under the age of 18? Why exclude them? 

That’s the other question I have. Why exclude the children 

under 18? For what reason did they do that? For what reason? 

That’s the question I have. 

 

So next time there’s an interview on the radio or TV and 

somebody says, what reason did you have to exclude the 

children under 18 in this electoral boundaries Act? And I 

wouldn’t mind hearing some of the answers over there, Mr. 

Speaker. You know I’d pay a ringside seat to hear what they 

had to say about that particular question. 

 

So the question I have open to the entire Sask Party 

government, including the Premier and his cabinet ministers, 

what reason do you have for excluding all the children under 18 

from the boundaries or The Constituency Boundaries Act that’s 

being proposed under Bill 36? What reason? Why are you 

doing that? That’s a fundamental question. 

 

The second question is, why are you adding more politicians 

instead of front-line workers, Mr. Speaker, to fight fires or to 

teach our children or to provide health care? What reason are 

you trying to . . . Why are you adding more politicians? And 

above all else, where is your argument for more politicians? 

Where is the argument? 

 

It can’t be on numbers because we’ve shown you today that 

Saskatchewan’s got 18,000 voters per riding. Manitoba’s got 

22,000. Alberta’s got 41,000. BC’s got 53,000. Quebec’s got 

64,000. Ontario’s got 125,000. Mr. Speaker, it’s amazing. It’s 

amazing the numbers of voters per riding in all these other 

provinces. But Saskatchewan is saying, oh no, no, we need 

more. And I’m trying to figure out why and where. And the 

further question that I ask is, why did you exclude the children? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of different things that we need to 

ask on this Bill, a lot of different things. We are far from done 

in terms of the questions and the positions and the actions that 

you want to take on this Bill. We asked earlier this day to make 

sure that the kids and the parents out there and the grandparents 

to start a letter-writing campaign. Write to the daily 

newspapers. Try and get onto the radio and phone-in shows. 

Write them a letter. Write to the Premier or to any member of 

the Sask Party MLA, or bring petitions here to the Assembly. 

We will fight. We will fight for you if you give us that 

information, Mr. Speaker. And we understand that there are 

petitions coming in. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, rest assured that people of Saskatchewan are 

going to watch this Bill. They’re going to watch it very 

carefully, and they’re going to see what’s going on here. And 

I’ll tell you, I bet you one thing, that they quickly realize that 

not only is there manipulation going on from that particular 

government, Mr. Speaker, on this Bill, but they have 

cold-heartedly excluded all the kids and the young kids under 

the age of 18 from being included in this count. And I say 

shame on them. Shame on them because that’s not exactly what 

the people of Saskatchewan asked for last fall. 

 

Well, the big thing I would point out again as I mentioned at the 

outset, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan, this was 

hidden from them. This agenda was hidden from them. And had 

they known this, Mr. Speaker, that there were going to be more 

politicians added because of the Saskatchewan Party, rest 

assured, Mr. Speaker, that there would be a lot of people angry 

about that. There’d be a lot more people angry today as a result 

of them being not told what’s going on as opposed to making 

sure that they’re upfront and honest with them at the beginning. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is what the critical argument that I 

would make is: that they weren’t told. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to again point out that the whole vote 

on this Bill will be coming forward to the Assembly here today. 

And I’m going to ask and watch very carefully how the 

members vote across the way. And I made the Aboriginal 

people’s argument. I made the representation argument. I made 

the distance issue certainly in some of the points that we raised, 

of the First Nations and the fact that in northern Saskatchewan 

we have a seven, eight-hour drive every week to be here. And 

despite the fact that we probably have the furthest driving 

distance — my colleague and I from Cumberland — we’ve 

never asked for more MLAs, Mr. Speaker. We’ve never asked 

for more MLAs. 

 

Now we know that there’s been calls from different groups that 

may ask for some politicians to be seen in some of their 

communities because there are times when we know that a lot 

of the Sask Party MLAs, once they’re elected, people rarely see 

them, Mr. Speaker. That is what’s important. It’s not the point 

that they would raise, that we want more politicians. The big 

point, I think people in general would say, we want to see more 

of our politicians, not more politicians. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s one of the points that I would 

raise in some of my closing comments. I think that we’re going 

to make sure that we start the campaign as an opposition, and I 

think we have petitions that are coming in. I believe that there 

are some letters that may be forthcoming. We want to make 

sure that we hit the media with some of these things. And we 

would ask the media to continue being engaged in this file, to 

continue looking at the whole ridiculous nature of this Bill and 

to dig a bit deeper. Like where did this come from? 

 

And that’s what the important message is, is when the media 

sits up in their media balcony, and they look what’s going on in 

this Assembly, you know, some days I imagine it’s very 

amusing to them. But the fundamental point that they made is, 

in trying to be balanced and trying to be straight with the people 

of Saskatchewan, the media characterizes this Bill as one of the 

stupidest Bills that they’ve seen the Saskatchewan Party 

present. Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how the media arrived 

at such a strong word, but that’s how they characterized this 

Bill. 

 

And I was watching, Mr. Speaker, with a bit of amusement 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1085 

when yesterday, when there was reference to some of the media 

comment, half of the Sask Party caucus started chirping up at 

the media saying, oh, did you say that about us? You know like 

obviously there’s a bit of a, you know, don’t-be-mean-to-us 

kind of appeal there, Mr. Speaker. And you shouldn’t try and 

manipulate or play the media in that fashion because it makes 

you look silly on this side. We were sitting there and laughing 

at that. The media aren’t going to be manipulated in any way by 

you guys smiling at them. They’re going to determine what 

they’re going to write, and they going to write it as best they 

can. A lot of times we don’t agree with what they write about 

us, but we don’t smile at them and chirp at them and try and 

connect with them over the rail here. We just leave them alone. 

Let them do their job. And that’s what I would suggest that the 

Sask Party does as well. 

 

But when the media get up and they characterize this Act as one 

of the stupidest Acts they’ve seen coming forward, Mr. 

Speaker, enough said. I think they are doing their darndest to be 

fair and impartial and make sure that they do it in a balanced 

way in how they present what they see as Bills that the 

governments are doing, whether they see it as good or bad. 

And, Mr. Speaker, this was not considered bad. It was 

considered a very stupid Bill. 

 

So one of the things I would point out is what the media is 

saying. You know, these are words that we can justify through 

showing the press clipping here. I think it’s important that 

people out there know that the NDP aren’t doing it just to be 

dirty or to be slanderous. I think what they’re trying to do is 

say, look, we don’t agree with this Bill. We have other groups 

and organizations that don’t agree with this Bill. And now the 

media is sitting up there looking at this thing. Well this is not a 

very good Bill either. And they described it very directly in a 

very negative fashion. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again I would point out the fundamental 

question people of Saskatchewan are asking. Number one is, 

why are we advocating for more politicians? If you want to 

have more politicians, let’s have a plebiscite. Let’s have a 

public vote. And let’s have a binding, a binding public vote, Mr. 

Speaker. And the questions we’re asking in opposition: why in 

this Bill, why in this Bill are you taking out all the children or 

the people, youth under the age of 18 in determining where 

these constituencies are? That’s the question we’re asking. Why 

are you doing that? We need to have those questions answered. 

It is a serious question we ask of all Sask Party MLAs. Why are 

you excluding those children under the age of 18 when you do 

the design of the constituency boundaries? Why are you doing 

that? That’s the question we have. And where in the platform, 

where in the platform did you advocate for three MLAs? We 

need to know that, Mr. Speaker.  

 

So that’s the key point that we’d raise in some of our closing 

comments here today is the fact is, why are you doing this? And 

that’s the fundamental question the people of Saskatchewan 

ask. And today when I asked for a public vote on this — we 

asked about five or six or seven or eight times — and not one of 

them have gotten up to speak up and say, yes, let’s have it. It’s 

an open challenge. It’s a point that we raised. And, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s no way we’re getting a peep out of any Sask 

Party MLA because, Mr. Speaker, they know they didn’t get the 

mandate from the people to do this. And they know they have a 

tough time defending it, and they can’t defend it, and much less 

if they want to go to a public debate and a public vote. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what I think is really important is that if you 

look at the whole notion of some of my constituency I 

mentioned at the outset — large, young, Aboriginal population 

— some of them aren’t of voting age yet but they really, really 

are active in politics. Many of them are very young. And it 

would be nice to know, and certainly within the NDP we have 

an option to join the party under the age of 12 to 18. And I’m 

sure the Saskatchewan Party have the same youth membership 

opportunities for people under the age of 18 to be part of the 

Sask Party. But, Mr. Speaker, I wonder what the age 

information on that application for the Sask Party cards. So that 

information is out there, Mr. Speaker. We’ll certainly find out. 

So it’s okay for them to be a member of the Sask Party, but they 

won’t be included to be voting if they’re under the age of 18. 

And that’s the sad point. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

  

So, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to quickly say I just explained in 

Cree that I told them that same argument I made, that what’s 

happening here . . . I’m not happy that they’re trying to bring 

more MLAs when we should have more health care workers, 

more teachers, that they didn’t tell the people of Saskatchewan 

that they were doing this, and that this Bill No. 36 is contrary to 

anything that the Sask Party has said or done. 

 

And the most important thing is that in the North, as was 

spoken to about when they had a number of visitors, is that in 

northern Saskatchewan they want mental health counsellors. 

They want drug addiction workers. And they want people to 

help strengthen the family. They want better roads. They want 

decent housing. They want fairness when it comes to all the 

resources being pulled out of the North. They want to be able to 

have a future for their kids for training and working. They want 

jobs. They want to be recognized for what they are and who 

they are because they have a great amount of good people in 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

The problem is that the Saskatchewan Party just treats them 

with a lot of disrespect, and they don’t acknowledge some of 

the challenges we have. And this Bill again goes back, the same 

old thing, that when you want to do some things on the political 

front, we’re going to exclude people. And now every person 

that’s under the age of 18 will know how many of the 

Aboriginal people feel at times. When the Saskatchewan Party 

is in power, we get ignored and we get treated in the most 

negative fashion, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why it’s important 

that people out there get the message, is that as you look at this 

Bill, if you’re under 18, you don’t count. A lot of Aboriginal 

people can relate to that. So there’s a lot of times we certainly 

are able to share some of their frustration and some of the 

challenges we feel together, as once again we see evidence that 

the Sask Party is ignoring a large group of people. 

 

So in closing, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s important is that in 

northern Saskatchewan it’s addiction services, it’s youth 



1086 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2012 

drop-in centres, it’s health care facilities, it’s housing, it’s 

training opportunities, it’s highways, it’s support for our young 

people, it’s support to strengthen the families, it’s support to 

recognize that the elders have a difficult time in making ends 

meet between costs for food, for heat, costs for helping out with 

the grandkids, between their medicines. Like the elders have a 

difficult time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And these are the issues that the Saskatchewan Party should be 

working to address instead of increasing the health care costs, 

the drug costs for the elders. They should have been dealing 

with road issues instead of trying to bring more politicians in 

here. They should have been trying to deal with some of the 

mental health addiction problems in the North instead of trying 

to put together a process that costs the government millions of 

dollars more for more politicians. That’s not what we want as 

an opposition, and it’s not what the people of Saskatchewan 

asked for at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, this Bill smacks of political interference. 

It’s an affront to democracy. It’s a great discredit, great 

discredit to the new MLAs on that side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker, because that’s not what they joined politics for. I know 

that and the people in the province know that. But they have to 

wear that just as much as the front bench, Mr. Speaker, because 

obviously there is going to be the question marks out there in 

the future as to why they put this Bill in place. 

 

The bottom line, the bottom line, Mr. Speaker, is that the three 

MLAs that the Saskatchewan Party want to add, Mr. Speaker, 

are primarily there at the expense of the Saskatchewan Party. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan did not want 

that, and they still don’t want it, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the 

most important lesson. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would add on this front, if I am going to 

stand here today and I ask the opposition for a debate on this 

matter, I am prepared to respect the wishes of the people of 

Saskatchewan through a plebiscite. If the people of 

Saskatchewan say they like this Bill, they want this Bill, then 

I’ll simply say this: that I would respect the position of the 

people of Saskatchewan through that plebiscite. If they say yes, 

we want more MLAs, I will respect that. But if they said no, we 

don’t want more MLAs, would the government support that 

notion? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a question that I think I should answer 

because none of them are saying a word right now, and the 

answer is quite frankly that the Saskatchewan Party doesn’t 

want to have a public debate on this. They don’t want to have a 

plebiscite on this because the people of Saskatchewan would 

tell them, no. No way. We’d never asked for that. We don’t 

want it, and we still don’t want it whether it is a year from now 

or three years from now or four years from now. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell the people of Saskatchewan that the 

train may have left the station, Mr. Speaker, the train may have 

left the station. But quite frankly there is time that the people of 

Saskatchewan have by way of giving us emails, letters to the 

editors, interviews on the radio and TV, and certainly signing 

petitions and coming to the Assembly, telling people we don’t 

need more politicians. When you start seeing 112, 112 people 

from the highways labs that were being cut in the last couple of 

years, Mr. Speaker, those are the people that the people of 

Saskatchewan want back, Mr. Speaker. They don’t want more 

politicians. They don’t want more politicians, Mr. Speaker. 

They want those highways workers back, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think the important message is that you have to get it, you 

have to get it in any way, shape, or form. People don’t want this 

Bill. They don’t want these three MLAs. They want front-line 

workers in health care, in highways, in addiction services, and 

the list goes on, Mr. Speaker. So I think it’s important that 

people out there get the message that they can make a 

difference here, that there is a way that we could make this 

government change that silly notion that they can turn around 

and put more MLAs, at the same time cutting programs and 

people. That’s not how you should operate as a government. 

 

And secondly, the most resounding thing, the most resounding 

thing is that, did you mention this in your platform at the last 

election? And we looked and looked. We even had a couple of 

accountants look, you know, through the fine print. And we had 

some of my colleagues put on bifocals and they couldn’t find 

anywhere in the Saskatchewan Party platform last year saying, 

we are going to increase the number of MLAs by three. Nothing 

in there whatsoever. 

 

And although this deal was cooked up about a year ago, maybe 

two years ago, Mr. Speaker, the plan quite frankly is to look at 

some of the opportunities that the Saskatchewan Party want to 

pounce on. One of them is waiting for the census so they can 

advocate for this kind of Bill and manipulate the process so they 

can get their wishes to have three more MLAs. And this whole 

notion of trying to be fair and open and accountable to the 

people of Saskatchewan, well that’s out the window because 

they made one fundamental mistake, one fundamental mistake 

which showed their hand, Mr. Speaker. And that mistake is that 

they arbitrarily chose to exclude every young person under the 

age of 18. 

 

And the reason why they’ve done that, Mr. Speaker, was for the 

pure, manipulative plan that they have for their political agenda. 

Full stop, period, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s quite clear. The 

people of Saskatchewan can see through that. They can see 

through that a mile away. And the more that the opposition, or 

the government, tries to manipulate or tries to hide the 

information or trying to discredit the opposition or trying to 

deny that they’re doing this, the more the people of 

Saskatchewan will hold them to account. 

 

So in the future, if you’re asked, if you’re asked by some 

interviewer or some media person, why are you doing this, 

don’t say, we have a balanced budget. Tell them the real reason 

why because I think everybody knows now the real reason why 

behind this Bill. The real reason behind . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well that’s a little bit better than your last 

answer. But, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s important is that you 

talk to the people and you be very factual and upfront with him 

or with them in terms of why you’re putting this Bill in place. 

It’s pure and simple as that. And that’s the unfortunate reality, 

Mr. Speaker, is that we know what the plan is. And the 

unfortunate reality is 30 per cent of those guys back there are 

just part of this train that left the station. And our job is to make 

sure the people in the constituencies know what’s going on. 

 



April 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1087 

And that’s a fundamental question that we want to add to again 

is, why are you excluding all the children and youth under the 

age of 18? That’s a question I would ask any member of that 

government. Why are you excluding people under the age of 18 

in this constituency boundaries Bill? That is the fundamental 

question. And you know what, Mr. Speaker, there’s not one 

answer from that part, not one answer. 

 

So I want to explain to them, the reason why you’re doing that 

is so you’re able to gerrymander the constituency boundaries to 

try and fit your political agenda, thereby watering down certain 

areas that have more children than others, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s an attack on the family structure, an attack on the young 

people. That’s why you’re doing it. So might as well call a 

spade, a spade in this Assembly because everybody and their 

dog and their horse and their cow knows that this is what’s 

happening, Mr. Speaker. And certainly from the opposition 

perspective, we know that as well, and we’re not going to hide 

that. We’re going to tell the people of Saskatchewan that our 

role is to expose those kind of challenge and those kind of 

points and those kind of attacks, and we’ll continue doing so. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I have a lot more things I want to say on this 

Bill. We haven’t gotten into the jurisdictional debate on the 

political process when it comes to making sure the First Nations 

and the Métis people get active in politics. We think that there’s 

a lot of opportunity to correct a lot of wrongs. And one of the 

things you want to do is make sure that not just the 

non-Aboriginal people are engaged in the politics as soon as 

they can, but the First Nations and the Métis people have that 

opportunity as well. And there’s many, many more younger 

people in some of the reserves and some of the northern Métis 

communities. The population of young people is high, so this 

Bill has a more profound effect on them and that’s the challenge 

that we have to address. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned at the outset when I stood to 

my feet today, that I have a lot to say about this Bill. I think this 

Bill is a really, really bad Bill. It doesn’t do any justice to this 

hall. It doesn’t do any justice to democracy. It doesn’t do any 

justice to the freedom that was afforded to us by our veterans. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a shame to stand here today to see this 

kind of activity happening in 2012. And I would ask the people 

out there in Saskatchewanland that if you have an opportunity 

to help us fight back on this Bill, this Bill would be something 

that we should all . . . It’s a hill that we should all gather up 

together and fight until we get this Bill killed and get this Bill 

out of the way so we can continue building this democracy, and 

of course the economy. So, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that 

we have more to say and we shall say more. I’ve got other 

information that I want to share with the Assembly when the 

time permits. 

 

The Speaker: — The time being now after the hour of 5 

o’clock, this House stands recessed to 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1055 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1055 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1055 

  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 1055, 1076 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1055 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1056 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1056 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1056 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1056 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1056 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 30th Anniversary of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1057 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1057 

 Celebrating the Sikh Community in Saskatchewan 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1057 

 Humboldt Broncos Win Canalta Cup 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1057 

 Saskatchewan Highways 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1058 

 Support for Habitat for Humanity 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1058 

 “I like to help folks” 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1058 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Electoral Representation 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1058 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1059 

 Public Servants Seeking Elected Office 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1059 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1059 

 Tuition Fees and University Funding 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1060 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1060 

 Support for the Film Industry 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1061 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1061 

 Tourism Saskatchewan 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1062 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1062 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1063 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 36 — The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1063 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


