




















































Hansard: October 30, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 4B  TUESDAY, OCTOBER 30, 2012, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1677 

 October 30, 2012 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 7, session will 

resume. Why is the Government House Leader on his feet? 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to 

introduce a guest. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

pleasure to introduce a gentleman, a great Saskatchewan boy. 

Went to Alberta unfortunately, but we’re grateful to have him 

back here in the Chamber. A member for Calgary-Acadia, first 

elected in 2008, Mr. Speaker, re-elected in 2012, appointed to 

cabinet as the assistant Energy minister in 2009, Housing 

minister in 2010, the Solicitor General in 2011, and currently 

serving as Minister of Justice and Solicitor General for the 

province of Alberta, Mr. Jonathan Denis. Also a graduate of the 

University of Regina and University of Saskatchewan College 

of Law — and I think I actually still have your Black’s Law 

Dictionary, Jon, which I borrowed during law school — and at 

one point worked in this building as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So if I could ask all members to introduce and welcome 

Minister Jonathan Denis. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — On behalf of the official opposition and 

University of Regina graduates everywhere, Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to join in the welcoming of Minister Denis to the 

Legislative Assembly. We’ve followed his work in Alberta with 

great interest, particularly the work around Housing First. We 

thought that was a fine bit of public policy work, Mr. Speaker, 

and we’d encourage him to tell his friends on the other side all 

about it. But that being said, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join in the 

welcoming of Mr. Denis to his home province’s Legislative 

Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Debate on special order shall resume. I 

recognize the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Cox, seconded by Mr. 

Docherty, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Nilson.] 

Mr. Hart: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s certainly a pleasure to enter into the reply to the 

Throne Speech. A number of members of the House have 

certainly put their comments forward and on the record, and I 

would like to take this opportunity to do the same. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s always been a tradition I guess for many 

members, including myself, to thank those who are closest to us 

and help us serve the people of our constituency and the people 

of the province. And I’d certainly like to thank my family — 

my wife, Marlene; our two granddaughters. Certainly they say 

they miss grandpa when he’s away, but I have a feeling that 

sometimes life is easier when he’s here and they’re at home 

able to have supper in front of the TV and watch the programs 

that they like to watch. But we do manage to get through the 

days and so on, and as I said, I’d certainly like to thank them at 

this time. 

 

Also, as all of us know, that we are ably assisted by our 

constituency assistants who look after the operation of our 

constituency offices, and I have certainly a very able person in 

the person of Carol Mellnick who has been with me since I was 

first elected. And I’m getting to the point where I’m sure the 

office runs much smoother when I’m not there and Carol looks 

after things. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes, I believe it. 

 

Mr. Hart: — And the member from Carrot River Valley says 

he knows his office runs much smoother when he’s here, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There are a number of things that I’d just like to briefly touch 

upon in the Throne Speech — some of the highlights, and in no 

particular order, some of the things that I feel perhaps are 

important to the province and also to the constituency of Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

In the section of the speech entitled building the workforce, our 

government has put forward, set a goal of increasing the 

workforce by 60,000 more people employed in the province by 

2020. This is certainly a laudable goal. It will be needed to meet 

all the requirements of the growth and industries in this 

province, particularly the potash industry. 

 

Part of that growth or increase in the labour force, Mr. Speaker, 

we certainly will be looking at engaging many more of our First 

Nations and Métis people in the workforce, and, Mr. Speaker, 

that is something that we absolutely have to work very hard at 

doing. We look at the unemployment rates in our province, 

particularly amongst First Nations people that are living on 

reserves. It is quite . . . It is not where it should be. And there is 

good work that is happening and we need to continue that good 

work and enhance that work. 

 

One of the examples that I could offer up, Mr. Speaker, is in my 

own constituency at the Punnichy Community High School, 

which is located in an area of the province where there are a 

number of First Nations communities very close to that 

community and who are very involved. The students, high 

school students from the First Nations are very involved in that 

school. The Horizon School Division in which the Punnichy 



1678 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2012 

school is located in, they have representation from the First 

Nations communities on their board and that seems to be 

working quite well, and engaging First Nations in the education 

system in that area and the initiatives taken there with the help 

of our ministry. 

 

I remember when the member from Canora-Pelly was the 

minister of Education, he was instrumental in bringing forward 

some initiatives that would engage First Nations youth in skills 

training. There’s the involvement with SIAST [Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology] and SIIT 

[Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies] there. We not 

only are educating the young people but also providing them 

with a skill set. And taking it one step further, some of the 

leadership of some of the First Nations community, and 

particularly the George Gordon First Nation, has taken the 

initiative and partnered, has developed a partnership with BHP 

Billiton to provide them with some of the workforce that they 

have the need now and will, their requirements in the future. 

And the whole concept and idea of the partnership is to have 

young people who have been educated and trained and have the 

skill set so that they can go to the mine site and take up gainful 

employment. 

 

Something that I suppose those of us who are not members of 

First Nations communities perhaps maybe sometimes overlook 

is that the people, particularly living on our reserves, they 

would prefer, much prefer to work with some of their 

colleagues and also work, their place of work needs to be fairly 

close to their home community as there is very strong family 

ties. And if we can manage to, if the number of variables that 

are in place out there, if we could put those in place so that we 

can accomplish that, it’s certainly a win-win. And I think the 

Horizon School Division and the people of the Punnichy 

community, the staff of the Punnichy community school along 

with the residents of the area need to be commended for the 

initiative and the successes that they have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as indicated in the education section of the Throne 

Speech, education is something that is a vital part of the future 

of this province, and I know under the leadership of the 

Minister of Education we will see great things happening. 

 

The auditor in her report of June of this year has identified 

some of the issues that we need to deal with, and I know our 

minister’s very aware of these and has initiatives under way to 

deal with these, some of these problems. They have been 

mentioned in the Throne Speech. We need to certainly increase 

the graduation rate, and in particularly amongst the First 

Nations people, and particularly those young people who are 

living on our reserves. 

 

In the auditor’s report in chapter 2, there’s some statistics I 

think that need to be identified: the percentage of students 

entering grade 10 and their completion rate. And there’s a table, 

three, four, and five years down the road. When we compare the 

overall graduation rate of those grade 10 students to the overall 

graduation rate of First Nations and Métis students, there is a 

marked difference. 

 

If we look at the school year 2006-2007, if you looked at the 

first three years — so you would normally think that’s the three 

years that the students on average would complete their 10, 11, 

and 12 — the overall graduation rate was 74.6 per cent. But yet 

if we look at the First Nations and Métis student graduation 

rates, that was a very low 31.8. 

 

However if you look at a longer period of time, over four and 

five years, those rates do come up for both categories, but still 

nowhere where they need to be. The First Nations and Métis 

students, their graduation rate climbed up to 48.1 per cent, but 

that’s not good enough, Mr. Speaker. I think we all realize that 

that’s not good enough and we need to do better. And under the 

leadership of our Minister of Education, I know we will be 

doing better. 

 

And not only those young people who graduate go on, get the 

skill set or the further education that they desire and then go on 

to gainful employment and are able to fully participate in our 

society and in our economy — they’re not the only winners. We 

all are the winners, Mr. Speaker, if that happens, and we all 

have a vested interest in making sure that this happens, Mr. 

Speaker. And as I said, with the leadership of our Ministry of 

Education, I feel very confident that some good things are going 

to happen in this area, and happen quickly. 

 

Another area that is, of course . . . Health care is certainly one 

of the sections in the Throne Speech, and Last 

Mountain-Touchwood is certainly a constituency that has some 

challenges in that area, particularly with physician retention. 

Part of the constituency is within reasonable driving time to 

Regina, and for those people who have their own transportation, 

accessing health care in Regina is not a problem. The closest 

point of Last Mountain-Touchwood to Regina is Craven. Well 

it’s not very hard to get into Regina from Craven, but that’s for 

people who have their own transportation, are fully mobile. But 

you take some of the communities further out, well Lestock is 

probably the best example, where there was a doctor. The 

doctor left a couple of years ago and they are currently being 

served by a group of physicians out of Regina that have clinic 

days there two days a week, along with a nurse practitioner. 

 

But recently myself and the Minister for Rural and Remote 

Health had meetings in Lestock and in Balcarres because that’s 

another community that’s experiencing real difficulties in 

physician recruitment. And of course, well we met with the 

staff. We met with community leaders. And what we were told, 

and particularly in Lestock, which is a community that’s further 

away from Regina, has a high population of seniors and First 

Nations people, and there’s a real need to enhance and make the 

physician and health care service in those communities. 

Because as I said, for those people who have their own 

transportation and are able to drive to a community and to 

access health care, it’s not a huge problem. But it is for a 

significant portion of the population of some of those 

communities such as Lestock where the seniors’ transportation, 

finding somebody to take them to the doctor for appointments 

or if they need to come in to Regina or Saskatoon, it’s a real 

burden. And in fact some of those people aren’t receiving the 

quality of care that they deserve. 

 

And I know through our ministers, both the Minister of Health 

and the Minister of Rural and Remote Health, that there’s a lot 

of good things. A lot of hard work is being done and I certainly, 

I’m sure we will be seeing some of the positive results of those 

efforts. 



October 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1679 

Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I didn’t at least say something 

about agriculture, and I think I’ll make some announcements on 

behalf of the Minister of Agriculture and he can refute them 

when he gets up because I understand he’s getting up after I sit 

down here. But the Throne Speech did talk about the important 

role that agriculture plays in our province and in our province’s 

economy, and how our exports have now reached $10 billion 

and our goal is to see that increase to 15 billion by 2020. 

 

[19:15] 

 

And the Throne Speech also mentioned that research is a 

priority. And it needs to be, Mr. Speaker. If we are going to 

reach those goals, we need to make some strategic investment 

in agriculture, in research, such as some of those strategic 

investments that paid huge dividends in the past. 

 

And one investment, strategic investment that comes to mind 

was the investment in the Crop Development Centre at the U of 

S [University of Saskatchewan] a number of years ago, many 

years ago. And that’s, that has paid huge dividends. It has 

resulted in Saskatchewan being the world leader in the export 

quantities of pulse crops, lentils, and peas, and that was all 

made possible by some key people coming to work and do 

research at the Crop Development Centre. One has to think of 

Dr. Al Slinkard, and he was known as doctor lentil. I can 

remember when a group of us in our community started 

growing lentils. Well we certainly did follow the advice, the 

good advice that we got from Dr. Slinkard and his colleagues at 

the Crop Development Centre. 

 

If we go back just a bit further and look at some of the 

initiatives and the investments that were made by both levels of 

government in the canola industry, and Dr. Keith Downey at the 

ag research station in Saskatoon. All we have to do is, all you 

need to do is drive around this province in July, late June and 

July, and see all the yellow fields out there to realize what a 

tremendous and valuable crop that canola has become in this 

province. And it wouldn’t have happened if we wouldn’t have 

had those investments in research, because I can remember 

when we first started out, when I first started growing canola, it 

was common knowledge or the rule of thumb was you didn’t 

grow canola south of No. 16 Highway, the Yellowhead, 

because at that time the varieties and agronomic conditions 

made it fairly risky. But with the development of new varieties 

and new technology in agriculture, we see Canola grown 

throughout the province, and it is and will continue to be a 

major crop in this province and in Western Canada and a major 

driver in the agriculture economy. 

 

There is mention, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to also just say 

a few words about Saskatchewan’s role in the overall food 

security of the world. And quite often we take for granted that 

when we travel this province and travel into our neighbouring 

provinces that, you know, there’s all kinds of good land and 

good soil for food production, and there should never be a 

problem with food security in the world. Well we walk into our 

supermarkets and see the vast supplies of food products on the 

shelves. You get a little different picture if you do some 

travelling and visit countries who don’t have the large expanses 

of agricultural production that we do in Canada and in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

All you need to do is fly over some of these areas of the world 

and look down on a clear day and see the miles or kilometres 

and kilometres of desert and rock and it’s all brown and it’s not 

green at all, or travel to some of our tropical areas of the world 

and you see what looks like a lot of forage out there, but yet you 

see the animals who are vastly undernourished because there 

isn’t anything in that forage that’s growing to sustain adequate 

animal production and so on. So when you have an opportunity 

to see some of these other areas of the world, it certainly drives 

home the fact as to how fortunate we are here in Saskatchewan 

to have the resources that we do have and realize what a key 

player Saskatchewan is in the overall security of food 

throughout the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I take my place, there’s just a couple of 

other comments I’d like to put on the record and it has to do 

with, well, with this place that we’re all so privileged to work 

in. We are starting the second century of this legislature, of 

these Chambers. We have brand new carpet. Perhaps 30 or 40 

years down the road, historians will look back and look at what 

some of us had to say at the start of the new century of this 

building and so on. And I would just certainly like to offer up a 

few comments. 

 

You know, we get in here and we do our thing. We stand and 

we debate and we will heckle across and we’ll play this game of 

politics. And I think sometimes we think that we are the most 

important people here in the overall scheme of our form of 

government. 

 

But if you look back, and I’ve been told that since 1905 there’s 

been 721 members elected to this legislature and, as far as I 

could determine, the average length of service is about six 

years. So when you look at that, we really are bit players in the 

history of our government. There’s one or two exceptions, and I 

think the member from Moosomin would be an exception. He’s 

been here for quite some time and has certainly served the 

people of this province very well and so on. 

 

But overall, sometimes I think we tend to lose a little bit of 

perspective, and sometimes we’re inclined perhaps not to 

remember what a privilege it is to work here. Also sometimes 

we may lose a little sight of the form of government we have. It 

is an adversarial system, and sometimes we get very 

enthusiastic about that adversarial part of governing and so on. 

But it does have . . . There is a cost to that, and I believe the 

cost is in part reflected in voter turnout. 

 

I think we’ve all heard it, particularly from our young people, 

when at election time they’ll say, well why should we vote 

because you’re all the same. And you know, that’s pretty 

flippant I suppose, and so on. But I think sometimes some of 

our actions give cause to that kind of a notion. And we should 

be, I believe we should be somewhat mindful of that and take 

seriously the whole voter engagement and the declining voter 

turnout, whether it’s because what we do in this place not only 

affects those of us that are here currently; it affects other 

elections, whether it be municipal elections and some of the 

things that our colleagues do in Ottawa. It does impact and have 

an effect on the perception of those of us that stand for public 

office and are elected. 

 

So I would just offer that up. And I would just perhaps, perhaps 



1680 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2012 

like to remind members that our form of government and 

everything that this room represents is much more important 

than we are, and that we just all be respectful of one another. 

And I’m a bit selfish in offering those comments because — 

and I know we’re not supposed to involve the Speaker so I 

won’t go there — but I know when the Deputy Speaker is the 

Chair, the job’s a whole lot easier if everyone behaves 

themselves, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that I know other members would like to 

enter into the debate and I would say, just like to say that I will 

be supporting the motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a great 

opportunity to speak in reply to the Speech from the Throne in 

this great Assembly, and one that few citizens ever get to 

realize. 

 

I’d like to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to thank my 

family for giving me the opportunity to pursue this great 

opportunity to give back a few years of my life to this province 

that I love. Also I wish to thank the good, hard-working people 

of Thunder Creek, salt of the earth, decent people, Mr. Speaker, 

for providing me with a fourth term in this place, this great 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And in thanking the people of Thunder 

Creek, I include my constituency assistant, Bev Leaman, for the 

great work she does for the people of Thunder Creek and the 

assistance that she provides for me in fulfilling my duties, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I want to take a moment to recognize Her 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan, Vaughn 

Solomon Schofield, and thank her on the occasion of presenting 

her first Speech from the Throne in this honourable Assembly. I 

am sure that she will present many more, Mr. Speaker. She 

brings a special level of dignity to the role of Lieutenant 

Governor. 

 

And my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, who work hard to make this 

province a better place to live and work and raise a family. I am 

proud to be associated with my Saskatchewan Party colleagues. 

Also my legislative colleagues from across the floor. I don’t 

agree with them. Their policies have been devastating for the 

province and we don’t ever want to go back there. They 

continue to show that they would make the same mistakes all 

over again that would devastate this province all over again. But 

I thank them just the same for their sincere service to our 

democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from July 2007 to July 2012, Saskatchewan’s 

population increased by nearly 80,000 people. In the last year 

alone, Saskatchewan grew by more than 22,000 people, the 

most growth in any year since 1921. Every Saskatchewan city 

and nearly 80 per cent of Saskatchewan towns saw their 

population increase during the most recent census period. In 

August the number of people employed in Saskatchewan hit an 

all-time high of nearly 550,000 after growing by more than 

20,000 in just the last year alone. Mr. Speaker, these are the 

benefits of a vibrant economy driven by the private sector. 

 

In contrast, Mr. Speaker, in the previous census, the last one 

during the NDP [New Democratic Party] government, over half 

of Saskatchewan cities and more than 85 per cent of our towns 

decreased in population. I hope that no resident of this great 

province will forget what life was like under the NDP: young 

people leaving to seek opportunity elsewhere, stagnant and 

dwindling population, high taxes, no development, no money 

for infrastructure, for health and for social services, for parks, 

for the arts, longest surgical waiting lists in the country, and a 

general feeling of despair and embarrassment for this province 

that we love and that we recognized had so much potential, Mr. 

Speaker. These are the results of socialist policies of the 

Saskatchewan NDP in their previous role as government. 

 

In contrast, Mr. Speaker, to that previous NDP government that 

had no goals and set no targets, our government has released 

The Saskatchewan Plan for Growth, a vision for 2020 and 

beyond. And it’s referred to in the Speech from the Throne, Mr. 

Speaker, and the plan sets a bold target of 1.2 million people 

living in Saskatchewan by the year 2020. 

 

Our government has committed to funding a minimum of $2.5 

billion in infrastructure investments over the next three years, 

Mr. Speaker. At least 60,000 more workers will be required by 

2020 to meet the objectives set out in our growth plan. We will 

add 300 more apprenticeship spaces and work to develop 

additional apprenticeship training opportunities for students in 

high school. We will continue to engage with the federal 

government to increase the annual cap on the immigrant 

nominee program by 50 per cent from 4,000 to 6,000 and 

working with First Nations and Métis organizations on ways to 

improve educational outcomes and increase employment for 

those great people. 

 

Saskatchewan’s business tax rate will be lowered from 12 per 

cent to 10. We have balanced our budgets in the past, Mr. 

Speaker, and we will continue to do so. 

 

This year, capital investment in Saskatchewan will surpass $20 

billion, a record amount and nearly double the total in 2007 at 

the end of the previous NDP government. 

 

[19:30] 

 

The potash industry is in the midst of a $13 billion expansion 

that will create thousands of jobs and generate billions of 

dollars in economic activity and provincial revenues. 

 

Our government will continue to enhance Saskatchewan’s 

reputation as an innovator in agriculture by establishing the 

Global Institute for Food Security. 

 

More than 1200 kilometres of provincial highways have been 

improved, but we still have more work to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne reflects our plan for 

growth. Agriculture, more than ever, is a driving force in our 

economy in the new Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan provides 

safe, reliable food to feed a growing world population. In 2011, 

Mr. Speaker, we exported $10.2 billion in agri-food exports 

from Saskatchewan, making us the top agri-food exporting 

province in the country. Mr. Speaker, that $10.2 billion is a 60 

per cent increase from the end of the NDP regime in 2007. 

Credit goes to our farmers and ranchers, Mr. Speaker, and our 



October 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1681 

researchers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we target $15 billion in exports by 2020. An 

international market development program will help increase 

exports. We will establish the Global Institute for Food Security 

to build on our strong research and innovation sector and 

further improve production. Research and innovation is vital to 

our future. In 2012 we put $20 million into ag-bio research, an 

increase of 50 per cent since the end of the NDP regime in 

2007. And research will continue, Mr. Speaker, to be a priority 

of this government. 

 

Irrigation is also a priority, with $30 million in 

federal-provincial spending since 2008, just four years, Mr. 

Speaker, for irrigation. In those four years, Mr. Speaker, that is 

an increase of $25 million over the entire 16-year term of the 

previous NDP government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the last five years in agriculture . . . I want to 

talk about agriculture a little bit. It’s what I am. I’m a farmer 

and a cattleman and I’m proud to be. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

proud of this government’s contribution to agriculture and the 

way that this government has worked with our farmers and 

ranchers over the last five years. 

 

In that time, Mr. Speaker, we’ve made the largest education tax 

reduction in Saskatchewan history, record Saskatchewan crop 

insurance coverage of $174 an acre now versus $88 an acre 

under the NDP at the end of their reign. The five largest Ag 

budgets in coverage levels in the history of the crop insurance 

program, committed to fully funding AgriStability and 

AgriInvest every year, Mr. Speaker, up front. The NDP always 

used to refuse to do this. 

 

We are creating an international market development program, 

Mr. Speaker. We’ve developed and rolled out the farm and 

ranch water infrastructure program, compensation for livestock 

killed or injured by predators. The NDP refused to do this too. 

 

A 100 per cent wildlife damage compensation. Mr. Speaker, it 

was 80 per cent under the NDP. Increased agricultural research 

funding by 50 per cent, Mr. Speaker, in the last five years. It’s 

up to $20.4 million in the most recent budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Introduced the gopher control rebate, which was not available 

under the NDP regime, and the beaver control program, also not 

available under the NDP. Ten new extension offices have been 

opened under our government, Mr. Speaker. Under the NDP, 31 

were closed. One point four billion dollars for crop insurance 

and excess moisture programs paid out in 2010 and 2011. The 

Saskatchewan feed and forage program, Mr. Speaker, is another 

contribution of our government to agriculture. AgriStability 

administration was moved to Saskatchewan and in a very 

much-improved processing timelines and reduced complaints 

and problems with the program. The NDP did not want to 

administer the program. 

 

Seventy-one million dollars to 18,000 cattle and hog producers 

in 2009. And that was only Saskatchewan funding, no federal 

contribution there. We increased funding for rat control. We 

developed a Crown land sale program to put farm land back in 

the ownership of farmers. Record revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker, 

and record investment in highways and infrastructure in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And during that same . . . or during the previous government, 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP refused to address education property tax 

issues, closed 31 rural ag offices, cut extension services, 

eliminated the GRIP [gross revenue insurance program] 

program even after farmers had signed the contracts and ended 

up having to go to the Supreme Court of Canada to justify their 

actions, increased crop insurance premiums without increasing 

coverage in those days. They cut spot loss hail insurance — as 

the previous minister of Agriculture used to say — twice. 

Ignored agricultural disasters including a major drought in the 

Southwest. They blamed the federal government for all their 

problems. 

 

They lost taxpayers’ money in private investments and 

investments like $15 million in Channel Lake; $2 million in 

Guyana; $16 million in NST [NST Network Services of 

Chicago]; $9.4 million in Persona Inc.; $24.7 million in 

Retx.com; $6.7 million in tappedinto.com; $3 million in 

Clickabid.com; $5.6 million in Soft Tracks; $90.8 million in 

Navigata Communications; $10 million in Craig Wireless; 

$17.2 million in Coachman Insurance; $8.9 million in Ag 

Dealer; $35 million in SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 

Development Company]; $8 million in mega bingo; $40 

million, Mr. Speaker, in Austar Communications; $6.5 million 

in Minds Eye Entertainment; $2.42 million in Business Watch 

International. And this one was a bargain, Mr. Speaker, they 

only lost $2.2 million in Clinicare, whatever that was. 

 

In any event, Mr. Speaker, those are some of the comparisons. 

During that time they also closed 52 rural hospitals, closed rural 

schools, ignored rural roads and highways, and off-loaded costs 

on to RMs [rural municipality] and farm families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think a well known NDPer sums it up best. And 

most recently, Ian McCreary said in the most recent issue of 

The Commonwealth, the internal NDP newsmagazine that goes 

out to their members. Here’s what Ian McCreary had to say. He 

said, and I quote: 

 

There are many reasons why progressive people in rural 

Saskatchewan no longer support the NDP. [He goes on to 

say.] The Romanow administration made cuts which 

disproportionately affected rural people. Over 50 rural 

hospitals were closed. We withdrew from the national 

farm income support program during the lowest farm 

income period in the grains and oil seeds sector. The rural 

road network tax by a rapidly centralizing elevator system 

began a rapid process of decline. 

 

And he goes on to say: 

 

The end result was that rural people felt abandoned by 

government. In subsequent elections, rural areas were not 

represented in government and rural people watched often 

in disbelief as rural policy was developed in urban centres. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that those members opposite, as 

much as I admire them as individuals and I think they’re sincere 

in their mistaken beliefs, I think they would do the same things 

all over again, Mr. Speaker. 

 



1682 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2012 

And accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of the record of 

this Saskatchewan Party government. And I’m proud of what 

we’ve outlined in the Speech from the Throne as things that 

we’ll be doing over the next year. And accordingly, Mr. 

Speaker, I support the Speech from the Throne and thank you 

very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

to enter the debate on the recent Throne Speech. This is my 

third time to have the opportunity to be able to do this. 

 

It’s an incredible privilege to be representing the people of 

Saskatoon Riversdale and to have a seat in this legislature. It’s 

such an honour. And I work hard every day to try to do this job, 

and the people in my community, justice. 

 

So I think I’ve heard from everybody in this House here. I think 

all of us acknowledge without our support systems, we could 

not do this work. For us in the Chamber, particularly with 

young families, that support network becomes even more 

important. For that reason, I really need to thank all of them. 

My list is long, so please bear with me. 

 

There’s my mom and dad who are always there for us. If a child 

needs to be picked up, dropped off, fed a meal or a snack, or 

just nurtured with some grandparently love or some of grandpa 

Rusty’s homemade ice cream, I can totally count on my parents. 

 

There’s Blair. Often in my own life I feel like a bit of a general 

coordinating the troops — who goes where, who does what and 

when they do it. But in my absence when I’m here in Regina, it 

is Blair who takes on this role. I couldn’t do this job without 

him being there and willing to do this. 

 

There is my sister, Michelle, who always tells me not to thank 

her, and I need not to thank anybody. But I think it’s very 

important. So my sister, Michelle, who’s like a second mother 

to my kids and, actually to be perfectly honest, I think she’s 

sometimes the preferred option. If I were being perfectly 

honest, I suspect she’s probably way more fun than I am. And 

there are my daughters, Hennessey and Ophelia. They’re two 

great kids who put up with all the things that our kids have to 

put up so we can do this job. And one of the reasons, the big 

reason I’m here is for my kids. They’ve made huge sacrifices so 

hopefully they have a better future and their cohort has a better 

future. It’s also been an interesting time or challenge this year, 

Mr. Speaker, as Hennessey has just started grade 9 and Ophelia 

has just started kindergarten. So it’s an interesting sort of 

bookend kind of life that we’ve got right now. 

 

I also want to thank my staff, who I think do a wonderful job of 

helping me serve the people of Saskatoon Riversdale so well. I 

couldn’t do it without them either. Vanessa just left on 

maternity leave a couple of weeks ago to be with her sweet little 

baby and her two other lovely children. And I will really miss 

Vanessa tremendously this year but I am very happy that Judy 

has joined our office. Judy provided years of service to the 

former member from Saskatoon Nutana, and Judy has been just 

a delight to have in our office. So I have great staff committed 

to serving the people of Saskatoon Riversdale. 

I also need to mention a huge loss we faced in my constituency 

just over a month ago. My first assistant, who helped me adjust 

to this job after my election in 2009 and who also served Lorne 

Calvert so ably for many years, succumbed to breast cancer 

after a courageous three-year battle. Yvonne McCowan left 

behind a family and many friends who loved her dearly. She 

was a fabulous constituency assistant and a good person who 

will be fondly remembered and sadly missed. She helped make 

people’s lives better in Saskatoon Riversdale for many years, 

including my own. So thank you to Yvonne and to everyone 

else. 

 

Getting down to the Throne Speech, I am going to narrow my 

focus a bit more than I usually do when I do this. Usually I like 

to try to touch on as many aspects of the speech as possible, but 

I think this Throne Speech in particular was fairly thin and 

devoid of ideas, that I thought a better approach would be to 

cover fewer points in fuller detail. And if the government isn’t 

going to provide detail, I will. 

 

I’d like to start with Parks, Culture and Sport, but more 

specifically culture, that was featured at the top of this 

ministry’s section in the Throne Speech. I think the facts speak 

for themselves, and they say something different than what is in 

the Throne Speech when it comes to culture. I would like to 

quote one particular line when the truth has been stretched far 

beyond recognition. “My government will continue to support 

arts and culture. From 2007 to 2011, funding for arts and 

culture increased 35 per cent, compared to the previous four 

years.” 

 

This would leave the reader or the listener with the impression 

that this government has increased arts and culture funding 

tremendously. In fact this is a government that is taking credit 

for the former administration’s funding decisions. For the sake 

of the backbenchers on the government side of the House who 

seem to easily buy some of their ministers’ and their Premier’s 

spin, I would like to provide them with some useful information 

on Saskatchewan Arts Board funding that might better inform 

their discussions around the caucus table. 

 

[19:45] 

 

This is all easily accessible data in past budget estimates if they 

wanted to do the research themselves, but I’m going to talk 

about some of it here. The NDP budget of ’04-05, Arts Board 

funding was 4.784 million. The NDP budget in ’05-06 was 

5.284 million. The NDP budget in ’06-07 remained the same — 

5.284 million for the Arts Board. The NDP in ’07-08 funded the 

Arts Board to the tune of 6.094 million. This is a 14.2 per cent 

increase. So the NDP four-year total was $21.386 million. This 

was a total increase between year 1 and year 4 of 26.1 per cent. 

 

Let’s take a look at the Sask Party numbers in terms of funding 

of the Arts Board: in ’08-09, the Sask Party’s first budget, 6.094 

million; in ’09-10, 6.338 million; in ’10-11, 6.338 million; and 

in year ’11 and ’12, 6.433 million. So the Sask Party four-year 

total was 25,203. So this was a total increase between year 1 

and year 4 of 5.6 per cent, Mr. Speaker. So the four years that 

the NDP was still in power, there was an increase of 26.1 per 

cent funding for the Arts Board compared to the Sask Party’s 

increase of 5.6 per cent. So I think they’re playing fairly fast 

and loose with statistics in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 



October 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1683 

The reality is though the Sask Arts Board is not the only place 

where the ministry spends money on arts and culture. So I’d 

like to talk about that for a moment. So let’s take a look at 

actual spending taken from public accounts. In the 2004-05 

budget, the provincial NDP government spent on the arts — 

which includes the Arts Board, cultural industries development, 

SaskFilm, and the film employment tax credit — $18.76 

million, or if you adjust for inflation, 21.256 million in 2012 

dollars. So what did we see in this last budget? Our Sask Party 

government has budgeted 16.183 million for the Arts Board, 

support for provincial arts and cultural organizations, cultural 

industries development, SaskFilm, and the film employment tax 

credit. As you can see, and I think . . . I hope the backbenchers 

on the government side as well as the minister see that 16.183 

million is in fact less than 18.76 million in the 2004-2005 

public accounts. 

 

I’d also like to point out that 15.65 million, the lowest amount 

over the past nine years, was spent in this last fiscal year, 

2011-2012 at a time when overall provincial government 

spending was up. So when this government talks about its 

support for arts and culture, I think they need to put their money 

where their mouth is. 

 

I know I’ve pointed this out before, but again for those 

backbenchers, the reality is the allocation to the Saskatchewan 

Arts Board in 2012-2013 is at the lowest level — at the lowest 

level — in over 25 years in proportion to the overall 

government budget expenditures, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d also like to point out that the highest amount spent on arts 

and culture in the period referenced in the Throne Speech was 

actually spent in the NDP’s ’07-08 budget of 33.578 million, 

some of which was clawed back by the current government in 

its first budget in ’08-09. So, Mr. Speaker, there you have it: 

this is this government’s record on arts and culture spending, 

the support that it references in the Throne Speech. 

 

Also of note . . . And I’m sure they’ve all enjoyed hearing those 

statistics, Mr. Speaker, because I don’t think they’ve heard it 

from anywhere else. Clearly you hear some of the spin, and you 

would think they were the greatest supporters of arts and culture 

here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Also of note, the first point under this ministry section reads, 

“Consultations are proceeding on a new plan to move creative 

industries forward.” So in terms of the creative industry 

consultations, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to chat 

with people from across the creative industries, and . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — What are they saying, Danielle? 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Well they are saying all kinds of things. 

 

First of all, though, I have to comment that consultation is really 

important. I’m a huge believer in participatory democracy and 

good consultation. Public policy should be informed through 

real and meaningful consultation, when you speak to people 

who actually know, who have industry-specific information or 

people know what it looks like where the rubber hits the road, 

Mr. Speaker. And you should not cut a program, a major 

program, that has an impact across cultural, the creative 

industries — has an impact not just for one of the creative 

industries, but for all of them. You shouldn’t cut a program and 

then decide to consult, Mr. Speaker. That is bad governance; 

there’s no question about it. 

 

So I think that that’s my first point. But what have people been 

telling me? I’ve heard from many people across the creative 

industries who have said they are not confident that these 

consultations are true consultations. I’ve had an opportunity to 

speak with the minister and he has assured me that they are 

being open-minded about this process, but there are many 

people who are not trusting of this process and don’t believe 

that they’ve entered in good faith into this consultation process. 

People from across the cultural industries have echoed the same 

concern to me that they felt like when they attended the focus 

groups that the facilitator was looking for specific answers 

rather than really asking them what they thought. I’ve had one 

individual say to me that she can’t believe the future of her 

industry is resting on these consultations filled with loaded and 

leading questions along the lines of how should we repurpose 

the sound stage. 

 

So there have been focus groups in both Saskatoon and Regina 

and I understand from the minister that the P.A. [Prince Albert] 

consultations have been cancelled or postponed due to lack of 

participation. And when the minister and I talked, I suggested 

that part of this might be because people are distrustful of the 

process. But I think another part of it, having spoken to people 

who were invited to the P.A. consultations, it was timelines. 

People were not given adequate notice to be able to come out to 

the P.A. consultations. So I think that that’s a bit of a problem. 

 

So everybody I’ve spoken to across the creative industries, 

actually no one is afraid of real and meaningful consultations 

and in fact they invite them. They would like the opportunity to 

strengthen their sectors and look at programs and services 

offered and how to do it better. The goal is to grow the creative 

industries, Mr. Speaker, and I believe the people in the creative 

industries have the information and the knowledge and a lived 

experience on how best to do this. So it would be nice if the 

minister and this ministry would take that seriously, Mr. 

Speaker, and unfortunately they don’t feel like this process is 

one that will do that. 

 

This is rather dramatic, Mr. Speaker, but I have heard people 

use the term, these consultations are a bit of a Sophie’s Choice. 

It’s either, which child do you send off, Mr. Speaker, and we 

have a government trying to pit one creative industry against 

the other. I have also heard the word cannibalism, reflecting the 

same concerns in reference to these consultations, Mr. Speaker. 

The one thing that people have also said to me is it’s very 

difficult to get consensus across the creative industries because 

they are all such different animals. But the one thing that I’ve 

been told that all these industries have been able to achieve 

consensus on is that these consultations are lacking, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I think with what this government has done to the film 

industry, first cutting JobStart/Future Skills, then privatizing 

SCN [Saskatchewan Communications Network] and now 

cutting the tax credit, people across the creative industries are 

asking themselves, what’s next? SaskFilm, the sound stage? 

When is the government coming for them and their 

programming and their support to foster a creative industry in 



1684 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2012 

this province? 

 

So contrary to this government’s approach, arts and culture are 

not just about commercialization. Yes, artists deserve to make a 

living, and the reality is artists are some of the most 

well-educated people in our society and they make the lowest 

amount of money. So yes, artists deserve to make a living but 

most would say commercialization is not the reason they are 

artists. Arts and culture is about creating, inspiring, challenging, 

educating, entertaining, and I don’t think this government gets 

this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d also like to talk about innovation, another heading in this 

Throne Speech. Coincidentally though, we can also talk about 

the need for a vibrant arts and culture sector to enhance 

innovation and attract and retain the best and the brightest 

minds here. I know the member from Greystone and a former 

minister used to talk about Richard Florida all the time. This 

was before my day but I’ve been told that Richard Florida was 

someone that the former minister liked to quote and perhaps 

that’s why he’s no longer the minister. So I’d just like to read a 

quote that I hope the minister and the other Sask Party members 

pay attention to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So Richard Florida, author of Cities and the Creative Class, has 

this to say: 

 

In reality, people were not making the career decisions or 

geographic moves that the standard theories said they 

should: They were not slavishly following jobs to places. 

Instead, it appeared that highly-educated individuals were 

drawn to places that were inclusive and diverse. Not only 

did my qualitative research indicate this . . . but the 

statistical analysis proved the same [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

So I do hope when this government thinks about innovation and 

thinks about attracting some of the best and brightest minds 

here, they bear that in mind that a creative and diverse economy 

and culture here in Saskatchewan will attract and retain those 

people we need to keep Saskatchewan going forward. 

 

Under the innovation heading, the Throne Speech reads, “Our 

innovation agenda is based on the foundation of our province’s 

natural resource wealth — providing the food and energy 

security the world requires.” Yes, we definitely have a 

responsibility to the rest of the world, but firstly we have a 

responsibility to our citizens. 

 

Today the hunger count came out. We heard that 7,000 people 

more per month are using food banks in Saskatchewan than 

when this government came to power. Twelve thousand 

children are using our food banks here every month, Mr. 

Speaker — 12,000 children. Seniors and employed people are 

using the food banks. This is not food security and it is not 

acceptable this should be happening at a time of prosperity. 

Food security is one of those words that politicians and 

policy-makers seem to like but the average citizen doesn’t 

really relate to it. Basically food security is about ensuring we’ll 

all have access to healthy, culturally appropriate food that we 

can afford to buy. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is what Station 20 West and the Good Food 

Junction are all about. Just a couple of weeks ago we had the 

opportunity in Saskatoon to celebrate the grand opening of 

Station 20 West and the Good Food Junction. It happens to be 

in the constituency of Saskatoon Centre but it’s just across the 

street from my own community, and has a huge impact on the 

people I represent, Mr. Speaker. Collective kitchens, the Good 

Food Box, a real grocery store, community economic 

developments — this is food security, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Despite the petty nastiness of this government, people pulled 

together — faith communities, business people, and your 

average everyday . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The former 

minister of Health actually is questioning my comment about 

nastiness, Mr. Speaker. I would say that there are many people 

in that community who think that that decision was incredibly 

nasty. There are many people who think pulling the money 

from a community development project, Mr. Speaker, was 

nasty, Mr. Speaker. This is about, this is about the social 

determinants of health and making sure people in a food desert 

have access to food, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government actually had the audacity to refer to that 

community development project as a mall, Mr. Speaker. He 

should perhaps . . . Perhaps the minister who’s heckling me 

should come visit Good Food Junction and Station 20 West, 

Mr. Speaker. But this could have and should have happened 

three years ago. This was not and was never an NDP project, 

Mr. Speaker. This was a community-driven project, Mr. 

Speaker. This was a community-driven project and could have 

happened three years ago, Mr. Speaker. So kudos to all who 

made this happen. 

 

I have to say there was another part of this that’s been hugely 

disappointing, Mr. Speaker. A few months ago I had the 

opportunity to casually speak to a board member about the 

grand opening. One board member was asking me, well should 

we invite the Minister of Social Services? Yes or no? What do 

you think? And they really wanted to invite the minister and 

they were seeking my input. And I told them of course they 

should invite the minister. It’s a wonderful project. I think the 

Social Services minister should have an opportunity to see 

Station 20 West and the Good Food Junction. And they really 

wanted to extend an olive branch and demonstrate to her and 

her government how important this project is to so many 

people. And they want to work with her, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

what this board did. 

 

All I know is that she was invited but she was not there, Mr. 

Speaker, nor were any other Sask Party MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly]. I have attended enough events, Mr. 

Speaker, where other MLAs are happy to bring greetings for the 

minister when the minister is not able to be there. Not in this 

case. I’ve been at events where civil servants have brought 

greetings when no one else could be there, Mr. Speaker. And in 

fact there was nobody from the government, who had been 

invited to attend this wonderful community event, Mr. Speaker. 

I think that this is shameful that no one could show up, Mr. 

Speaker, to say congratulations. The Minister of Social Services 

was invited. I have been at many events where the minister has 

given her regrets but has sent someone else, Mr. Speaker. The 

Minister of Social Services was invited. 

 

[20:00] 

 



October 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1685 

In terms of education, I’d like to go to the education heading, 

Mr. Speaker. In my constituency of Saskatoon Riversdale we 

see huge issues with the funding formula. I represent schools, I 

represent schools, Mr. Speaker, with high Aboriginal 

populations and newcomers to our city. These cuts to this 

funding formula impacts everyone, but particularly impacts 

some of our more vulnerable students even more than others. 

English as an additional language support continues to be a 

problem. 

 

Cuts to full-day kindergarten. Talk to any early . . . Cuts to 

full-day kindergarten have been hugely problematic. You talk to 

any early years teacher interacting with some of these kids 

who’ve had more challenges in their short lives than most of us 

have ever had, Mr. Speaker. They benefit hugely from full-day 

kindergarten. If they’re not ready for kindergarten, Mr. Speaker, 

they are behind and they continue to fall behind. 

 

I can talk about St. Mary School. We have a wonderful, 

beautiful new school in Saskatoon Riversdale, which is 

fabulous. It’s great to have a new building, but the reality is the 

classes are far too big, Mr. Speaker. The kindergarten class, as I 

understand, there are two classes of 30 students, Mr. Speaker. 

There are two classes . . . So we have a wonderful building, Mr. 

Speaker, but the services offered, not because the teachers 

aren’t doing their darndest to be great teachers in supporting 

these students, but because they are under-resourced, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Pre-K [pre-kindergarten] waiting lists at schools like St. Mark 

in Saskatoon Riversdale are a huge issue. I’m very happy that 

the government added one pre-K class. This government always 

says when we’re on our feet, why can’t you say anything 

positive? Well, Mr. Speaker, our job . . . I’m very happy to say 

that this government a couple of years ago added a pre-K class, 

but it wasn’t enough, Mr. Speaker. There’s a huge demand, day 

one, at St. Mark School, huge demand for pre-K classes. It is 

not enough, Mr. Speaker. Education needs to be a priority for 

this government. The reality is, if we don’t . . . They’re telling 

me, Mr. Speaker, that it is, but actions speaks louder than 

words, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SRC [student representative council] budgets. This is just a 

little, it might seem like a little, silly thing, but SRC budgets, 

some schools are funded through the school boards, and money 

has been cut to SRC budgets. How does this impact our kids’ 

education? It does. I know there’s been a musical at one school 

in particular that they have every year which provides 

incredible skills for our kids and opportunities to learn. So SRC 

budgets have been cut, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The one thing I’d like to talk about under education which is 

quite near and dear to my heart is child care. I am very glad this 

government is committed to adding spaces but it needs to . . . 

Apparently, Mr. Speaker, I’ve hit a bit of a nerve because 

there’s been a lot of heckling coming from the other side, Mr. 

Speaker. So I think . . . I’m glad . . . Well the minister, the 

former minister is telling me that she’s glad I did so well on 

child care. I’d like to point out that I’ve been a member here 

since 2009, Mr. Speaker, so I’ve had nothing to do with any 

child care budgets, just to be clear. 

 

I’m very, very glad the government is committed to adding 

spaces but they need to do far more than that to properly 

support families. We need a real early learning and care plan. 

This system is broken. It doesn’t matter when it’s broken or 

how long it’s been broken but it is broken, Mr. Speaker. It 

shouldn’t be tinkered with. It needs a massive overhaul, Mr. 

Speaker. This is 2012. If we want to support people to be 

educated and to be employed, we must put together a 

well-informed early learning and care plan. This is about 

helping address labour force challenges, Mr. Speaker. This is 

about helping make sure our kids are well prepared for future 

years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So there are so many things wrong with our child care system. 

I’d like to point a few of them out. Child cares right now in 

Saskatchewan cannot recruit and retain staff. There’s tough 

conditions and low wages, Mr. Speaker. You talk to any 

director at a child care facility and they will tell you that there 

are not child care workers coming behind them, Mr. Speaker. 

There are huge issues around recruitment and retention. They 

have quotas or they have ratios that they have to fit or meet in 

terms of staffing, in terms of the number of people and the 

education they have, and it’s geared towards age. And these 

child care centres have a heck of a time meeting these ratios, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Subsidies. The paperwork that directors and ministry staff must 

do in order to ensure that families have subsidies is completely 

onerous. Every month for every child in that child care facility, 

the director manually fills out an attendance card, Mr. Speaker. 

That information then goes to the ministry and is then inputted 

there. We’ve got all this bureaucracy around this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I asked a written question last spring, Mr. Speaker, about the 

range of subsidies that have been paid out for child care, Mr. 

Speaker. One of the answers to that question, the bottom end 

range, Mr. Speaker, we paid out a 25-cent subsidy. We paid out 

a 25-cent subsidy, Mr. Speaker. What the heck is that? It is a 

horrible insult. It’s an insult to families. It talks about 

bureaucracy that someone is processing a 25-cent subsidy, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We don’t even have a good handle on the numbers of families 

that need child care, Mr. Speaker. It’s good to set targets but 

they should be best on the best possible information. We don’t 

have this. We don’t have a centralized waiting list. We don’t 

know who or how many families need or want child care, Mr. 

Speaker. We don’t have this number. And the reality is, here in 

Saskatchewan we are near the bottom of the pack when it 

comes to child care and supporting families. 

 

I want to just briefly touch on social services and children in 

care. I know the one thing that the minister has talked about is 

foster care. In fact we’re relying more and more on persons of 

sufficient interest instead of foster families. And she mentioned, 

I believe last year after the Children’s Advocate report came 

out, that that’s a trend. It’s harder and harder to get foster 

families today. And you know what? The reality is I’m a big 

believer. It’s ideal to have family and close relations look after 

kids too. I think foster families are fabulous but if you can have 

someone who has a direct connection, I think that that’s even 

better, Mr. Speaker. But I have concerns that we are not 

properly supporting persons of sufficient interest or PSIs to do 

their job and to raise children the best that they can. 



1686 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2012 

There still continues to be issues with the changes to The 

Children’s Special Allowance Act last year that saw PSIs losing 

money, Mr. Speaker. I worked with a woman just a couple 

months ago who tried advocating for herself, as the minister has 

recommended both to me in committee and in this House and to 

the media — don’t worry; if you call, we will make sure that 

you have the money that you lost. Well this woman, it was two 

months ago that she came to our office, and only at the 

prodding of her dad who said she needed, she . . . Her dad 

thought perhaps we would be able to help and in fact, after 

many back and forths, this woman has the same amount of 

money that she had when the changes first happened. But the 

minister had reassured us that that would have happened when 

she made her first call several months ago when she lost her 

money. And that wasn’t the case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The reality is we don’t . . . There are many issues around PSIs 

— respite care. I think the minister often talks about not having 

a one-size-fits-all solution and I am a big believer in the big 

overarching policy. But yes, you do have to be sensitive to 

people’s needs. But I think my experience with working as the 

critic for Social Services, I have many people come to me who 

are PSIs who say that many things could be changed with the 

system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Actually, and there’s one final thing that I would like to talk 

about, Mr. Speaker, that I think that this government actually 

seems to ascribe to this theory, the abrupt appearance theory, 

Mr. Speaker. Abrupt appearance is basically about 

neo-creationism. It claims that, abrupt appearance claims that 

the first life in the universe appeared abruptly, and that plants 

and animals appeared abruptly in complex form has 

occasionally been postulated. I would argue that perhaps this 

government has taken the abrupt appearance theory and applied 

it to economics here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. You would 

think that with this government’s rhetoric that the world in 

Saskatchewan started in 2007. When this government was 

elected, the skies opened up and the angels sang, and it all 

started, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would just like . . . Oh look, there’s a potash mine. Oh 

look! 

 

I’d just like to point out for them a few statistics, Mr. Speaker. I 

would like to point out a couple of statistics for all those 

backbenchers here who I think listen to some of their senior 

members a little bit too carefully and closely, Mr. Speaker. So 

looking at our population, Mr. Speaker, the reality is in 

Saskatchewan we started making positive moves sort of more 

regularly in the right direction in 2003, and has been going up 

since July 2006. Believe it or not, that was not under a Sask 

Party government. And we broke the 1 million mark before the 

Sask Party government took power. Can you believe that, Mr. 

Speaker? It didn’t all start in 2007. 

 

And you know, there’s one more thing I’d like to say to debunk 

this abrupt appearance theory of the Sask Party. I’d like to read 

something here, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read a quote here, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

People make light of how Saskatchewan is always next 

year country. In some respects, they’re right. We are 

eternal optimists. And that’s a good thing. But next year 

has arrived. We are a have province. Our economy overall 

is performing well, and we’re riding the momentum 

towards bigger things. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when was that from? That was from Harry 

Van Mulligen’s, the former Finance minister’s March 23, 2005 

budget speech, Mr. Speaker. 2005 we were a have province — 

what a surprise. Oh my goodness, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Anyway, with that I hope that this has been a good lesson for 

the backbenchers on the government side of the House where 

they’re actually getting some accurate information. 

 

But with that, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the 

government’s Throne Speech and I will be supporting the 

amendment put forward by the opposition. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

always a pleasure to enter in debate in the Chamber, and 

specifically on the Throne Speech. And such a positive speech 

as this year’s Throne Speech was, Mr. Speaker, it certainly 

warrants some comments here today. And I’d like to make a 

few comments later on in my speech specifically about Energy 

and Resources and the mining and oil and gas industry in our 

province. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would like to start off by thanking my 

constituency assistants in Lloydminster. We have a great office. 

We have a great team. And it seems like every day we are 

dealing with some fairly serious issues that need a little bit of 

attention. And as their MLA, it’s a real honour to serve the 

people of Lloydminster and to have the help of Caren and 

Marilyn. It makes that work very well. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, speaking of making myself look good, I 

don’t want to miss an opportunity of thanking my wife. All of 

us in this Assembly, with our partners, it’s the type of job that if 

you don’t have the support at home, it makes it very difficult. 

And I am blessed with a wife that is very supportive of me and 

we’ve got a couple of great daughters and it is very easy to 

come to work every day and represent the constituents of 

Lloydminster. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this year’s Throne Speech is one that builds 

on a lot of optimism, on a lot of hard work after the last five 

years. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s one that comes and builds upon, it 

looks at the one-year plan for our government for 

Saskatchewan, and that’s important. It spells out some 

initiatives for this year, which in the budgeting process in the 

spring the budget will give the money to, to carry those plans 

from the Throne Speech through in the year. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, another thing, an important thing that 

happened earlier this fall is the growth plan 2020. The Premier 

delivered it in Saskatoon and it is a document, Mr. Speaker, that 

I think is fundamental to the success of our province in the next, 

in the next eight years and probably well beyond that. And I 

know the members opposite have done their best to try and 

make it seem as irrelevant as possible. They have a long track 



October 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1687 

record of failed growth plans that after several growth plans, 

people said, for the love of Saskatchewan, just stop coming out 

with these growth plans. We can’t take any more. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this one in particular is one that sets some 

very clear targets, some very clear goals. It identifies challenges 

and it puts a road map in front of the government, this 

government, and then the government following the 2015 

election, Mr. Speaker, of what can and should happen to move 

Saskatchewan forward. Now certainly things will happen that 

we’ll need to accelerate or decelerate or modify that plan, but if 

you don’t have a plan, Mr. Speaker, it’s very tough to know 

where you’re going and it’s easy to get lost. And this document 

certainly lays out some important goals. 

 

To look at a couple of them fairly briefly, Mr. Speaker, 

investing in infrastructure. That is something that our 

government has taken on from our very first day in ’07 as a 

priority. But it’s not something we can say, job well done. It’s a 

job just begun in this province as we start to make up the 

backlog of work left by the former government as we look at 

the growth and opportunities ahead of us. It’s the infrastructure 

that needs to be in place to facilitate that growth that is 

articulated in this growth plan and in the first year of that in this 

year’s Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[20:15] 

 

Developing a workforce. Again, Mr. Speaker, a substantial 

amount of work has been done in the last five years: record 

investments in post-secondary, record investments in skills 

training, in the growth plan, and in this year’s Throne Speech, 

Mr. Speaker. Again, spelling that out is fundamental to moving 

our province forward this year, next year, and over the next 

several years. 

 

Ensuring competitiveness, Mr. Speaker. Again we have set 

some very clear targets and very important goals for our 

province, for our government. And this year will be the first 

year in the Throne Speech we spelled out some labour 

legislation. We need to ensure that we have competitive labour 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, that makes Saskatchewan an attractive 

place for businesses and for growth and prosperity for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Trade, Mr. Speaker. Trade is something that is in my ministry. 

It is something that we’ve seen great success over the last five 

years. We saw earlier this year that we’ve been tracking ahead 

of British Columbia. For the first time, Mr. Speaker, in 

probably close to 100 years, our trade numbers are going to be 

ahead of British Columbia. They’ve been ahead each and every 

month since the start of the year. And we think that that is a 

sign of prosperity, going forward as our exporters work very 

hard to push that forward. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to share a quick story. About a 

month ago I was asked to bring some comments to the STEP 

[Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership] annual meeting. 

And they had a reception. They had brought in buyers from 

around the world to set up deals with. And I actually flew to 

Saskatoon to make this event, cutting time a little tight. I only 

had about 20 minutes to get from the airport to downtown, and 

it happened to be just before rush hour. Things were getting 

quite busy and I found myself in traffic. And I was sweating it, 

Mr. Speaker, thinking, I can’t be late. Why is all this traffic in 

my way? And at one moment I had to take a deep breath and 

think, this is somewhat ironic that I’m going to a meeting of 

exporters that are driving our economy, that are growing our 

economy, and the prosperity is all around us. And the irony is 

that it’s all around us on the highway. 

 

And that is the new Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, in the 

Throne Speech and in the growth plan, Mr. Speaker, both 

contemplate the growth in our province. And is this something 

that we want to see into the future? Our party has said clearly, 

unequivocally, yes. Growth is important and growth is 

something we will continue to pursue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we see where we are today, it is a very 

exciting time in Saskatchewan. We have the highest population 

in our province’s history, and I think this province more than 

any is haunted by population stagnation, population loss. In the 

1930s, Mr. Speaker, we were, I believe, the third largest 

province in the country and we roughly had the same 

population we did in 2007. We now have 80,000 more people 

living in our province than we did then. And, Mr. Speaker, just 

in the past year, 20,000 of those people have called 

Saskatchewan home. We have a workforce that’s roughly 

60,000 more workers here today than we had five years ago. 

Mr. Speaker, this is all very positive to the kind of province that 

the people on this side of the House want to see. 

 

We see building permits at almost record numbers. We see 

housing starts at a level in the past year that are higher than any 

year going back to 1983, at about 7,000. In this current year, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s projected to be about 8,500, a substantial 

ramping up of housing construction and something that is very 

positive for our province. Incomes in this past year, Mr. 

Speaker, have increased, one of the highest increases in all of 

Canada here in Saskatchewan. The people of Saskatchewan are 

working very hard and they’re being recognized for that with 

the incomes they bring home. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk a little bit about some of 

the things that we’re hearing from the other side of the House 

from the NDP party provincially and federally and how that 

isn’t helpful. It isn’t helpful in Saskatchewan. It isn’t helpful for 

our economy as a whole in Canada. And the first of these that I 

would like to address is Dutch disease. Mr. Speaker, I think this 

is one of the interesting issues that plays very well in Quebec, 

and the NDP are playing it as hard as they can in Quebec. And 

it’s possible they honestly believe the hardworking people of 

Western Canada, the rich resources that we have here in 

Western Canada, the competitive investment climate we have 

here in Western Canada is, in their opinion, is a disease that is 

harming the rest of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that isn’t true. The NDP are wrong, but what is 

also wrong is the silence we hear from the other side of the 

House. Now one of the leadership candidates, Mr. Erin Weir, 

has come out very publicly and said, I absolutely support the 

leader, Mulcair. And he absolutely believes in Dutch disease. 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Weir is an economist. He’s the 

economist that the NDP provincially utilize on a regular basis to 

justify their positions. He’s the economist, in fact, that they use 

during the election campaign to cost out their platform. And, 



1688 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2012 

Mr. Speaker, he is also the spokesperson that is saying Dutch 

disease is real; Dutch disease is hurting Canada, and the 

strength of our resources in Western Canada, the strength of our 

workforce is hurting the rest of Canada. 

 

Now many people have come out against it, far more credible, 

Mr. Speaker, than the members that sit on the far side of the 

House, than the economists they use, such as Mark Carney, that 

says this is an overplay, that this is not accurate, that this is a 

simplistic read of the facts. And, Mr. Speaker, it is. All of 

Canada benefits from the strength of our resource sector. All of 

Canada export products, goods, services, people to feed the 

industry here in Western Canada. And we will make no 

apologies for the strength of our industry, for the hard work of 

our citizens and the investments made by industry here in our 

province. 

 

And as a government, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to work 

very hard to ensure that we continue to lead our country. And 

whether that means that we work on corporate tax rates, 

whether that means, Mr. Speaker, that we work with our 

training institutions to have the appropriate number of 

electricians, welders, Mr. Speaker, all these are very important 

pieces of our growth plan and important for Saskatchewan as a 

whole. 

 

Another one, Mr. Speaker, is pipelines. That’s another issue that 

the members opposite have weighed into, that their federal 

counterparts continue to wade into. And it’s not helpful for our 

province. The first I would like to address is the Keystone XL. 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s quite well known that the NDP sent 

people to Washington, D.C. to actively lobby against the 

pipeline, that in this House we had a debate. We had a vote on 

the issue, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan New Democrats 

voted against supporting the pipeline capacity that would be 

provided by the Keystone XL. And that’s troubling. It’s 

substantially troubling. And I will go into the numbers of it here 

in a moment. 

 

But the Northern Gateway is another pipeline option, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s being promoted, certainly in Canada, that will 

take some of the capacity from Western Canada and find a port 

on the West Coast. There’s been substantial work done by 

different proponents. Another one would be Kinder Morgan. 

It’s currently an oil pipeline that takes oil from Western 

Canadian oil fields to the coast, Mr. Speaker. And these play a 

very crucial role in the industry. The members opposite, the 

federal NDP, the provincial NDP have spoken out publicly 

against this pipeline as well. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s great to do this here in theory that we 

can all survive on solar and wind. Mr. Speaker, those are 

important, and in our province we have worked very hard on 

wind. But the oil industry is something that is going to be a 

long-term industry and something that we need to take very 

seriously. And, Mr. Speaker, the math on these pipelines is 

substantial. If we look at the price for oil on the high seas, the 

Brent price which is the price going on the East Coast of 

Canada, it’s about $20 premium over West Texas. Twenty 

dollars a barrel, Mr. Speaker, that is being lost to the producers 

in Saskatchewan. Taxation on $20 a barrel, on every barrel, is 

being lost by the people of Saskatchewan who own this 

resource, and it is entirely due to capacity of pipelines, Mr. 

Speaker. In fact we’re shipping a substantial amount of our oil 

by rail today, Mr. Speaker, that we weren’t doing several years 

ago. Rail is not, in theory, as safe as pipelines. It’s far more 

expensive. But you talk to the refiners on the East Coast. 

They’re having to buy Brent priced crude for refining where 

they can buy West Texas priced crude at a substantial discount 

in central North America from Saskatchewan oil fields, train it 

all the way to the East Coast, and it may cost them $7 to ship it 

by rail and they’re still $13 ahead from buying Brent oil, Mr. 

Speaker, from the sea on the East Coast. 

 

Now if the members opposite would reverse their position, 

support some of the pipeline capacity, the margin between those 

two would evaporate. The competitive disadvantage we see our 

industry here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, would evaporate 

and the industry would grow and be far more successful. But I 

think that the inclination of the members opposite, of the federal 

government, are that they don’t recognize the oil industry for 

the strength that it provides to our province, that it provides to 

our country. And if they can continue to chip away at the Dutch 

disease, if they can limit the pipeline capacity, if they can ruin 

the economics, Mr. Speaker, that this industry won’t be as 

substantial as it currently is. And that is going in the face of the 

growth plan we put forward. It’s going in the face of the 

hard-working men and women that make up the industry in our 

province and that pay the royalties and the taxes to our province 

as well. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the third way that I see the NDP actively, 

openly, and upfront attacking the oil industry, Mr. Speaker, is 

on royalties. And I find this one very interesting. I have 

watched it very closely over the last couple of years. About 

three years ago, Mr. Speaker, four years ago, the NDP were 

very open about raising royalties. Their new leader had just 

come back from Calgary and he fancied himself a bit of an 

oilman and he said that there is a lot of money to be taken by 

government and they should just reach into the pot and grab 

handfuls of it. And he was ready to raise the royalties on oil, on 

potash, Mr. Speaker, and on any commodity you want for a 

spending spree that we all saw him articulate during the 

campaign. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that was a point of view. As we got closer to 

the election though, Mr. Speaker, the NDP started hedging their 

bets, and well maybe they weren’t quite as sure about oil and 

they weren’t going to talk about that. Potash on the other hand, 

yes of course they wanted to get their hands in that pot and start 

pulling money out, but oil they backed away from. 

 

The election comes; the election goes, Mr. Speaker. We’re a 

year past the election and what are the NDP talking about? 

Substantially raising royalties on oil and gas again, as well as 

continuing their attack on the potash industry as well, I might 

say. 

 

And again articulated most succinctly by their chief economist, 

Erin Weir, and, Mr. Speaker, and not refuted by any of their 

candidates. When asked pointed questions of the nature, it’s all 

. . . I will have to study that, or I haven’t thought of that. But, 

Mr. Speaker, it is quite clear that if their party were ever to get 

into power that we would be in a situation where the resource 

industry in this province would be devastated. 

 



October 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1689 

And I’d like to quote, Mr. Speaker, from the member from 

Rosemont, and he sometimes I believe . . . Currently he’s in a 

leadership race and I think he fancies himself as doing quite 

well. And I think that he’s trying to distance himself from Mr. 

Weir, actually. I think that he is. I think that the member for 

Rosemont who fancies himself a finance expert — he’s the 

critic of Finance who also happens to be running a massive, 

red-ink-stained deficit, Mr. Speaker — also had a few things to 

say a few months ago about Mr. Weir who he now distances 

himself with. 

 

So the member for Rosemont, when talking about raising 

royalties, said this. And I quote. I’m quoting Mr. Wotherspoon. 

“I’ll highlight . . .” I’m quoting the member from Regina 

Rosemont who is actually quoting Mr. Weir, so please follow 

with me. The member from Rosemont says, “And I’ll highlight 

Mr. Erin Weir, an economist, a senior economist with the 

United Nations . . .” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m breaking away from the quote. I don’t 

know if Mr. Weir is in fact a senior economist with the United 

Nations. I find that if he is, that’s a very impressive resumé, and 

somebody that the members opposite would be very pleased to 

have as their leader. But, Mr. Speaker, I regress and I come 

back to the quote. So this is back to the quote from the member 

from Regina Rosemont: “And I’ll highlight Mr. Erin Weir, an 

economist, a senior economist with the United Nations.” Mr. 

Speaker, and I would quote, “Saskatchewan is collecting far too 

little revenue from potash.” 

 

[20:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, now we have multiple candidates for the NDP 

leadership quoting each other about raising royalties. It’s 

getting to be a situation, Mr. Speaker, where I think it’s all too 

transparent to people of Saskatchewan. I think that the people of 

Saskatchewan would say, I’ve seen this movie before. It’s 

called Bill 42, when they nationalized the oil industry. It’s when 

they nationalized the potash industry, their continual gaze on 

the resources, on the jobs that are driving this province, that we 

can dip into that for a little bit of money any time that we want 

to spend it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is something that our government has 

been very consistent and clear on, that we believe in stability. 

We believe in long-term growth, and we think that these 

industries will provide that growth to our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity to tour a new rig in Weyburn, 

Saskatchewan about three weeks ago. It’s a small company. 

They started in ’07 or ’08 I believe, Mr. Speaker, with one rig. 

They now bought a second rig. They built or bought a third rig, 

Mr. Speaker, and just three weeks ago they built their fourth rig. 

They had it stood up in their yard in Weyburn and they invited 

me down to look at it. So of course I went down, Mr. Speaker, I 

climbed around it. They were good enough to actually let me 

run the controls and run the equipment up and down the derrick. 

And it was a great experience. 

 

The young man that was showing me around, it was a guy who 

was about 30 years old. He had started in the oil industry on a 

weekend. He was going to become a carpenter. His neighbours 

had taken him to the rig to work for the weekend because he 

wanted a little money when he went back to school on Monday. 

But Monday came along, Mr. Speaker, and his neighbour who 

was the rig hand wouldn’t drive him home. So he was stuck 

there. And 10 years later, Mr. Speaker, he’s now going to be 

running this brand new rig. He’s worked around the world on 

drilling rigs over the last 10 years, worked his way up. He loves 

the oil industry. He thinks that was one of the most fortuitous 

events in his life when his neighbour wouldn’t drive him back 

to school on the Monday. And he was proud of this rig. He was 

proud of the work that had gone into designing it. It was 

world-class; they had thought of a lot of things. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, coming off that day was just an exciting time 

that, you know, people in Saskatchewan that grew up here, that 

survived through decades of NDP rule, that were here when the 

NDP took the industry and nationalized it with Bill 42, are still 

here, are still working, and finally are seeing that this province 

cares about their industry. It cares about business. It cares about 

the growth and the benefits that it brings to our province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I had a few thoughts as I was driving back 

that day. And if I could give a message to my friends on the 

other side of the aisle, Mr. Speaker, just a few, a cheat sheet if 

you will, of important things you need to . . . when you’re in an 

oil province or in an oil town, a derrick is, he may be a guy in 

your book club, but it’s also the thing that stands really tall in a 

drilling rig. A monkey board you may see at the zoo, but it also 

is at the top of the derrick. Tongs aren’t just for barbecues, and 

a dog house is where you can warm up and get some work done 

inside on a rig, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Oil, Mr. Speaker, for the members opposite, it’s black. It’s 

sticky. It employs about 30,000 people in our province, and it’s 

a part of our future that this side of the House is going to defend 

for a long, long time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll be supporting the Throne Speech. I will not be 

supporting the amendment, and I’m very pleased to enter 

debate. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly a privilege to rise any time in this 

House to speak especially to this Speech from the Throne. I just 

want to tell viewers across the province, don’t turn off their 

sets. They’re not seeing the same replay. I know we’re an awful 

lot alike. It just happens to be the ties are the same tonight, Mr. 

Speaker. And as Charles Colton said, imitation is the most 

sincere form of flattery. Thank you very much. 

 

Anyway I do want to say a number of thank yous first of all to 

the number of people, actually there was quite a number of 

people that worked in my ministerial office when I was the 

Minister of Health. I think it was the Ministry of Health that 

caused the turnover, not the minister himself. But they may say 

something different. I also want to thank the people that are 

working in my office now as Highways and Infrastructure and a 

number of Crowns. They’re doing a great job and I want to 

thank them very, very much for having me. If I seem prepared, 

it would be them that are getting me the information and 

making that happen. 



1690 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2012 

I also want to really thank, as I have in other speeches, but 

particularly my constituency assistant, Nicole 

Entner-McCullough, who does a great job in our office in 

Balgonie handling the issues that come in from Indian 

Head-Milestone and keeping me abreast of those. She does a 

great job. And so I want to thank her as well as, not last or least 

but probably most importantly, is my family, Cindy and the 

boys, for what they do to allow me to do my job. I don’t see the 

boys very often anymore, and when I do they tend to come 

home. And you know, I’m always looking forward to them 

coming home but actually, quite frankly, I look forward to them 

leaving because when they do come home the house kind of 

turns upside down. 

 

Anyway so I want to thank them all very much. And the boys 

right now are down in the States. We’re ready for the season to 

start here in about a month or two or three weeks, I guess. And 

if I could have only been living their life when I was 20. I really 

do admire them and respect them . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

No, you’re right. I wouldn’t have, I certainly wouldn’t have 

been here tonight. That’s for sure. 

 

So this really is a . . . And I’ve listened to a number of the 

speeches here tonight and over the last couple days. And it 

really is a choice. It’s a choice between looking at life in the 

world through the lens of the NDP or the life in the world 

through the lens of 48 members on this side — 48 members, not 

excluding you, Mr. Speaker, from this side — as to where the 

province is and what the outlook is. It really is a choice. It’s a 

choice of really, quite frankly, backward thinking and 

negativity compared to optimism and growth. 

 

And you know, it really can be spelled out in the growth plan 

that was released by the Premier a week or so ago and reiterated 

through the Speech from the Throne, that growth plan 

compared to the growth plans that were set out by the NDP. 

They set in 16 years, I believe, 13 or 14 growth plans. And as 

the Premier mentioned in the House one day, thank God they 

didn’t get to 18 and 19 growth plans because our population just 

couldn’t stand it. Every growth plan that they released saw a 

decline in population. They were persistent. They kept calling 

them growth plans. But every time they released a growth plan, 

we saw a decline in population. 

 

Since 2007, over the last five years in this province, we’ve seen 

an increase of 80,000 people. That is a far cry from what we 

saw under the NDP, an increase of 80,000 people. Where I 

grew up in a small town just outside of Regina, about 35 miles 

outside of Regina — I always have to say it because it’s the 

only way it ever gets mentioned any more — is the town of 

Lewvan. There is no one that lives there anymore. But when we 

were fortunate, we got to drive in to Weyburn. And I remember 

thinking about going into Weyburn, and there was 10,000 

people living in Weyburn. In five years we’ve added eight 

Weyburns to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s the difference 

between this government and the members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 16 years of government — and for 8 of those 16 

years I sat in this House, and I certainly had my criticism of the 

direction that the government was going — but to the best of 

my knowledge, and I stand to be corrected, but to the best of my 

knowledge, we didn’t see a community go from a town to a 

city, which is a population of 5,000 or more. Mr. Speaker, in the 

last four or five years, to the best of my knowledge, we have 

seen four communities go from a town to a city. The most 

recent was Warman who announced that they were up to that 

5,000 mark, Mr. Speaker. There’s also the town of 

Martensville, Humboldt, and Meadow Lake. 

 

Four new cities in the province of Saskatchewan in four and a 

half years compared to 16 years. To the best of my knowledge 

not a new city announced, Mr. Speaker, because the population 

was in decline. It is a choice between growth and growing 

population, or decline and negativity under the NDP. The 

people in Saskatchewan saw that for 16 years. I don’t think they 

want to go back any time soon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of subjects raised in the Speech 

from the Throne, not the least of which, not the least of which is 

setting many, many targets. And I honestly believe that a 

government should set targets and be held accountable to those 

targets. Mr. Speaker, it isn’t that the NDP didn’t set some 

targets in their early days. They set targets such as there’ll be no 

more food banks in this province. They missed it. They set 

targets that there would be 200 more police officers in this 

province, and they missed it. So at the end of the years of the 

NDP government, when asked, how come you don’t set a 

target? The answer was, we’re probably going to miss it. And, 

Mr. Speaker, they wouldn’t set targets. 

 

A very bold target, a target that I would vote for 10 times out of 

10, Mr. Speaker, 100 times out of 100, is that our population is 

going to grow to 1.2 million people by the year 2020. A very 

ambitious goal. A vision for this province. Something for this 

province to strive for, Mr. Speaker. I believe this government 

will do it, Mr. Speaker. I believe this province will do it, Mr. 

Speaker, in spite of the negativity that we hear each and every 

day from the NDP. 

 

It’s absolutely a choice. It’s a choice of a growing province that 

has infrastructure challenges. In the last five years, this 

government has invested $5 billion into infrastructure, Mr. 

Speaker. We could take that $5 billion, or we could go back 

where the NDP in the same amount of time invested less than 

half that amount, Mr. Speaker. They were never planning for 

growth. All they were planning was for decline, Mr. Speaker. It 

is a choice. It is a choice between again looking forward to a 

growing infrastructure, to a growing province, or going back to 

the old days of the NDP. Again, Mr. Speaker, 100 times out of 

100 I’ll take a growth plan, and so will the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Keep clapping. I’ve got to find my 

next page. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t have a lot of time so I don’t want to spend 

a lot of time on some of the other issues, but I do want to talk a 

little bit about highways. Mr. Speaker, we have seen a record 

amount of money spent on highways. In this budget year we 

have the second highest budget for highways in the history of 

the province. And I would like to say that we’re only second to, 

what? Perhaps what the NDP — no — what the NDP spent? 

No, it’s the second highest budget to the former budget a couple 

of years ago by the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. This year it’s well 



October 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1691 

over $600 million that are going into our highways 

 

There is more work to do, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely there is. But 

let’s look at a record of decline and an infrastructure that was 

crumbling under the NDP. We could vote for that on their 

amendment because they do want to go back to the good old 

days of decline and lack of spending, or we can vote for the 

Speech from the Throne that looks at record investments, in this 

year the second highest amount of investment in highways in 

the history of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I leave the issue of highways, on certainly 

a very much more sombre note is the issue around Ashley 

Richards that is talked about in the Speech from the Throne. 

Mr. Speaker, I was very proud of the Premier who was out in 

front of this. And this tragedy should never have happened. The 

Premier has charged not only myself as the Minister of 

Highways, but Justice and the Minister of SGI [Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance] to look at things that we can do to 

ensure the safety of people that are working within our province 

and in particularly on the highways. 

 

When you have a record amount of spending, Mr. Speaker, in 

the province of Saskatchewan, you have more construction than 

ever before. That’s what we’re facing. But in order to do that, it 

takes the men and women day in and day out to make sure that 

those highways are being fixed. What we need to do is ensure 

their safety, and that’s what the Premier has charged us to do. 

 

We’re seeing initiatives already, I was glad to say. And we’ll be 

hearing more actually — I hate to scoop myself — but 

tomorrow regarding the tripling of fines within the orange zone. 

Mr. Speaker, right now the fines are double the normal speed 

limit and they’re doubled when they’re in the orange zone. 

We’re taking the step to move that up further. It is a deterrent. It 

doesn’t prevent a person once they’re in that situation, when 

they’re speeding in the orange zone, but what it does do, what 

we hope it will do, is make people think twice before they put 

some worker’s life, worker’s life in danger through the orange 

zone because of the deterrent of speeding. 

 

It’s only one of many other initiatives that we’re going to talk 

about, but I was very proud of that. And I want to say to 

employees, not necessarily only of Highways and Infrastructure 

but that work on our streets through the cities and highways 

across our province, that we take their safety very, very 

seriously. That’s why our government is reacting and acting and 

will continue to act into the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other areas in the Speech from the 

Throne, it talks about health care. And I certainly could go on 

and on about health care and, boy, do our members know that I 

can go on and on about health care. So I choose not to. 

 

But what I think makes me the proudest is it is a choice again. It 

is a choice between ideology and putting patients first. Mr. 

Speaker, we can go back to the old days of the NDP where it 

was all about ideology, and we will still hear it from their critic 

and from their government about ideology. There is not a 

chance that they would have a surgery centre working privately 

within a public system in this province. Those surgery centres 

have put hundreds and hundreds of people through, and I would 

submit that one or two of those people were NDP. And not once 

have I heard a complaint from a person that’s got their surgery 

done surgery sooner, albeit through a private clinic, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

If it was up to the NDP, and if we ever went back to the those 

days of the NDP, they would far rather have people linger on 

the longest waiting lists in Canada because of ideology than 

serving patients first, Mr. Speaker. This government will serve 

the patients first every time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing, I do need to close. Mr. Speaker, in 

closing, I have lived in Saskatchewan all my life, for 26 years, 

Mr. Speaker. Okay, my numbers are a little bit wrong there, for 

a little bit longer than 26 years. Mr. Speaker, I have lived in this 

province all my life. And there isn’t a province in Canada — 

and I’ve had the opportunity, as many of us have, to have 

visited each and every province in this great nation of Canada 

— there is no province that I am more proud of. And I would 

believe that there has been an attitude change in this province, 

that people in Saskatchewan are as proud of this province now 

than they ever have been in the history of this province. And I 

would submit that if you did a survey right now, people would 

think our province is number one in Canada. 

 

We never want to go back to the days when it was 

out-migration by the NDP, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we saw it 

for far too long. It used to be people would ask you, when you 

travelled the country, where you were from. And you would 

say, well I’m from Saskatchewan. And they would say, that’s 

too bad. You say now, where are you from? I’m from 

Saskatchewan. You know we’ve been thinking about moving 

there. There’s jobs there. There’s opportunity there. It is a 

province to be in, not to the province to be from. We never want 

to go back to the province that everybody was from. We want to 

be in this province, and people are moving to this province in 

droves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there has been an attitude change. And it is a 

choice. It is a choice between going back to the former NDP or 

staying, looking forward. You can look forward with the 49 

here or you can be negative with the negative nine over there. 

I’m picking the forward-looking 49 here. We never want to go 

back to those negative nine over there. Mr. Speaker, I’ll be 

supporting the Speech from the Throne and I adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 1:30 



1692 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2012 

tomorrow afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 20:49.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1677 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1677 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1677 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1680 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1682 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1686 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1689 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


