




















































Hansard: May 01, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 38A  TUESDAY, MAY 1, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1341 

 May 1, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you, it’s a pleasure to introduce some very special 

guests who’ve joined us today on the floor of the Assembly. 

The nine among us who have been nominated by their peers, by 

their friends, by their family to receive Saskatchewan’s 

Volunteer Medal have joined us. And, Mr. Speaker, this is a 

pretty bright room and a pretty special place to be, but it could 

always use a little bit of brightening. And when this day 

happens every year in the calendar, the room is brightened 

indeed by the best among us, those who have given so much of 

themselves over a lifetime to their passions, to their avocations, 

and have made this province the place that it is today. And we 

want to welcome them to their Assembly. 

 

As you will know, Mr. Speaker, because you were there, we 

had the chance to more formally acknowledge them over at 

Government House this morning at the annual ceremony for the 

Volunteer Medal. We were joined by the Provincial Secretary, 

and by a number of members of the cabinet, as well MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] who represent these fine 

individuals. And of course we were hosted, Mr. Speaker, by 

Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor and His Honour as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, eight of the honourees are with us today in the 

gallery, and they’re going to be formally introduced in a 

moment by their respective members of the Legislative 

Assembly. And a ninth, the former Weyburn city councillor, 

Marlene Nedelcov of the city of Weyburn, who had given so 

much to that community and to southeast Saskatchewan but 

who we lost in February, was honoured posthumously today as 

well. And representing Marlene is her daughter Susan. She’s 

here as well today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Last month Stats Canada reported incredibly that Saskatchewan 

again has the highest volunteer rate of anyplace in all the 

Dominion of Canada at about 60 per cent of adult citizens 

helping out in some way, giving of themselves to their 

community, to their neighbours, to their province, to those who 

need the help the most. We honour some of those leading 

volunteers, of those 60 per cent or so, on a day like today.  

 

Mr. Speaker, for those of us who were there for the citations, 

who might read the biographies of these everyday heroes, you 

would be right to wonder how they find time to eat or sleep 

because they’re also of course pursuing, and they have been 

through their lives, pursuing their various occupations and 

vocations through the year while they were giving. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is just a very small token, the medal itself just 

a bauble compared to their great contribution to our province, 

and we just want to thank them. We especially want to thank as 

well their family members and their friends who have shared 

them with the rest of the province who made their giving and 

their generosity possible. We honour both the recipients and 

their families and friends today, and we welcome them all to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to join in 

on behalf of the official opposition and welcome all of our 

special guests here today to the Assembly, but especially to 

welcome the volunteers. 

 

These people have shown us that they care about their 

neighbours, they care about their communities, and they care 

about our province. And our simple task today is to say thank 

you to these nine individuals and remember that they are 

symbolic of all of our communities and all of our people in our 

province who serve each other. So, Mr. Speaker, I want to say 

thank you very much for everything that you have done. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce 

to this House, Mr. Allan Bailey from the constituency of 

Yorkton who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer 

Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Parent: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce Mr. 

Marcel de la Gorgendière from the constituency of Saskatoon 

Meewasin who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer 

Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege 

to introduce Mr. Joseph Dubielewicz from the constituency of 

Kindersley who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer 

Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it is my privilege 

to introduce Mr. Clarence Johnson from the constituency of 

Rosthern-Shellbrook who today received the Saskatchewan 

Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce 

Dr. Anne Leis from the constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland 

who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 



1342 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2012 

Mr. Marchuk: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce 

Mr. Don McDougall from the constituency of Regina Douglas 

Park who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to 

introduce Ms. Susan Nedelcov-Anderson from the constituency 

of Weyburn-Big Muddy who today received the Saskatchewan 

Volunteer Medal for her mother, Mrs. Marlene Nedelcov. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce 

Ms. Sandra Wankel from the constituency of Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre who today received the Saskatchewan 

Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce Mrs. Evelyn 

Wojcichowsky from the constituency of Saskatoon Greystone 

who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 

the members of this Assembly, I would like to introduce 36 

very beautiful young students from the grade 10 class at the 

Yorkton Regional High School in Yorkton, accompanied by 

their teacher, Mr. Perry Ostapowich, and chaperone, Ms. Lyla 

Cugini. 

 

Noteworthy, Mr. Speaker, two members in that group I’d like to 

point out — I hope I don’t embarrass them — one is Ms. Carlie 

Neufeld. Carlie, could you give us a wave? Carlie, she got a 

hold of me on Facebook. She’s wanting to take part in the 15th 

annual Brayden Ottenbreit Close Cuts for Cancer this year. So 

you know, we’re recognizing volunteers in this House today, 

and another one starting out very young and that someday we 

may see on this floor getting her own volunteer medal. So I’d 

like to acknowledge her as well as Brooklyn Jackson. Brooklyn, 

can you wave? There’s Brooklyn. 

 

It just so happens, I think Brooklyn, I don’t want to embarrass 

her either, but she’s one of the Premier’s biggest fans. And I 

was questioning him about that earlier. I don’t get it. But we are 

a bit partial to the Premier, but I’d just ask all members to 

welcome all of these great people to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, it 

gives me some great pride and honour today to introduce in the 

west gallery from Saskatoon, Larry and Rosemarie 

Hazelwanter. Do you want to give us a wave? Today’s the first 

day that they’ve actually toured this magnificent building, Mr. 

Speaker, and along with them is a young couple, Lorne and 

Noreen Knibbs, who also acted as part-time tour guides. Now 

of course everyone in the House that knows I’ve introduced 

Lorne and Noreen before; I’m their favourite son-in-law. I’m 

their only son-in-law, mind you, but that’s got no bearing 

whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. So I’d like to ask everyone to 

welcome Lorne, Noreen, Larry, and Rosemarie to the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask for extended 

leave, please? 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Prince Albert Northcote has 

asked for leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, at the entrance to the Assembly, I would like to introduce 

three people integral to my P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote 

MLA office. Sharon Kuhn is sitting on the left — give us a 

wave — is my constituency assistant. I first met Sharon a 

couple of years ago at a gathering of like-minded Saskatchewan 

Party members. Sharon came out with me to door knock and 

heard first-hand the hopes and fears, the concerns and dreams 

of our constituency of Northcote. With Sharon as my eyes, ears, 

and voice while I am here in Regina, there have been more than 

75 Northcote residents that have been helped since opening our 

doors in December. 

 

Donna Barr, sitting in the middle, is a shining example of our 

Saskatchewan entrepreneurs. Through her grit and 

determination, skills, and personality, she is building her 

website design and photography business. As she has said many 

times and I quote, “Since Brad Wall and the Saskatchewan 

Party, I am doing better now than I ever have been.” This single 

mom is trained in journalism, copywriting, and skilled in 

photography. With her on our team, we are able to capture the 

stories, passions, dreams, and sense of community of 

Northcote. 

 

Brent Gerlach is the newest member of the team and casual 

constituency assistant. Skilled as a graphic artist and web 

designer, the patience needed for such a craft was utilized 

many, many times as he struggled to regain speech and indeed 

his life after enduring a stroke. I am so fortunate to have his 

sense of humour and determination on our team. He has 

designed our website and continues to smile despite the myriad 

of changes I ask for to get our website to reflect me, the MLA, 

and our voice for the community of Northcote, so that together 

we are making Northcote in Saskatchewan the best place to be. 

Mr. Speaker, this team of Sharon, Donna, and Brent are a 

godsend. Please join me in welcoming them to their Legislative 

Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 



May 1, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1343 

through you, I’m very pleased to introduce to this Assembly my 

Aunt Monica here today, Monica Wotherspoon, who joins us in 

the east gallery here today from Indian Head. Monica’s here to 

celebrate the life of her sister, Marlene Nedelcov, here today 

and the contributions that she’s provided southeast 

Saskatchewan and Weyburn. 

 

I’d like to thank my aunt for joining us here today. Aunt 

Monica served as the kindergarten teacher for many years in 

Indian Head. Her husband, my uncle Glen, serves as my fishing 

partner and good friend. And certainly they’re known to all in 

Indian Head for having the most beautiful yard, possibly, in the 

province. But it’s a pleasure to have aunt Monica joined here 

today and certainly to join in the thoughtful celebration of 

Marlene Nedelcov. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of this 

honourable Assembly, 14 grade 7 students from the Herbert 

School seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. And I’d ask 

them to give us a wave. There you are. Accompanied by their 

teachers, Devin Bitschy, Randy McCullough, and chaperone, 

Sarah Doerksen. 

 

I hope that you will all enjoy your time at the legislature and 

that you will find it both educational and interesting. I also hope 

that you will enjoy this beautiful building that is 100 years old 

this year and is yours. I look forward to meeting you at 2:30. 

And I ask all members to extend a warm welcome to the grade 

7 class from Herbert and their teachers and chaperone. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

want to join the member from Yorkton in introducing a student 

from the Yorkton Regional, not because she was involved in the 

Miss Teen Saskatchewan competition last year, not because 

she’s an A student taking an advanced English program, not 

because she dances in the Ukrainian dance program, but 

because she takes her schooling at the Yorkton Regional High 

School and is just a tremendous student. But she lives in 

Kamsack where her home is and the fact is that she is the 

daughter of Warren and Sherry Todosichuk, great leaders in 

east central Saskatchewan. So I’d ask all members to have her, 

first of all, wave so that my colleagues know who she is, and 

welcome Kennedy Todosichuk to her Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — One last quick introduction, Mr. Speaker. I 

would be remiss if I didn’t introduce these individuals. With 

their father, Allan Bailey, in this Assembly today is two 

businessmen from Yorkton along with their wives. On the floor 

is Raymond Bailey. Do you want to give us a wave, Raymond? 

He’s the baby of the family. And Boyd is the eldest. Boyd. And 

their wives are seated up in the east gallery. We have Rhonda 

married to Boyd, and Crystal married to Raymond. 

 

So I’d ask all members to welcome them and also acknowledge 

one other fact, Mr. Speaker. Their mother, Colleen, we lost to 

cancer in 2006. But interestingly enough, in 2004, she was also 

awarded the Volunteer Medal of Saskatchewan. So I’d ask all 

members to acknowledge that and recognize the Baileys in this 

Assembly. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it is my honour to introduce to you and through you to 

all members, a father and son from Regina who are serving our 

country with great distinction overseas. They’re in your gallery 

today. Thank you, gentlemen. 

 

A senior officer with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, 

Chief Superintendent Everett Summerfield is home on leave 

from his position as Canadian police commander in Kabul, 

Afghanistan. Before joining the RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police] 38 years ago, the chief superintendent served 

in the Canadian Forces military police here in Canada and 

abroad. 

 

Lieutenant Coady Summerfield serves in the third battalion of 

the Princess Patricia’s Canadian Light Infantry based in 

Edmonton. He graduated from Saint Mary’s University in 

Halifax and completed his infantry officer training in St. Jean, 

Quebec and Oromocto, New Brunswick. He was posted to third 

battalion PPCLI [Princess Patricia’s Canadian Light Infantry] in 

February 2011 and deployed with his unit in July to Kabul at 

Camp Eggers and Camp Phoenix. Like his father, Lieutenant 

Summerfield is home for a few days of well-deserved rest and 

recreation with family members who have been waiting many 

months to see them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a privilege to thank these outstanding 

gentlemen for their dedicated service to Canada and to welcome 

them to their legislature. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present petitions calling for greater protection for 

late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know 

in the early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray 

Wiebe died from his injuries when he was shot. He was 

working at a gas station in Yorkton, alone and unprotected from 

intruders. We know that British Columbia and other provinces 

have brought several safety precautions through law, including 

a requirement that workers cannot be alone during late-night, 

early-morning hours. And if they are required to work, there 

must be protective barriers such as locked doors and protective 

glass. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 



1344 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2012 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

the city of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise today to present a petition from the Beauval 

area. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Therefore we, in the prayer that reads as follows, 

respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan undertake to upgrade the section of 

Highway 165 between Beauval and the English River 

First Nation by adding proper lighting for pedestrian 

traffic, by adding space for pedestrians on the highways 

and its bridges, and by properly surfacing the road with 

the material needed for a busy, heavy-haul road. 

 

And the people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

primarily from Beauval. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to education in our province. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to make education a top priority by 

establishing a long-term vision and plan, with resources, 

that is responsive to the opportunities and challenges in 

providing the best quality education and that reflects 

Saskatchewan’s demographic and population changes; 

that is based on proven educational best practices, that is 

developed through consultation with the education sector 

and that recognizes the importance of educational 

excellence to the social and economic well-being of our 

province and students for today and for our future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Kindersley and Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of citizens of the province who are 

concerned about how some seniors are treated in Saskatchewan. 

And these individuals are calling on the Sask Party government 

to support the Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights. 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that many Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed 

incomes and are victims of physical, emotional, and 

financial abuse; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

social and economic security and a right to live free from 

poverty; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights which would 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current 

regulations being enforced are creating challenges that are a 

concern for our traditional trappers. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued; and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation and 

regulations with respect to trapping regulations and 

firearm use in consultation with traditional resource users. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many good northern people. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Journalists for Human Rights Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today 

to highlight some inspirational work of Ms. Raquel Fletcher. 

Raquel is a local journalist, writer, and photographer. Her work 

was showcased at a photojournalism exhibit and fundraiser at 

the University of Regina on March 31st. I was pleased to 

attend. 

 

As a member of Journalists for Human Rights Saskatchewan, 

Raquel participated in an international journalism internship in 

Ghana, West Africa. Her photo exhibit entitled, This is Africa 

shared a wide-reaching array of human rights stories and 

highlighted the unique culture and national pride of the local 

people. It aimed to illustrate Raquel’s personal experiences, as 

well to break down stereotypes of the continent by displaying 

images of a colourful and vibrant country. As I examined the 

images, I noticed that each photo shared a unique human story. 

 

The evening was also a fundraiser for graduating U of R 

[University of Regina] journalism student Noah Wernikowski 

who will be embarking on the same project in May and 

continuing the work of the local chapter of Journalists for 

Human Rights to inform Saskatchewan residents of human 

rights issues around the world. It was a fantastic event that told 

a story that challenged stereotypes and assumptions. I ask all in 

this Assembly to join with me to recognize the meaningful 

work and leadership of Journalists for Human Rights and 



May 1, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1345 

specifically that of Raquel Fletcher and Noah Wernikowski. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Missing Children’s Month 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House today 

to proclaim Missing Children’s Month in Saskatchewan. This 

year marks the 21st Green Ribbon campaign by Child Find 

Saskatchewan, which culminates on May 25th with the advent 

of National Missing Children’s Day. According to Child Find 

Saskatchewan president Phyllis Hallatt, thousands of children 

are reported missing in Canada every year. Missing Children’s 

Month is a vital opportunity to raise awareness at home here in 

Saskatchewan and throughout Canada on behalf of missing 

children and their families. 

 

The Green Ribbon of Hope campaign is recognized nationally 

as a symbol to remember children and to seek their safe return. 

It originated at a Holy Cross Secondary School in St. 

Catharines, Ontario following the disappearance of one of their 

students, Kristen French. In memory of this tragedy, the 

students and faculty created the green ribbon to increase 

national awareness for missing children. 

 

Our government is committed to the safety and well-being of 

all Saskatchewan children. That is why we are wearing today 

the green ribbon, and that is why we are encouraging all 

Saskatchewan citizens to do their part and put on a green ribbon 

of hope this month to raise awareness of missing children. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Aboriginal Youth Leadership Summit 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to rise in the House today to draw attention to a very 

special event that took place in Prince Albert very recently. 

That event, Mr. Speaker, was the Aboriginal Youth Leadership 

Summit. With the goal of spreading a positive message of 

empowerment and furthering education, the summit drew over 

100 youth from Prince Albert and area to hear the stories of 

inspiring leaders in the Aboriginal community which included 

scientists, athletes, and actors. 

 

One of the highlights for the attendees, Mr. Speaker, was the 

presentation by keynote speaker and a former Prince Albert 

resident Justin Rain. As a successful actor with his own story of 

struggle, Justin addressed the audience with the goal of 

inspiring youth to pursue their creative expression. Mr. 

Speaker, Justin Rain is currently appearing on Aboriginal 

Peoples Television Network’s Blackstone, but he’s also known 

for his roles in Two Indians Talking and of course the very 

popular Twilight Saga, the Eclipse. 

 

During his presentation, Justin spoke carefully about peer 

pressure. He spoke candidly about his problems with drugs, as 

well as his struggle as a lost teenager growing up in the Prince 

Albert area. He went on to urge the youth to find things they’re 

passionate about and to pursue them as he did to overcome 

periods of heartache and difficulty. 

 

On behalf of my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take 

this opportunity to thank the organizers, the speakers, and 

everyone involved for inspiring and bringing hope to youth by 

organizing this very important and wonderful event. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

International Workers’ Day 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 

my pleasure to rise today and celebrate International Workers’ 

Day. The Government of Saskatchewan recognizes the 

province’s workers and their indispensable contributions to 

strong communities and a growing economy. As we continue to 

develop this fine province, it is employees who make much of 

this progress possible, and their safety and continued prosperity 

is at the top of the mind for government. 

 

As of March 2012, Saskatchewan had 529,000 people working 

in the province, an increase of approximately 5,200 jobs. Strong 

employment conditions are evident in diverse areas of the 

economy. Saskatoon’s employment numbers are up 3.3 per 

cent, while Regina’s has increased by 5.4 per cent year over 

year. Saskatchewan is experiencing record employment, and 

this includes our Aboriginal population. 2011 saw the highest 

level of Aboriginal employment in the province’s history. In 

addition Aboriginal youth employment is up 9.2 per cent, 

indicating that investments in training and education of youth is 

resulting in transferable job skills. 

 

We will all work hard to continue these positive employment 

trends and maintain one of the country’s lowest unemployment 

rates. I invite the members of this Assembly to please join me 

in recognizing the contributions of our Saskatchewan workers. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

Father-Daughter Gala Fundraiser 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise today to talk about the Father-Daughter Gala which I 

attended with my two daughters this past Friday in Prince 

Albert — Alyssa and Mackenzie. 

 

The gala was a fundraiser for the Prince Albert Raiders 

education fund and the upgrading of the Ronald McDonald 

House in Saskatoon. The special event was organized by the 

Prince Albert Raiders Hockey Club. The inaugural gala 

included father and daughter portraits, flowers for all the ladies 

in attendance, and entertainment provided by the comedian duo 

of Double Vision. The event also held a silent auction of 

fabulous items and an elimination draw featuring a variety of 

prizes for ticket holders. 

 

One thing was very clear, Mr. Speaker, daughters who want 

auction items should not be messed with. In the end, Mr. 

Speaker, they had absolutely no problem spending their father’s 

money. Case in point, Mr. Speaker, is that one of my daughters 



1346 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2012 

decided I should purchase an evening out in Saskatoon to see 

the Jersey Boys Broadway show, along with a dinner out and a 

night stay in a hotel. Then, Mr. Speaker, the other daughter, not 

to be upstaged by her older sister, decided a night stay in an 

executive suite at another hotel in Saskatoon was in order. Like 

any special father and daughter time, it’s the memories that are 

important, Mr. Speaker, not the cost. Or that’s what we decided 

to tell their mom when we got home that night. 

 

I would like to acknowledge the organizers and attendees for 

making the gala a success. The organizers were aiming to sell at 

least 150 tickets, and they exceeded this expectation 

overwhelmingly by selling out. That meant that about 100 

fathers were in attendance and over 200 daughters were ranging 

in ages from 4 years old to 29 years and holding, Mr. Speaker. 

We all had a fun evening together. 

 

On behalf of the province of Saskatchewan, I ask all members 

to thank the generous individuals from both Prince Albert and 

Saskatchewan who assisted those in need and help to make our 

province a great place to live. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Regina Resident Completes Sahara Marathon 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday we 

acknowledged the 100 years of Huskie athletic contributions to 

our province. I stand today to recognize a constituent of Regina 

Douglas Park and the University of Regina who successfully 

completed what is considered the hardest cross-country foot 

race in the world, the Marathon des Sables in the Moroccan 

Sahara Desert. 

 

Stacey Shand has competed in running events in the Northwest 

Territories — a race aptly called the Cold Foot Classic — Costa 

Rica and Europe, and has scaled Africa’s two tallest peaks, 

Kilimanjaro and Kenya, within a week of each other, Mr. 

Speaker, all in the pursuit of pushing her mental and physical 

limits. 

 

When not racing, Stacey works as a lecturer and community 

research coordinator at the University of Regina. The 

University of Regina is very fortunate to have an instructor of 

this calibre. And as the Premier remarked yesterday, 

accomplishments of this magnitude only serves to focus 

attention on our province. 

 

The Marathon des Sables is a seven-day, 243-kilometre race 

through sometimes knee-deep sand. Each competitor carries a 

30-pound pack containing a sleeping bag, clothing, food, a 

snake and scorpion anti-venom pump, and a ration of water. 

Mr. Speaker, you can get more water if needed but then you’re 

time penalized for each request — give me a break. 

 

A guidebook is provided to racers along with a compass which 

helped Stacey navigate her way through the course at night — 

and get this — a sand storm at 81.5 kilometres. Stacey finished 

second among Canadian women and third among women of 

North and South America. A fantastic accomplishment. 

 

Please join me in applauding a courageous and determined 

Regina and Saskatchewan resident. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

Grade 6 Students Start Recycling Program 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to recognize the 

excellent work by a group of grade 6 students in the town of 

Star City. These 10 students, under the guidance of Mrs. 

Kathleen Stobbs, started a community-wide recycling project in 

November of 2011. 

 

The object of the project was to improve Star City 

environmentally and socially. The class decided to offer free 

recycling pickup the first Friday of every month. The way it 

worked, Mr. Speaker, was to accept calls from the residents 

ahead of time and then the teacher and students would pick up 

the recycling material from the residents during the noon hour. 

After that, Mr. Speaker, the students would make sure the 

cardboard, paper, tin cans, plastics, and bottles were ready to be 

recycled. Then the students would bring the material to the bins 

or to Sarcan for recycling. In the words of Mrs. Stobbs, little 

did the students know that this class assignment would turn into 

a program that they would all be so passionate about. 

 

This past February the town of Star City nominated the class for 

the Saskatchewan waste reduction awards. And recently it was 

announced that this grade 6 class won the award for youth and 

students. 

 

I would like all members to join with me in congratulating Mrs. 

Stobbs and her grade 6 students on their initiative and their 

energy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Impact of Federal Crime Legislation 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Justice minister said 

once again that the government did not know exactly what the 

impact of Bill C-10 would be on the provincial justice system. 

He said that the number of inmates in provincial prisons will 

increase as a result but he couldn’t say by how much. In an 

interview yesterday the Ombudsman said, “The estimates that 

seem to be the most reliable in terms of the impact on the 

provincial system is about a 20 per cent increase.” 

 

Has the Premier learned anything more about the impact of Bill 

C-10 on the provincial system? And does the Premier agree 

with the Ombudsman that a 20 per cent increase in the number 

of inmates is a reliable estimate? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you for the question, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve indicated before that we’ve chosen not to 

participate in speculation on this area. We’ve looked at what’s 

taken places in other provinces, and we know that speculations 



May 1, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1347 

vary widely. We know that this Bill will have an impact on our 

inmate population. We also know that our correctional facilities 

are at or near capacity. We know we will have to increase 

capacity at some point in the reasonably near future. 

 

It would be premature and foolish to plan for an expenditure 

that may not be necessary or, on the other hand, may not be 

sufficient. We will be careful and we will be prudent with the 

public’s resources, and we will make a good and a right 

decision when the time comes. The federal government has 

indicated to us they will work with us on proclamation dates so 

we have reasonable time and can make a good plan in this area. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in his report the Ombudsman 

writes, “Correctional centres in Saskatchewan already house 

almost twice as many inmates as they were designed for. With 

the recent passage of the federal omnibus crime bill, this 

situation has the potential to deteriorate [even] further.” 

Yesterday the Minister of Justice admitted that not only is there 

double bunking going on in provincial facilities; there is some 

triple bunking. 

 

How can the Premier support Bill C-10 when he says he doesn’t 

know the financial cost to the province and he says he can’t tell 

us what the impact will be on the inmate population at a time 

when triple bunking in provincial facilities is already 

occurring? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During the 

time when the members opposite were in government, they 

replaced a facility. But during that time, they did not add a 

single space in the correctional facilities. We inherited a 

significant deficit. We have made increases that will allow, with 

double bunking, to increase the ability to hold the prisoners by 

an additional 204. We also have other plans on the way to 

increase space. 

 

We will do our best, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that we’ve got the 

best possible facilities. There will be a transitional period. We 

will work through that transitional period. Unlike the members 

opposite, we are not sitting back idly waiting. We have made an 

increase, and we are going to continue to make further increases 

as are necessary and as are warranted and as are financially 

prudent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, Bill C-10 will have both 

short-term and long-term impacts on the province’s correctional 

system. Even without Bill C-10, there’s overcrowding and 

triple bunking. The minister admitted yesterday, classrooms are 

being converted to dorms. The Ombudsman says, 

“Overcrowding does pose serious health and safety risks for the 

inmates, but it also poses risks for the corrections workers 

tasked with supervising them.”  

 

My question to the Premier: does he believe that triple bunking 

inmates or even mass housing inmates by converting 

classrooms to dormitories is safe for inmates and for 

correctional staff? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite 

want to talk about safety, we’ll talk about safety. We’ll talk 

about child sex predators and getting them off the street. Mr. 

Speaker, we’ll talk about people that traffic large amounts of 

drugs at or near our schools, and we’ll want to get those people 

off the street. And if those people have to be triple bunked, so 

be it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We want the criminals off our streets. We want to have safe 

streets. We are taking steps to ensure that our streets are safe. 

And the provisions that are in Bill C-10 that will make our 

streets safe, we will support those provisions. We asked for 

those provisions, Mr. Speaker, and we will see that those 

provisions provide safety to our citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people ought not be returned back to society when 

they have not completed their sentences or when they have not 

completed an adequate rehabilitation program. We are going to 

continue to do that, and we will work to ensure that we do not 

have child sex predators on our street, to ensure that we do not 

have large quantities of drugs. Those are the steps that we will 

take for safety, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Support for Northern Housing 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, on April 30th, 2012 on 

behalf of the Minister of Social Services, I took notice of a 

question asked by the member from Cumberland on the rental 

purchase option program. The rental purchase option was 

introduced in 2001 and helped 138 northern households to 

become homeowners between 2001 and 2012. As well since 

2007, our government has invested 31.6 million to build 256 

housing units in the North. 

 

The rental purchase option program was never intended to be 

offered indefinitely, and the Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation conducted an assessment of the program and 

presently it is on hold pending consideration of the information 

gathered in the assessment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Proposed Urban Development Project 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we learned that the 

minister responsible is considering a proposal to help pay for a 

domed stadium in Regina. Unfortunately when the minister was 

questioned about the proposal he made it clear that the Sask 

Party government was not prepared to share any information 

with the taxpayers of Saskatchewan about how much money 

they might be on the hook for. 

 

In 2007 the Sask Party campaigned on being one of the most 

open and transparent governments in the history of 

Saskatchewan. Well they have a chance to live up to that, Mr. 



1348 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2012 

Speaker. This government has not been forthcoming with the 

people of Saskatchewan from day one on the stadium project. 

They have a chance to do so today. To the minister: how much 

money has the city of Regina requested and will the Sask Party 

government be paying part of the cost for a new stadium in 

Regina? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of First Nations and 

Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much 

for the question. We did indeed receive a proposal from the city 

of Regina late last week, a proposal that encompasses the major 

revitalization of the city of Regina including a stadium, 

including the development of the CP [Canadian Pacific] yard 

site and development of the existing Mosaic site. That proposal 

has asked the government for some $230 million out of a 

proposal of $348 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we behave in a very professional manner. This 

proposal was sent to us in confidence and we extended that 

courtesy to the city of Regina to ask that that information be 

released. They okayed that information and here it is. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — We thank the minister for the actual 

information today, Mr. Speaker. We’re glad to have that on the 

table. The minister has said that everything is on the table when 

it comes to the total project. So the $230 million that the 

minister’s referenced, what does that go for? Does that go for 

the stadium? Does that go for housing? What do those dollars 

represent, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of First Nations and 

Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, just to remind the 

member opposite, we went through a proposal. It was a 

partnership of the federal government, the provincial 

government, the city of Regina, and the Saskatchewan 

Roughriders. The federal government had chose not to 

participate in that particular proposal. At that time we’d asked 

the city of Regina to take the lead in this area. They’ve come up 

with a revitalization plan. The mayor is certainly the lead on 

that file. And we will continue to ask questions on it. What they 

provided us last week was a proposal. We have many questions, 

and earlier today I wrote a letter to the mayor of Regina asking 

for more information in that regard. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, will the minister table that letter 

with the Assembly? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of First Nations and 

Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to talk 

about the substance of the letter. The letter had just gone out 

earlier today to the mayor, and again I would ask that that letter 

be kept in confidence. But certainly I can talk about the . . . 

more information that’s needed about the proposal, about the 

specifics, about the funding model that is going to be used, 

about the involvement of the Saskatchewan Roughriders, and 

normal questions that would be asked in the process of due 

diligence that we are undertaking at this time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, after the first answer, this set’s 

been a little short on information coming from the minister. 

Again, the $230 million, what does that represent? What is that 

request going to the province for? Is it for housing? Is it for the 

stadium? What does that, what do those dollars represent? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of First Nations and 

Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — That amount is the amount of 

money that the city of Regina is requesting for the entire 

revitalization program, and that includes the existing site for 

Mosaic Stadium, some of the ideas that the city is putting 

forward; the downtown site; the CP yard site, the revitalization 

there; and the stadium. That is the total ask that encompasses all 

of those three areas. Again we’re asking for more information 

from the city. We will be doing that due diligence. We will be 

asking them questions like the involvement of the private 

sector. 

 

But we’ve asked them to take the lead on this file. They are the 

lead on this file. They discussed it at city council yesterday, and 

we’ll be waiting for more information that comes forward as 

this necessary proposal is being considered by levels of 

government. Mosaic Stadium, Taylor Field is 100 years old. I 

think all members will agree that something has to be done. It 

can’t remain the status quo as it is now. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, in an earlier chapter in this story 

around what happens with the stadium, we came to a pass 

where the federal government said that they were out, that there 

wouldn’t be federal money going towards this project, and at 

that point, the province followed suit. Is the province today 

saying that there is federal money on the table for this as well? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of First Nations and 

Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, when we were 

involved in the joint project, we asked the federal government 

to put money forward for this project. They declined to do that 

at that time. They were very clear in that. We took them at their 

word. What we have asked now is the city of Regina to come 

with a proposal. They’ve come to us with an ask of the 

province. We’re doing our due diligence. We have not had any 

discussions with the federal government as a province on this 

file. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — So one of the challenges that we have as the 

opposition, Mr. Speaker, is to get a clear picture of what this 

proposal really means for the people of Saskatchewan. We want 

to know what the Saskatchewan public dollars that are being 



May 1, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1349 

asked for in this project, we want to know what that leverage is 

in terms of the private sector potential involvement. And we 

want to know whether or not there is in fact some potential for 

federal involvement. 

 

And again on this front, Mr. Speaker, the minister, after having 

come forward to talk about a proposal that provincial money 

had actually gone into helping to construct, Mr. Speaker, wasn’t 

able to come forward with the information. We’ve got a lot 

more questions about this, and I guess we’re glad about the key 

details on the total ask being put forward today. 

 

To the minister: what more information is he going to provide 

the people of Saskatchewan so that they can make an informed 

decision about a huge project for the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of First Nations and 

Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — The member opposite outlines a 

number of questions. I can tell him we have similar questions. 

And we are asking the proponent, the author of the proposal 

that came to our attention last week, for that additional 

information. 

 

I think what the more important question maybe is today, in the 

line of the questioning, is where does the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] stand? Are they in favour of a new stadium? 

Do they think that Mosaic Stadium, Taylor Field is in need of 

renewal? Mr. Speaker, that is something that we will continue 

to ask. But at the meantime, we will do our job as government. 

We will do our due diligence. And we will make sure that 

before any taxpayers’ dollars are spent, that there’s a judicious 

review of this proposal. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Saskatchewan Home Repair Program 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, on April 30th, 2012, on 

behalf of the Minister of Social Services, I took notice of a 

question asked by the member from Cumberland on the home 

repair program. Our government is pleased to announce last 

week the launch of the new Saskatchewan home repair 

program. This new program replaces the residential 

rehabilitation assistance program, known as RRAP, and 

provides solutions to reflect the current housing environment in 

Saskatchewan and to respond to our province’s unique housing 

needs. 

 

The Saskatchewan home repair program has been redesignated 

to be more accessible to homeowners and the rental property 

owners for repair and/or to adapt their dwellings. Assistance 

levels have been enhanced for all program components for 

repairs to recognize the increased cost of repairs. The new 

program also increased eligibility of households with 

disability-related issues to account for the additional costs. 

 

These changes to the eligibility requirements and the maximum 

assistance levels will better target those who most need the 

program. This targeted delivery will assist everyone in our 

province, including homeowners in the North. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for the Film Industry 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In March this 

government chose to put an industry at risk by killing the 

Saskatchewan film employment tax credit. After the huge 

public outcry, the government then agreed to give the industry a 

short reprieve. Now only two months remain for the tax credit. 

People working in this industry are anxious and want to know 

what the future might hold for them in their own province. To 

the minister: what progress has the government made in 

working with the industry to come up with an acceptable 

replacement for the tax credit? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the Premier has suggested consideration of a real tax 

credit program that actually reduces income taxes payable by 

Saskatchewan-based film companies. Under the current 

program, as many will know, less than 2 per cent of the 

payments reduce taxes payable; over 98 per cent is just a grant. 

 

The Premier also invited the industry to consider ways to help 

the film community transition from its current format to digital 

production, which is obviously the way of the future. Industry 

representatives are clearly intrigued with these ideas. A lot of 

good work, we know, has already been done on both sides of 

the table, and we look forward to sharing the results of our 

work with industry representatives in the very near future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Supporters of the 

industry have felt compelled to keep this conversation going 

and the industry alive. The end of the tax credit is looming and 

the minister has yet to provide a solution or even a progress 

report, which we just asked for, on finding a solution. People 

need clarity and concrete statements to make plans for their 

future. That’s why they continue to push with petitions, letters, 

email, rallies, and other actions. Time is running out. Will the 

minister commit today to ensure an equal or better incentive is 

in place before the June 30th deadline? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In his 

budget response speech, the Premier said no to continuing a 

grant program that has paid tens and tens of millions of dollars 

to companies that don’t even pay income tax in Saskatchewan. 

But he also said yes to creative alternatives. And here is a 

quote: “If you want to work with government to find a better 

way to sustain . . . the film industry . . . we are ready to work 

. . . to see what can be achieved together.” 

 



1350 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2012 

As I mentioned before, Mr. Speaker, the Premier suggested a 

real tax credit program that reduces the income taxes of 

Saskatchewan-based film companies. And he has suggested 

more research into digital production, which we all know is the 

wave of the future, not only for film, but for all of the creative 

industries. That’s what we’re doing. We’re looking forward to 

the results with great enthusiasm, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The extension of 

the tax credit hasn’t eased a single concern for people in the 

industry. In fact supporters of the film and television industry 

have ramped up their actions and want this government to 

listen. They need this government to listen and they need 

something in place before the tax credit is dead. 

 

In recent weeks, those who make a living from this industry 

have been handing out what they call money cards, 

demonstrating the impact their work has on our economy in this 

province. These individuals work hard, pay taxes, and raise 

their families here in this province. On behalf of these families, 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister guarantee something is in place 

before June 30th or will he be the one responsible for putting a 

nail in the coffin of the film and television industry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously 

we’re working on it. The member is fully aware of that. But 

while we’re considering the work that’s going on, we also need 

to consider other opinions. 

 

Here is what Colin Craig who’s the Prairie director of the 

Canadian Taxpayers Federation has to say: 

 

Chances are, the corner store by your house, the 

mechanic [that] you take your car to and the little 

machine shop you pass by on the way to work receive 

nothing in terms of government handouts. 

 

Nor should they [he says] . . . 

 

The reality is, the Wall government has tabled what many 

have called a “razor-thin” budget surplus this year. Thus, 

in order to balance the budget, it had to make some tough 

choices — give millions [of dollars] to movie companies 

or spend money on things like the new colon cancer 

screening program . . . 

 

There are plenty of businesses out there that create jobs, 

buy local products and support the local economy without 

receiving subsidies. The film industry should be no 

different [he argues] . . . 

 

Some may not like the film subsidy decision [he 

concludes], but the Premier made the right choice. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

 

Support for Children in Care 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, on April 30th, 2012, on 

behalf of the Minister of Social Services, I took notice of a 

series of questions from the member from Saskatoon Riversdale 

on persons of sufficient interest and the federal benefits cuts. 

 

Effective January 1st, 2012, the Canada Revenue Agency of the 

federal government implemented changes to the Children’s 

Special Allowance Act which directly impacted extended family 

caregivers and their eligibility to apply for federal benefit 

payments for children placed in their care as persons of 

sufficient interest. That decision of the federal government 

affected some of the caregivers through a loss of a child 

disability benefit or universal child care benefit or GST [goods 

and services tax] credits or income tax exemptions. 

 

The member opposite should be well aware that we do not have 

access to the federal database of recipients of various federal 

programs in order to identify who received a reduction. 

However, our government did have a concern of families seeing 

a reduction and therefore the Ministry of Social Services 

increased the maintenance payment amount it provides to 

extended families to ensure that they’re able to meet the needs 

of the children. For those families who previously received the 

child disability benefit for a child in their care, the ministry will 

provide an equivalent amount as their benefit payment. 

 

The member opposite asked for our government to take a 

serious look at the administration of the program and to use 

common sense and simply fix it. Again, Mr. Speaker, it is not 

our program to fix. The federal government decision affected 

one or more areas of different support payments. We cannot fix 

the federal government’s administration. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Literacy Programming 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the literacy community 

has learned that the SaskSmart Innovations Fund is being cut, 

being terminated. This fund enabled community-based literacy 

plans focused on family, adult, and Aboriginal literacy to 

become a reality. The Saskatchewan Literacy Network has 

weighed in in a letter to myself and the minister at the end of 

last week. I quote: “The decision to end the SaskSmart 

Innovations Fund is premature and ought not to be taken 

without a full review or evaluation of the program.” 

 

Why is the minister cutting a program without consultation, 

without review, and without consideration of the impacts on 

communities and families across Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, there still would be 

funding for the Saskatchewan Literacy Network and the 

Saskatchewan Aboriginal Literacy Network. There was one 

portion of the fund that we redirected into the literacy camps 

which are conducted mostly in the northern communities, but 

they are run to identify and give assistance through the summer 

months to the most vulnerable communities, vulnerable 



May 1, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1351 

children. It has proven to be an extremely successful program. 

The usage to the libraries of the children that access this 

program has increased not only for the children that have 

accessed the literacy camp but also for their families. It has 

been a very, very positive program and one well worth 

supporting. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, literacy skills are essential 

to development of a good, strong career and certainly 

development of being able to further education. The literacy 

camps themselves sound like a positive step but we know that 

community-based family, adult, and Aboriginal literacy 

programs which are funded through the SaskSmart Innovation 

Fund go a long way to supporting children’s literacy and 

certainly strengthening economic opportunities such as jobs and 

training opportunities. 

 

By cutting the SSIF [SaskSmart Innovations Fund] without 

consultation in favour of literacy camps, the minister is saying 

it’s either one or the other. Why is the minister making this an 

either/or scenario instead of making literacy a priority and 

decisions based on evidence? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I will 

not apologize for our government making decisions based on 

evidence. The literacy camps are showing great results, not only 

for the children involved in the literacy camps, but for the entire 

families. This will only benefit the communities. I’m surprised 

to hear the member from Athabasca chanting because it’s 

helping many communities in his particular constituency. So 

you would think that he would be very, very interested in what 

the literacy camps are doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was another program. It was a grant 

program. It was year by year — it was not a continued program 

by any means — where different communities would make 

submissions for different programs. We did not find that those 

programs were showing the results that we’re seeing from the 

literacy camps, so we are thinking that that is a far better way to 

spend our money. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — With leave to introduce a guest. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has asked for 

leave to introduce a guest. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the members of the 

legislature, I’d like to introduce Arden Bradford who is a 

farmer by Saltcoats, is also a constituent of mine. But having 

said that, we grew up together and been neighbours for many, 

many years. So I would ask all members to join with me in 

welcoming him to his legislature. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 38, The Active Families Benefit 

Amendment Act, 2012 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Tourism, 

Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

Bill and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and 

Sport has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee 

of the Whole on Bill No. 38, The Active Families Benefit 

Amendment Act, 2012 and that the Bill now be read the third 

time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed moving third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 38 — The Active Families Benefit 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that this Bill be now read the third time and passed until its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport that Bill No. 38, The Active 

Families Benefit Amendment Act, 2012 be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

 



1352 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2012 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 10, The Parks Amendment Act, 2011 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Tourism, 

Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

Bill and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and 

Sport has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee 

of the Whole of Bill No. 10, The Parks Amendment Act, 2011 

and that the Bill now be read a third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed with moving third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 10 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2011 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Tourism 

that Bill No. 10, The Parks Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a 

third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 9, The Saskatchewan Gaming 

Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Tourism. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

Bill and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Tourism has requested leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill No. 

9, The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 

2011. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed with third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 9 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Tourism 

that Bill No. 9, The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask for 

leave regarding the committee designation, leave to make a 

motion regarding the committee designation of Bill No. 23. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to make a motion regarding Bill No. 23’s committee 

designation. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 



May 1, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1353 

Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Referral of Bill No. 23 to Committee 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That Bill No. 23, The Occupational Health and Safety 

Amendment Act, 2011 be withdrawn from the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice and 

committed to the Standing Committee on Human 

Services. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That Bill No. 23, The Occupational Health and Safety 

Amendment Act, 2011 be withdrawn from the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice and 

committed to the Standing Committee on Human 

Services. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? Is the Assembly in 

agreement? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 27 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 27 — The 

Education Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la 

Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, pleased to enter into 

discussion this afternoon as it relates to Bill No. 27, The 

Education Amendment Act, 2011 and to offer a few comments 

to it. But really where I’d like to see this Bill is to be placed 

into committee because there’s many questions for the minister 

on this front. There are challenges that have emerged with the 

introduction of this Bill — a Bill that stems not from 

consultation, a Bill that stems not from deriving good public 

policy, a Bill that stems from a middle of the campaign election 

promise from the Sask Party. 

 

And so I guess that’s what brings forward this Bill here today 

and why we’re considering it. It has to do with the school year 

and Labour Day. But what this Bill . . . And I suspect it’s one of 

those circumstances, or maybe it’s deliberate, where the 

Premier and government weren’t maybe aware of the can of 

worms and the consequences to their behaviour when they 

made this change. Because certainly this announcement that 

was made in the middle of the campaign that is sort of a, maybe 

considered by the Sask Party at the time to be a low-impact 

announcement, is certainly anything but. 

 

And what the potential is, is significant change within the 

educational environment here in Saskatchewan and how it 

impacts the stakeholders. And this is where it’s so 

disappointing to see this piece of legislation that comes from a 

knee-jerk and quick campaign promise that’s been 

ill-considered by way of the consequences back to students, to 

parents, to teachers, the entire education sector. 

 

So more questions exist than answers at this point in time. 

That’s why I don’t intend to speak at length here today on this 

floor. But I do look forward to having many questions in 

committee and on behalf of the education sector who has many 

questions that exist on this front, different perspectives to be 

shared. What we do know is that this change takes parts of the 

Act that were enshrined in legislation and moves many portions 

of that, many sections of that Act into regulation, which then 

can be changed by the minister and the government without the 

oversight of this Assembly, without the consideration of this 

Assembly. And that raises some unique questions of their own. 

 

But I guess what’s interesting is when we’re looking at this 

piece of legislation, that it highlights just how vacant this 

discussion has been of any vision that’s putting students’ best 

interests first, that’s focusing on truly how do we enable and 

empower our education system to meet the needs of students. 

That’s not what this Bill is about. This is where the energies of 

this government have been placed. And that’s disappointing 

because I think that if this discussion were a discussion, one 

with goals of making improvements in education and what 

those goals that we strive towards are, and how we are going to 

get there and working with our partners to do so, then that 

would be a very worthy discussion. 

 

If this legislation had any basis in evidence-based decision 

making or was respective of pedagogical reasons for making 

changes, then this would be a worthwhile discussion to have. If 

this was more than just a knee-jerk response in the dark of a 

campaign that didn’t consider all the intended and unintended 

consequences that have arisen, then we’d be up for this 

discussion in a very meaningful way. But disappointingly, that 

hasn’t been how this has proceeded. And we continue to see 

information as far as other jurisdictions being provided in a 

manner that’s less than forthright, comparing things that aren’t 

apples to apples as apples to apples. And we have a lot of 

considerations as we move forward to make sure that we’re 

serving the best interests of students, that we’re speaking to a 

positive vision of publicly funded education here in 

Saskatchewan and that simply that part of this whole discussion 

has been vacant. 

 

So there’s a lot of arbitrary decisions and a lot of rumours right 

now as well, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to this piece of 

legislation, lots of discussions with the different educational 

sector stakeholders, concerns and considerations that they want 



1354 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2012 

to make sure are heard, and that there’s answers to their 

questions. Certainly we’ll be looking to committee too for those 

sorts of answers. 

 

So all I have to say at this point in time is we’ll move this Bill 

to committee. We’ll take it there where we can ask the kinds of 

questions that are important to Saskatchewan students and 

parents and educators and the entire education sector. But this is 

another example of poor planning on behalf of the government. 

It’s another example of no consultation with those who 

represent stakeholders who are directly impacted by changes. 

And you know, there’s unintended consequences and intended 

consequences for which . . . put forward the potential for 

significant change that may very well not be in the best interests 

of Saskatchewan students. 

 

And on that front, this goes well beyond any discussion around 

Labour Day and the school calendar. It gets into a whole bunch 

of other considerations for which we’ll be raising in the time in 

committee. So the discussion is much broader. I’m not sure that 

the Premier was aware of the can of worms that he was opening 

up with the mid-campaign promise. Had there been an ounce of 

consultation that had occurred with educational stakeholders 

during that time before that announcement, then we wouldn’t 

be at this point in time, and we’d have a piece of legislation that 

was much more clear in what it intended to do. But the sad 

reality is that we have legislation before us at this point in time, 

and we still don’t have the regulation changes or the 

understanding of what those regulation changes are. And in fact 

it will still be, may be weeks and months before those are made 

clear to the education sector and to students. 

 

More questions exist than answers at this point in time, but 

what’s certain is that the discussion that this government 

chooses to have about education is vacant of any sort of vision 

towards what we can build as a publicly funded education 

system in this province. And it’s vacant of discussion and 

consultation with Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan students, 

and the education sector. And it’s this sort of reckless approach 

to deriving policy and legislation that problems arise. 

 

And I guess there’s many issues and concerns that exist across 

the education sector on this front as it stands right now, many 

questions that parents have, many questions that students have, 

many questions that teachers have, questions that school boards 

have. And educational administrators will be seeking answers 

to those questions. It’s unfortunate that we have legislation, as I 

say again, before us that I think thought to tinker around with 

something they thought might be something that was just 

maybe popular, from their perspective, in playing with the 

calendar around Labour Day. 

 

But now there’s all these other impacts into education for which 

could have significant change. And certainly we aren’t entered 

into a process that would be a desirable one that we should 

enter into, and that would be a process that should be about 

putting students and their education first and having a 

discussion about how we build towards the goals that we aspire 

in this province. 

 

It’s been a narrow-minded discussion and debate from the side 

opposite on this front. There’s a much broader discussion that 

we must engage our exceptional stakeholders in this province 

on, and it’s been disappointing that hasn’t been done to date in 

a meaningful way. We’ll continue to ask good questions on 

behalf of stakeholders and Saskatchewan people and make sure, 

as best we can, that we understand the implications, or 

Saskatchewan people understand the implications of this 

legislation. But at this point in time, we look forward to those 

questions occurring at the committee structure. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Education that Bill No. 27, The 

Education Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that Bill No. 27, The Education Amendment Act, 2011 be 

referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

Bill No. 28 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 28 — The 

Education Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Now, Mr. Speaker, my comments won’t 

be long as it relates to Bill No. 28, The Education 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2011. We look forward to 

having questions answered in committee as it relates to this 

Bill. 

 

Again, as I’ve highlighted as it relates to Bill No. 27, what the 

Sask Party government has done with its legislation is go about 

a process without any consultation with the education sector or 

stakeholders or students without understanding those impacts 

on those various fronts and made legislative change that brings 

about significant change when you look at the two Bills, or the 

potential of those two Bills, that goes far beyond the election 

promise that was made in the fall. 

 

Specific to this Bill, there’s some aspects of financing that are 

being changed. And it’s awfully interesting, Mr. Speaker, that 

we have a government that’s in fact needlessly spending 

millions of taxpayers’ dollars by having school boards borrow 



May 1, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1355 

at higher interest rates than government can deliver that 

financing. And back in 2009, when this government made 

changes to education financing, it was only expected that with 

changes to the education funding formula that this would be a 

matter that would be addressed. 

 

Now the province, in entirety, controls education funding in this 

province for school boards in this province. And it doesn’t 

make any sense whatsoever for school boards, who have no 

control over the revenues that they receive, to be going out and 

borrowing dollars to have some sort of a . . . the 35 per cent 

share in school capital projects. It should be entirely on the 

backs of the province at this point in time. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And the reason I say this is what’s going on now is you have 

school boards that are going out and borrowing this 35 per cent 

share, and they’re doing so at a much higher rate than the 

government financing rates or borrowing rates. So the cost of 

capital to government is much lower than what school boards 

are borrowing at. And then the government itself is simply 

transferring monies, paying those higher interest loans off with 

the dollars they transfer. 

 

This is needlessly wasting dollars of taxpayers. And this is 

something that could be resolved and rectified quite simply, 

unless this is nothing more than having a desire to place debt 

onto school boards that doesn’t show up on the GRF [General 

Revenue Fund] of this province. We know this government 

reports its finances in an inaccurate fashion that’s inappropriate 

as it relates to public sector accounting standards. And this may 

be a simple manoeuvre to try to keep debt off the books of their 

GRF, which we know is an inappropriate way to report finances 

— the only province in Canada to be holding out in this 

fashion. 

 

But what we know at the same time is that it’s wasting millions 

of dollars. And if we look specifically at, you know, one school 

board, for example, here in Regina that went out and was forced 

to borrow $16 million here this year for school capital projects, 

we know that that cost of borrowing comes at almost 1 per cent 

higher of the . . . that the rate that government can receive, and 

that this will needlessly waste almost $2 million, or $2 million 

over the period of time that those loans are being delivered. So 

we’re wasting $2 million that could otherwise be reprioritized 

to priorities of Saskatchewan people, either in education or in 

debt reduction or anywhere else. So we are certainly 

challenging this government to fix something that is needlessly 

wasting dollars and is certainly not in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

So that’s one of the aspects I thought I would mention as it 

relates to some of the financing in education as it stands right 

now. It’s certainly not in the best interests of taxpayers to spend 

more than they need to on high-interest loans. And government 

should be stepping up to the plate, taking responsibility for the 

changes they’ve made, and securing that financing and doing so 

in the most efficient, effective way on behalf of taxpayers. 

 

As I’ve said, the legislation that’s been put forward by the Sask 

Party has been vacant of any sort of a broader discussion as far 

as a vision of publicly funded education in Saskatchewan and 

how we can make meaningful improvements. It is resultant of 

changes in the election or announcements in the election or an 

announcement in the election, about a Labour Day holiday in 

the school calendar year. 

 

But this is really not the point where there’s a whole bunch of 

broad-based questions that exist by stakeholders and by parents 

and by students all across the province, about significant 

changes that could be brought on by way of these legislated 

changes. And it certainly is representative of a government that 

has been unwilling to engage with stakeholders who are 

impacted by their decisions. And that failure to consult with the 

education sector on this front or with parents and with students 

has put this government in a position, with legislation before us 

with consequences that likely have never been considered by 

the Premier and government. And that’s unfortunate, but 

certainly we have the committee process before us to ask many 

of these questions as we move forward. 

 

So at this point in time, I look forward to further questions on 

behalf of Saskatchewan people that I’ll be bringing forward to 

committee and to I guess try to answer some of the questions 

that exist across the education sector and by Saskatchewan 

parents and Saskatchewan students, and we’ll do so at the 

committee structure. So thank you, Mr. Speaker, for allowing 

me to speak. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Education that Bill No. 28, The Education 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that Bill No. 28, The Education Consequential Amendments 

Act, 2011 be referred to the Standing Committee on Human 

Services. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

Bill No. 37 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hutchinson that Bill No. 37 — The 

Tourism Saskatchewan Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on the 



1356 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2012 

debate on Bill No. 37, The Tourism Saskatchewan Act. And it’s 

been interesting to see the conversations, the letters, interviews 

with the media, different individuals, whether it’s emails, the 

letter writing, the phone calls, the conversations that are going 

on in our province, the frustration, and I think the way . . . It’s 

not so much that they’re going to go into it. I think it’s the way 

this legislation, this Bill, was introduced with no respect to the 

industry, no consultation to the industry. They were blind sided. 

 

We’ve heard all kinds of comments. They were in a daze. 

People are making comments, and they’re wondering why. And 

they’re trying to understand what’s the purpose. What is truly 

the purpose of this Bill? Some are claiming it’s to take control 

of maybe the advertising, the marketing dollars — that’s just 

about $8 million — that if it’s turned into a Crown corporation, 

the minister, the government of the day will have control over 

it. That’s been some of the concerns people are raising. My 

colleagues have raised these concerns as they’ve spoke to this 

Bill and joined the debate on this Bill. There’s quite a bit of 

concern, the process. What is the reasoning? 

 

And the government and the minister himself says, well they 

want to have greater influence, more control. We’ve heard one 

of the ministers talk about, as to the marketing. So when you 

say take better control, when you say take control of, people are 

really concerned. And I think that should ring alarm bells to 

many people, and I think it has. I think truly the government is 

not responding well. They’re acting like they’re not hearing it, 

and that’s fine. They can sit there and act. But I think my 

colleagues, myself, and I think the press, the industry, Tourism 

Saskatchewan, the board, the CEO [chief executive officer], I 

think past board members, staff — they’re all concerned. When 

you have a report . . . And I want to be very clear: as an 

arm’s-length agency was doing an excellent job. 

 

People are very proud. And they have moved the tourism sector 

in such an area, and they reached out to such a wide audience. 

They targeted certain areas, and they were really good at 

bringing in tourism to Saskatchewan. And we have a province 

that’s very proud. We have a beautiful province. We have many 

parks. We have a lot of sights for people to see in this beautiful 

province. We have a lot of good people who are taking training 

on how to treat tourists when they come to our province. 

There’s all these things happening with the industry. There’s 

growth. There’s movement. 

 

But unfortunately we see the challenges that were being faced 

when you have a government that wants to take control. And 

the concern very clearly is the advertising dollars. And I’ll be 

honest: what is going to change? What will their . . . What will 

the advertising look like? What will the marketing tools be? 

Who will have better control than the government? And that’s 

some of the concerns. 

 

And they talk about the report. They had a report, and it was a 

review in 2009. In that review it stated very clearly, and I think 

all parties that took part in that, the one thing that came out loud 

and clear was Tourism Saskatchewan should remain at arm’s 

length of government. Well I don’t know how come a 

government can want to push forward to have a review, and 

then get the report and then not follow it when you have it. 

 

And like I’ve said earlier, and I know in question period very 

clearly, after the government introduced this Bill, Tourism 

Saskatchewan did a survey. Over 600 of their members, tourism 

industry individuals, responded to the survey — over 600 of 

them. Almost 70 per cent were opposed to what this 

government was introducing — legislation, Bill 37 — were 

opposed to the way they were doing it. And nothing has 

changed. The government is just going to go ahead with the Bill 

just like we’ve seen the government move forward on other 

legislation and Bills that they have passed. 

 

We see frustration. We see an industry. And you know, it’s 

interesting. Some people are even a little nervous to come 

forward and launch their complaints or concerns. And I 

sometimes wonder why, why would individuals, Mr. Speaker, 

in a province and a government that says it will be accountable; 

it will listen to the people; it will be humble. We heard all these 

things from the Premier, his government, the ministers. Well if 

that’s what they were referring to, a lot of people aren’t seeing 

it, that accountability. 

 

We’ve asked questions in here. We’ve raised concerns when 

the Bills were being introduced. And the government either 

doesn’t answer or talks about what the previous government did 

or didn’t do. Well sometimes if you’re going to hold the 

government to account and you want the government, then you 

ask questions. And you should have those questions asked. 

Whether it’s in question period, whether it’s on Bills, whether 

it’s in committee, whether it’s estimates, you hope that you’ll 

get the information. You’re asking on behalf of the people. And 

there has been many letters raising concern. 

 

And the tourism industry, I think very clearly — and again I 

think it’s very clear we need to repeat this — the tourism sector 

has done an excellent job. We know that. Tourism 

Saskatchewan, with its partnerships that it has created and has 

made, has been a huge success. It has benefited lots of tourism 

business, whether it’s outfitters, whether the fishing camps, 

whether it’s the parks, whether it’s communities. It has reached 

out, and it’s done an excellent job. We should be supporting 

them, not blindsiding Tourism Saskatchewan by trying to take 

control of its marketing dollars. 

 

And government says, the funding mainly comes from 

government. Well I think very clearly . . . I don’t know exactly 

dollar to dollar. We’ve tried to establish that — we’ve heard 

different numbers — at the end of the day to see exactly what 

the budget is of Tourism Saskatchewan and how much partner 

industry puts in. Majority comes from government, we realize 

that. But when you have an agency like Tourism Saskatchewan 

that’s doing an excellent job that it has been doing, no 

consultation with them about doing this, it’s no different than 

we see with, I guess, the film industry and how the problems 

that they’re faced with and the challenge they’re being faced 

with by this government’s decision to go ahead without 

consulting. 

 

So it’s pretty frustrating. Pretty frustrating for the industry, 

when you see a government act the way it is. It says it wants to 

be accountable. It wants to work with the people and it doesn’t 

do that. 

 

Clearly the tourism sector has continued to move forward and 

wants to continue. And I know there are a lot of questions need 



May 1, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1357 

to be asked, and we will be asking those questions. They have 

to be asked in committee before this moves forward. 

 

And I know that there are many individuals . . . We have a lot 

of letters, and we’ve heard a lot of response. The media has 

taken us up. So when we look at this and we wonder why the 

minister isn’t following the review, the report of 2009 that he 

commissioned or the government commissioned to go ahead, 

why they are not following the recommendations. 

 

And we have a government that likes to pick and choose what 

reports, the way other provinces are doing things. Oh, if that 

province is doing it, we’re going to follow it. They pick and 

choose what they want to move their own agenda forward. 

 

So is there a hidden agenda? Well I think we all know that there 

is a hidden agenda. They’re moving it forward. We see some of 

the legislation that’s been passed in this session. We have 

worked clearly with them. And they talk about all the different 

things, and yet they want to talk about being accountable. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s clearly a problem for many people, the 

industry, Saskatchewan residents. There are a lot of questions 

that need to be asked, but I think we’ve seen a lot of people 

weigh in on this. And in the frustration, concern, they’re very 

concerned about where is the organization of Tourism 

Saskatchewan going. Will it have the same, the impact? Will it 

reach out to the type of, I guess, audience it wants to? Will it 

have the same effect, or will it be changing when it’s taken over 

by a Crown corporation? 

 

And the government has an opportunity to rethink this. The 

government can say, whoa, we need to put the brakes on here. 

We’re seeing the industry, we’re seeing the partners, we’re 

seeing our partners concerned about this. Maybe we should 

rethink this. Maybe we should slow down a bit. Maybe we 

should take a breather and talk it over, consult. Will they do 

that? No. No, we don’t see that. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And it’s unfortunate because we’ve tried to raise concerns on 

different Bills, giving the government an option to out. We’ve 

seen this government move ahead, Mr. Speaker, on the different 

Bills that we’ve brought forward. And when there are issues, 

we’ve asked them. It’s very concerning when you see a 

government as big as it is. And we hear them say that, you 

know, look at the size of the government; look at the size of 

opposition. 

 

But the opposition truly has a role to play on behalf of the 

people it represents. And it’s not just in our own constituents. 

There are people who do not agree with the government, 

whether they’re in other constituents, who have issues and 

concerns. And our role is to make sure that we hold the 

government to account, and we will do all we can to make sure 

the government has a second look at some of their Bills. When 

people bring their concerns forward, we’re asked — whether 

it’s our constituents, whether it’s business, industry — we will 

bring those concerns forward. 

 

In some areas, we knew the tourism section’s doing well. The 

partnerships that it’s created, very successful. We’re very 

proud. And board members, staff, the CEO have done an 

excellent job. They’re very proud of what they have 

accomplished together as a team and the different partnerships 

that they have created, moved forward on. So to see this Bill 

come through the way it was brought forward, blindsided 

Tourism Saskatchewan, I think the industry partners were 

hearing it. There is a lot of different organizations that are 

partners buy into Tourism Saskatchewan, and it has worked 

very effectively for a very long time and has been very 

successful. 

 

And I think that is why people are shocked that the government 

is using the heavy hand it’s using on them, on an industry that 

was so successful, doing such a great job. And we’ve seen that 

throughout our province. We see the numbers going up of 

people visiting our beautiful province, coming to 

Saskatchewan, whether it’s out of Canada, whether it’s in 

Canada, a lot of people coming to Saskatchewan to have a look 

at our beautiful province. And it is a beautiful province, and we 

should all be proud. But unfortunately the way the government, 

the Sask Party government has done this, it is not something 

that they should be proud of — the heavy-handedness, 

blindsided. 

 

If you look at all the different things that we’re hearing, it’s the 

way it was done. It’s not saying that people aren’t willing to 

look at different ways of operating Tourism Saskatchewan, but 

it’s the way the Sask Party government introduced this Bill, 

without consulting, without letting Tourism Saskatchewan and 

its partners, the industry, know about it. It just comes out 

heavy-handedly and does this. It’s a little concerning to a lot of 

people and should be concerning. 

 

You know, I know that in committee, my colleagues have 

talked about Bill 37. We’ve gone through it. They’ve raised 

their concerns. We have seen it in question period. We’re going 

to continue to do all we can to make sure that this government 

either takes a second look at this Bill, or in committee we have, 

I guess, questions that we will be asking, direct questions, into 

this Bill to see if there’s anything we can do to work with the 

government to put the brakes on this Bill and say, whoa, maybe 

we have to rethink this. Maybe we should take a break, take a 

breather. There’s an option for the government to do if they 

really want to. 

 

So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I have no further comments on this 

Bill. We know we will have more comments in committee. And 

we’ll be moving, you know, forward with our questions in 

committee to get some of the answers and give the government 

an opportunity to take a breather on this Bill and take into heart 

what they’re hearing from the industry, industry partners, and 

from our citizens on taking over Tourism Saskatchewan the 

way this government has done. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport that Bill 

No. 37, The Tourism Saskatchewan Act be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 



1358 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2012 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that Bill No. 37, The Tourism Saskatchewan Act be referred to 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, in order to facilitate the 

work of committees later this day, I move that this House do 

now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. Wednesday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:06.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1341 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1341 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1341 

  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1341 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1341 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1341 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1341 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1342 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1342 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1342 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1342 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1342 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1342 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1342 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1343 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1343 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1343 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1351 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1343 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1344 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1344 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1344 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1344 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Journalists for Human Rights Saskatchewan 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1344 

 Missing Children’s Month 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1345 

 Aboriginal Youth Leadership Summit 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1345 

 International Workers’ Day 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1345 

 Father-Daughter Gala Fundraiser 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1345 

 Regina Resident Completes Sahara Marathon 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1346 

 Grade 6 Students Start Recycling Program 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1346 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Impact of Federal Crime Legislation 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1346 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1346 

 Support for Northern Housing 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1347 

 Proposed Urban Development Project 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1347 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1348 

 Saskatchewan Home Repair Program 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1349 

 Support for the Film Industry 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1349 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1349 

 Support for Children in Care 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1350 

 Literacy Programming 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1350 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1350 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1351 



 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 38 — The Active Families Benefit Amendment Act, 2012 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1351 

 Bill No. 10 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2011 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1352 

 Bill No. 9 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1352 

MOTIONS 

 Referral of Bill No. 23 to Committee 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1353 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 27 — The Education Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1353 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 1354 

 Bill No. 28 — The Education Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1354 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 1355 

 Bill No. 37 — The Tourism Saskatchewan Act 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1355 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 1358 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


