




















































Hansard: March 07, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 11A WEDNESDAY, MARCH 7, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 383 

 March 7, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you very, very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s truly an honour today to introduce four great 

individuals from the Humboldt area that are seated in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. We have a delegation coming from 

Humboldt and surrounding area to talk about all the exciting 

development that’s happening within Humboldt. There’s been 

increased growth, but there’s also a lot of potential for a lot of 

economic development. So these are important issues, not only 

for the Humboldt and surrounding area, but also for the 

province as a whole. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to introduce to you and 

through you to the rest of the members of the Assembly the 

mayor of the city of Humboldt, Mr. Malcolm Eaton. We have 

the reeve of the RM [rural municipality] of Humboldt, Jordan 

Bergermann. We have a city councillor with the city of 

Humboldt, Marilyn Scott, and we have a new finance manager 

for the city of Humboldt, Steve Brown. So may everyone join 

me in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 

of the loyal opposition we would like to join in welcoming the 

folks from the city of Humboldt, a growing, vibrant city. And 

we sure appreciate them coming and making their views known 

to the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I’d like to take a moment 

and introduce a well-respected leader in the labour movement, 

in the east gallery, Mr. Tom Graham, president of CUPE 

[Canadian Union of Public Employees] Saskatchewan. I ask all 

members to welcome him to his legislature. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

join with the member opposite in welcoming Mr. Graham to the 

Assembly today. Mr. Graham has enormous respect within the 

labour community and the business community at large. And I 

know we’ve got some things that will be going on over the next 

few months and look forward to meeting with him and having 

some what I hope are interesting, valuable, and productive 

discussions, and we’ll be valuing his input very much. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, I’d like to 

welcome a couple of guests in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They 

are two gentlemen seated in the front row: Mr. Robert Tam and 

Mr. Doug Nanton. And both Bob and Doug work for an 

innovative pharmaceutical firm called UCB Canada specializing 

in the therapeutic areas of epilepsy and arthritis. 

 

And Bob, who we affectionately refer to as Tambo, and I used 

to work together many, many years ago with another 

pharmaceutical firm, and I haven’t seen him in quite some time. 

They’re in town to have some discussions with some Health 

ministry officials, Mr. Speaker, and it was good to reconnect 

with him. So I’d like all members to welcome them to the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — To you and through you I’d like to 

introduce two women who are making a real difference in our 

community. Bev Bartok and Sharla Schofield are joining us, 

and they’re from the Cosmopolitan Learning Centre. Bev is 

program coordinator and Sharla is the human resources 

program coordinator. The Cosmopolitan Learning Centre 

provides life skills training and opportunities for community 

and on-site employment as well as volunteerism and activities 

for people with intellectual and physical disabilities. 

 

This morning I had an opportunity to announce funding 

standards for people with intellectual disabilities at their centre. 

It was really great to get out and to go to the centre and I 

wanted to thank Bev and Sharla and the centre for being great 

hosts this morning. 

 

So on behalf of everyone in the province, I want to thank you 

for your great work. And I’d like all my colleagues to welcome 

them to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for CIC [Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan]. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you 

and to you, I’d like to introduce a couple of gentlemen in your 

gallery who are from Canada’s National Brewers. They’re in 

town to meet with SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Authority]. They represent an industry which is very big 

partners with SLGA. We have Mr. Bryan Cox, vice-president, 

and we also have Brian Zeiler-Kligman. So thank you and 

welcome to the Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d ask leave for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has asked leave 

for an extended introduction. Is leave given? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, seated in your gallery, it is my privilege to introduce 



384 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2012 

some of Saskatchewan’s long-serving volunteer crop reporters. 

We are recognizing these crop reporters for their commitment 

and service to the agriculture industry in Saskatchewan. For 25, 

30, and 35 years these crop reporters have volunteered their 

time for at least 30 weeks per year, collecting information for 

the Ag ministry. Every week these reporters collect information 

about crop development and precipitation within their RMs 

[rural municipality]. They submit this information to the 

ministry to meet the weekly crop report deadline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, their work provides a timely and accurate crop 

report for all farmers and ranchers in the province. I want to 

recognize and thank these individuals for their dedication to the 

Saskatchewan crop reporting service. 

 

I would ask that these crop reporters and their spouses wave 

when I announce their names: 25-year recipients, Mr. Speaker, 

are Bette and Dennis Reiss of the RM of Francis; Dale Meier, 

RM of Progress, and his wife, Donna; Harry and Eileen 

McCorriston, RM of Connaught; Valerie and Gaylord Muller, 

RM of Frenchman Butte. 

 

Thirty-year recipients, Mr. Speaker: Edward and Charlotte 

Datchko, RM of Ituna Bon Accord; Jim Hornford, RM of 

Elfros, and his guest, Charlene Prince; John Hignett, RM of Big 

Arm, and his wife, Deanna. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are some crop reporters and spouses who 

were not able to attend today. They are 25-year award 

recipients, Brian and Jeanette Becker of the RM of Calder, of 

my constituency; Walter and Linda Sullivan, RM of Milton; 

and the 30-year award recipients, Allan and Marion Hardy, RM 

of Wolseley; Emile and Marie Robin, RM of Leask; Percy 

Schiele, RM of Meadow Lake, and his wife, Anna. 

 

And I would ask all members, my colleagues, to join me in 

thanking these crop reporters for their dedication and support to 

our ag industry in the province of Saskatchewan. Thank you 

very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to say 

thank you to all of you who work in this important area for the 

economy of the province. I know that all of us in this legislature 

have relatives and family or we ourselves have farming or 

ranching operations. And to actually make . . . know that 

practical Saskatchewan people are keeping track of the records 

of the province is an incredibly valuable thing. So thank you 

very much on behalf of all of us. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I would like to introduce to you Mr. Shawn Bennett from 

the town of Hanley. Shawn is a high school student, currently in 

grade 12. He’s in a work placement program with Hanley 

School, and he chose my office to do his work placement. So I 

would like to welcome him to his legislature, and I hope that I 

can show him a good example of what MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] do. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for protection for late-night 

retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know that in 

the early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray Wiebe 

was shot twice and died from his injuries. He was working at a 

gas station in Yorkton, alone and unprotected from intruders. 

But we also know that positive statistics show that the 

convenience store and gas station robberies are down by 

one-third since 1999, largely due to increased safety practices, 

including two people working together on late-night shifts. I’d 

like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

People signing this petition come from Grenfell, Esterhazy, 

Lemberg, and Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you very 

much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions 

on behalf of concerned residents from across Saskatchewan as it 

relates to education in Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to make education a top priority by 

establishing a long-term vision and plan, with resources, 

that is responsive to the opportunities and challenges in 

providing the best quality education and that reflects 

Saskatchewan’s demographic and population changes; that 

is based on proven educational best practices, that is 

developed through consultation with the education sector, 

and that recognizes the importance of educational 

excellence to the social and economic well-being of our 

province and students for today and for our future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of my constituents who live in the 

neighbourhood of Hampton Village, and I should add 

Dundonald neighbourhood as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is about the need for a new school in 

the neighbourhood of Hampton Village: 



March 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 385 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

children in Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend 

school in their own community instead of travelling to 

neighbouring communities to attend schools that are 

typically already reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current regulations 

being enforced are creating challenges that are a concern to our 

traditional trappers. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued; and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation and 

regulations with respect to the trapping regulations and 

firearm use in consultation with the traditional resource 

users. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many of the trappers and good people of northern 

Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Special Olympians Attend Winter Games 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

Monday, February 27th, I had the honour of attending a very 

special event at the Saskatoon airport. My daughter Courtney 

and I, along with the hon. members from Saskatoon Greystone 

and Saskatoon Silver Springs, were fortunate to be able to send 

off a group of Special Olympians to the Canada West Winter 

Games in St. Albert, Alberta. 

 

This was a very personal moment for me. As you know, Mr. 

Speaker, my daughter Courtney is a Special Olympian in grade 

7 at St. Luke School. Courtney joined us at the airport to hand 

out pins and cheer the athletes on. 

 

There were 27 athletes representing Team Saskatchewan, as 

well as 14 coaches and mission staff. Most of them were flying 

out of Saskatoon that morning, some of them for the very first 

time. The athletes were proud to show their Saskatchewan 

spirit, Mr. Speaker. They had confidently worn their 

Saskatchewan bunny hugs and tie-dyed T-shirts. Some even 

coloured their hair green. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Special Olympians train intensely for the 

Canadian games. When I asked a member of the snowshoeing 

team what he did to train for his sport, he told me he practised 

yoga and martial arts, among other activities. 

 

The games ran from February 28th to March 3rd, Mr. Speaker. I 

am proud to report that Team Saskatchewan did very well. We 

received five gold medals, four silver, and six bronze. Even 

though not everyone won a gold medal, we need to celebrate 

each and every Special Olympian for following their dreams, 

meeting their goals, and having a great time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 

athletes who participated in the games. We are very proud of 

you. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Lifetime of Community Service 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, tonight I’m honoured to attend a 

tribute dinner to honour Jessie and Gary Carlson for their 

lifetime of community service and over 50 years of marriage. 

During their long and successful careers in nursing and 

agrology and while lovingly raising their three daughters, Gary 

and Jessie have always made time to volunteer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here are a few highlights. Jessie and Gary are 

founding members of Sunset United Church and have 

volunteered extensively for the United Church of Canada. Gary 

and Jessie are active members and leaders of the Regina 

Eastview Rotary Club and the Regina Eastview Inner Wheel 

respectively. There’s more. Jessie has been a lifetime member, 

board member, secretary, and Chair of Family Service Regina, 

the treasurer and president of the Regina Horticultural Society, 

and she’s held various elected positions with her Saskatchewan 

union of nursing locals. 

 

Gary helped found or sustain numerous organizations, including 

the Saskatchewan Agricultural Hall of Fame, the Saskatchewan 

Farm Vacations Association, and the Canadian agriculture 

travel association. He’s involved also with the federation of 

human rights and civil liberties, the Saskatchewan Home-Based 

Business Association, south Regina leisure centre, and the 

Regina co-operative day care centre. And he served several 

terms on the senate and board of governors of the University of 

Saskatchewan. Jessie and Gary are also solid New Democrats 

who’ve worked in the Lakeview riding and also in the federal 

ridings. 

 

These Saskatchewan citizens are being honoured tonight, and I 

ask all members to join me in honouring Jessie and Gary 

Carlson. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 



386 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2012 

Inspiring Leadership Forum 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

hearing stories of others’ accomplishments and how they 

reached their goals often gives us confidence to begin pursuing 

and achieving our own dreams. With this in mind, the 

University of Regina, which is coincidentally in the 

constituency of Regina Douglas Park, has established the 

Inspiring Leadership Forum. The third annual Inspiring 

Leadership Forum will be held tonight at Queensbury Centre in 

Evraz Place, allowing women to share insights into what made 

a difference in their lives. 

 

Keynote speakers include Roberta Jamieson, a Mohawk elder 

and former chief of the Six Nations of the Grand River 

Territory in Ontario; Dr. Samantha Nutt, a doctor at Toronto’s 

Women’s College Hospital and also the co-founder and 

executive director of War Child North America; and Gayle 

Tzemach Lemmon, the author of The Dressmaker of Khair 

Khana and also the contributing editor-at-large for Newsweek 

Magazine. These outstanding women headline the event and 

will focus their presentations on how they feel leadership has 

helped influence the world, which is the theme for this year’s 

event. 

 

Attendees will also have the opportunity to ask questions of 

leaders who were born or currently live in Saskatchewan during 

a panel discussion this afternoon. The panel includes Regina 

lawyer, Susan Barber, Q.C. [Queen’s Counsel], and Regina 

Douglas Park’s own international jewellery designer, Rachel 

Mielke, creator and founder of the now famous Hillberg & Berk 

line. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to join me in 

congratulating the University of Regina and their president, 

Vianne Timmons, for taking a leadership role in promoting the 

importance of female mentorship, and thank the organizers for 

putting on this outstanding event. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Rebuilding Dreams 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my honour to 

recognize a very important community organization, Rebuilding 

Dreams, a non-profit that works to rebuild and refit homes for 

families facing adversity. The true visionary behind this group 

is Mr. Adam Hicks. Two years ago he was inspired to create a 

housing renovation project that aimed to assist families in need. 

The reveal of the Rebuilding Dreams second project took place 

on September 15th at the aptly named Strong family home. I 

was honoured to speak at the event. And in my short time 

volunteering on the site, I was witness to incredible community 

support. 

 

I want to acknowledge the courage and strength demonstrated 

by the remarkable Strong family after Dia Strong was 

diagnosed with a rare case of MS [multiple sclerosis]. Dia and 

her husband Ashton’s home couldn’t accommodate Dia’s 

wheelchair. The lack of accessibility restricted her interactions 

with their daughter Kiersten and placed great strain and stress 

on the family. 

 

Rebuilding Dreams not only rebuilt their home but contributed 

positively to their lives. This project demonstrates how a 

community can come together the Saskatchewan way to rally 

behind a family in great need. I’d like to take this time to 

recognize and thank the businesses, trades, and neighbourhood 

volunteers for their dedication and generosity to this project. I 

ask all members in this Assembly to join with me in 

commending Rebuilding Dreams and all the partners for their 

efforts, and to sincerely wish the Strong family a brighter 

future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

A Saskatchewan Miracle 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday a storm 

passing through the central part of our province brought about a 

Saskatchewan miracle. At 4:15 a.m., Jennifer Mundt woke up in 

her Biggar home and knew her baby was on the way. In no 

more than two hours, Jennifer would give birth to a healthy 

9-pound, 4-ounce son, Eric John, in the front seat of a 

three-quarter ton truck stopped on the shoulder of Highway 14 

about 18 kilometres west of Saskatoon. 

 

With true Saskatchewan determination, Jennifer and her 

husband, Jason, had decided to try and make their way to 

Saskatoon despite the blizzard that had begun earlier that 

morning. The Mundts left their house at about 5 a.m. but they 

only made it to Perdue before they called 911. An emergency 

operator dispatched a paramedic team from Saskatoon, who 

themselves had to brave the blizzard. Paramedics got to the 

truck just in time to help with the birth which is officially 

recorded at 6:28 a.m. 

 

This story is a testament to the expertise and professionalism of 

our front-line health care and emergency response workers. The 

emergency operator and the paramedics who responded did an 

excellent job identifying that with the current weather 

conditions, they were going to have to deliver on the scene. Mr. 

Speaker, I ask that all members congratulate the Mundts as well 

as the paramedics on the safe delivery of Eric John. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Volunteer Honoured with Health Care Philanthropy Award 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge the recent 

accomplishments of someone I rely on every day to perform my 

duties as an elected member of this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to congratulate Laurie Kosior — who 

not only acts as a volunteer Chair of the annual Moose Jaw 

Health Foundation Festival of Trees, but also is my full-time 

constituency assistant — for being awarded the Health Care 

Philanthropy Award. This award has been created to recognize 

those individuals, organizations, and companies that have made 

a significant contribution to patient care at the Moose Jaw 

Union Hospital. The individuals recognized by this award are 

also integral to the continued success of the health foundation 

itself. These individuals truly understand, as volunteer leaders 



March 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 387 

in this community, that their investment provides the funds to 

purchase state-of-the-art medical equipment and services that 

save lives every day and enhance the lives of thousands of 

individuals in Moose Jaw and southern Saskatchewan at the 

Moose Jaw Union Hospital. 

 

Now with the announcement of the new hospital in Moose Jaw, 

they are helping the Moose Jaw Health Foundation equip the 

hospital of today and the hospital of tomorrow. With Laurie’s 

five-year reign as the volunteer Chair, the Festival of Trees has 

raised $1.2 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all the members to join me and 

all the citizens of Moose Jaw in thanking Laurie for her tireless 

efforts in making this fundraising event an annual success. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy House 

Leader. 

 

Saskatchewan’s 21st Lieutenant Governor 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday Vaughn Schofield was 

named Saskatchewan’s 21st Lieutenant Governor designate, 

and today this House is pleased to welcome the announcement 

of the new Lieutenant Governor. Vaughn Schofield has 

contributed to the well-being of our province through her work 

in business, the arts, education, broadcasting, corporate 

governance, crime prevention, and community involvement. As 

honorary lieutenant colonel of 16 Saskatchewan Service 

Battalion, she provided leadership and support to the unit and to 

the Canadian Forces Reserve, in particular those who have 

returned from Afghanistan. The Lieutenant Governor designate 

has proven leadership to the Canadian Forces liaison council, 

St. John’s Ambulance, the Hospitals of Regina Foundation, the 

MacKenzie Art Gallery, the Duke of Edinburgh’s award 

program, Regina and Regina Beach Chamber of Commerce, 

and the Enterprise Club. 

 

In recognition of her service to the community, the Lieutenant 

Governor designate was a 2009 recipient of the Saskatchewan 

Volunteer Medal. We would also like to thank the contributions 

made to Saskatchewan by retiring Lieutenant Governor, Dr. 

Gordon Barnhart and his wife, Naomi. 

 

Under the constitution, lieutenant governors are appointed by 

the federal government for a minimum of five years, but there is 

no fixed term of office. Mr. Speaker, the monarchy is a 

foundation of our democratic institutions and is a sanctuary of 

our ancestral freedoms. We are confident that the Lieutenant 

Governor designate will work to protect and uphold these most 

important of Canadian democratic principles. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker, and God save the Queen. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Number of Members in the Legislative Assembly 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier’s been 

telling Saskatchewan that the people need to brace for cuts in a 

budget that’s coming up and that nothing is off the table. 

Everything is there for those cuts. The next sentence he’s telling 

people, not just here but everywhere, that it’s a time of growth 

and investment. To the Premier: will he be straight with 

Saskatchewan people and tell them, is it a time of prosperity or 

a time of austerity? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s a change 

of one word. The Leader of the Opposition said, is it one or the 

other? And the answer is it’s both: it’s prosperity and austerity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have to make sure that we’re moving this 

province forward. We have to make sure that the economic plan 

of this province is sustainable, Mr. Speaker. We have a great 

economy in this province. We have a growing population. We 

have a growing province, and we want to make sure that those 

things continue. So, Mr. Speaker, the message that will be 

delivered on March 21st will be a budget that will be 

sustainable and will be balanced, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the Deputy 

Premier are telling Saskatchewan families to prepare for cuts in 

services. Yet the Premier announced, quite surprisingly, in 

December that he’s going to spend $700,000 a year to add three 

more MLAs to this Assembly. To the Premier: Saskatchewan 

people need a straight answer. When you are cutting services to 

Saskatchewan people, how do you justify increasing the number 

of MLAs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We appreciate 

the opportunity to add some information on this important 

issue. Mr. Speaker, since the last time a census was conducted, 

the population of the province has grown by over 5 per cent. 

We anticipate between now and the time a next census is done 

there will be a further 5 per cent increase in the population of 

the province. And we have had in the history of the province, 

we’ve had as many as 66 and 64 MLAs. It is a challenge to 

ensure that MLAs are able to give good service to the people. 

 

We are a government that wants to plan for growth, not for 

limitation, and we think it is simply the right thing to do to try 

and balance and make an appropriate adjustment on matching 

the number of MLAs with the number of people that they will 

be serving. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, let’s be clear. One minute the 

Premier and his ministers are talking about austerity in the 

budget, and the next minute they’re talking about prosperity in 

the province. Now I’ve taken a look at the Saskatchewan Party 

election platform, and I’ve looked at the recent Throne Speech. 

I was here to hear it in December. But nowhere did I see a 

promise to add three MLAs to the province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would challenge the Premier and his 

ministers to explain where did the request for the three 



388 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2012 

additional MLAs come from? And who did he consult, who did 

they consult with before making the decision to add three 

additional MLAs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have more members on 

this side of the House. We want to ensure that they’re able to 

service them. I’m quite surprised, Mr. Speaker, to hear the 

Leader of the Opposition doing that. 

 

The member from Athabasca in the House said, and I quote: 

 

Because right now in the Assembly, we have a certain 

number of seats, and as the minister alluded to, as the 

population grows, do we have the need for more seats, for 

more MLAs? And the obvious answer is yes, as the 

population grows. And you should have more MLAs as 

the population should reflect that in the number of seats 

that we have in the Assembly. 

 

So I guess, Mr. Speaker, the simple answer to the question is, 

the one we’ve consulted with the most is the member from 

Athabasca. But you would think with only nine members, 

they’d be able to get a consistent story. It hasn’t happened yet. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask my learned friend, as I 

would call him in court, I would ask my learned friend to read 

the whole story, read the whole speech, and look at the fact that 

the primary emphasis in the hon. member’s speech relates to an 

increase in services for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Premier, Mr. Finance Minister, Mr. Justice Minister, it’s a 

simple question. It’s about priorities. How do any of them 

square spending $700,000 a year on three extra MLAs when 

they’re telling Saskatchewan people to brace for cuts to services 

and programs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we did read the member from Athabasca’s 

comments, and we did read them in their entirety. The quote 

that I gave before was from page 294. At page 297, and I quote 

again: 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, we would encourage different 

groups out there that are aware that the Sask Party wants 

to put up three more seats by using the argument that 

there’s a growing population and we need more seats. We 

agree with that, that there is a growing population and 

more seats are necessary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure whether we want to be on the same 

page as the member from Athabasca or the Leader of the 

Opposition but, Mr. Speaker, we think it’s the right thing to do. 

We want to ensure that the citizens of the province are well 

represented. We recognize there’s a growing population in our 

province and, Mr. Speaker, we will serve the constituents and 

the people in our province well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a question about priorities. 

And I say on behalf of the Saskatchewan people, how can this 

government, how can this Premier, how can this Finance 

minister, how can any of them justify spending $700,000 a year 

for three more MLAs when they’re going to be cutting the 

services for people in this province? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a sad day when we have to ask this kind of a 

question. It’s even sadder when we don’t understand where this 

idea came from. It’s not in any documents that we’ve seen. It’s 

not in the platform. They did not talk about this when they went 

to the public last fall. Mr. Speaker, I ask the members, what 

kind of priorities do you have? We on this side of the House 

have strong priorities to protect the people of the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be pleased to talk about 

their priorities. They plan for decline; we plan for growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when that party was in government, they spent $5 

million a year more on government communications, three and 

a half million dollars less than we have spent in the Premier’s 

. . . three and a half million dollars less that we are spending. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have made substantial savings through our 

executive government, Mr. Speaker. The amount of money that 

is spent on MLAs is money that will go directly to serving the 

citizens of this province. We’ll take no advice from them on 

where to spend money on serving the population of this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will do a good job ensuring that people have 

access to an MLA. I spoke earlier to the member from Arm 

River. He has to travel two and a half hours from one side of his 

constituency to the other. We want to ensure that people have 

good access, that they do not have to travel a great deal of 

distance to meet with their MLAs. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

going to do exactly that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Education and Employment for Northern Youth 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Northern Saskatchewan is home to many 

young people who want to have a good quality job. However, 

the government has not provided the funding and supports 

needed so that northerners can be successful. 

 

To the minister: what is his plan to create more training 

opportunities in northern Saskatchewan so our young people 

can qualify for good-paying jobs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for First Nations and 

Métis Relations. 

 



March 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 389 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Indeed an important question and one that is a priority 

for this government. Let me begin by talking about First 

Nations and Aboriginal education as a whole. We have some 

75,000 post-secondary students in Saskatchewan. Some 13,000 

of those are from First Nations and Métis, and 18 per cent, the 

largest ever in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As a government, we are spending $46.3 million for First 

Nations and Métis education, directly on education and 

employment support; an increase, Mr. Speaker, and I hope 

members opposite are paying attention, an increase of some 20 

per cent, Mr. Speaker. I have pages and pages of outlines of the 

programs, and I would be happy to go through them for the 

entire question period if members opposite want to do. A 

highlight amongst them is a $1 million commitment for the 

International Centre for Northern Governance and Development 

that’s happening in northern Saskatchewan today because of 

this government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Well that’s real interesting, because 

sometimes when you visit some of the communities in the 

North, it isn’t so as the minister is pointing out. The Premier 

recently visited Ireland, looking for workers to come to 

Saskatchewan. At the same time, there are young people in 

northern Saskatchewan who, with proper training, can fill the 

need for skilled workers. It would be good for the Premier to 

visit communities in the North and to meet the people that could 

solve the labour shortage. These people are here, right here in 

our own backyard. Is the Premier willing to come to northern 

Saskatchewan for a visit? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for First Nations and 

Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, we have indeed in 

this province a Premier that we can be proud of, whether he’s 

on the international stage talking about the advantage of 

Saskatchewan, whether he’s in Ottawa speaking for us, or 

whether he’s in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier, the Premier each and every year, to 

my knowledge, has been up in northern Saskatchewan visiting 

communities, talking about people. Not just issuing press 

releases, Mr. Speaker, sitting there talking to people, day in and 

day out about it. Mr. Speaker, that’s indeed a Premier that we 

have. And I can tell you, ministers and colleagues on this side 

of the House take that leadership and visit northern 

Saskatchewan at every opportunity. And that’s why northern 

Saskatchewan is such a great part of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — I don’t know if the minister has been talking 

to northern people or not, but obviously not because he doesn’t 

know what’s going on. 

 

Recently I have visited communities such as Sandy Bay, 

Pelican Narrows. There are many young people in these 

communities who could make an excellent skilled worker if 

they were just given a chance. I am offering right now to take 

the Premier on a tour, and not just for a quick stop, so that he 

can see first-hand what is happening in our communities. Will 

the Premier join me on a tour of Sandy Bay and Pelican 

Narrows as soon as possible? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for First Nations and 

Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much for the 

question, Mr. Speaker. Indeed it’s a privilege to visit northern 

Saskatchewan at each and every opportunity. And I know when 

I have the opportunity to be invited up into northern 

Saskatchewan, I like to take that opportunity. And certainly I 

would welcome the opportunity to join the member in northern 

Saskatchewan at any time. 

 

Members will know that every time that I am in northern 

Saskatchewan I talk to the local MLA — two of them that are 

sitting on the opposite side of the House — invite them to join 

me wherever possible. Because at the end of the day, what’s 

most important is not the politics of the House, but increasing 

the standard of living for those people. That’s the priority for 

us, that’ll continue to be the priority, and that’s why we’re on 

this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Kidney Transplant Program 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. March is Kidney 

Health Month. Unfortunately this month also marks 31 months 

since the Sask Party government suspended the kidney 

transplant program. That was back on July 28th, 2009. 

 

Since being appointed Health critic, I have been contacted by a 

number of individuals who are on the waiting list for a kidney 

transplant. Last month the minister informed me that the kidney 

transplant program is not yet fully up and running. My question 

to the minister: when will the kidney transplant program, on 

behalf of the patients and families who are desperately waiting, 

when will the program be fully up and running? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the kidney transplant 

program is up and running, not fully as the member opposite 

mentioned. We are still sending some citizens outside the 

province once they have a match.  

 

Now it’s important to understand, Mr. Speaker, that if a person 

is waiting for a kidney transplant, because they’re on a waiting 

list doesn’t mean they’re waiting because surgery cannot be 

performed. They’re waiting because there is not a match of an 

appropriate kidney, Mr. Speaker. So it’s very important that the 

member opposite not mislead, that people on a waiting list 

aren’t waiting for surgery as much as they are waiting for an 

appropriate kidney, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have been working very hard with the 

Saskatoon Health Region to make sure that the kidney 

transplant program will be up and functioning fully as soon as 



390 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2012 

we possibly can. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we have sent a physician 

from Saskatoon out to London, Ontario to upgrade their 

education so that when he returns, he will be able to conduct the 

full transplant procedure, Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan. 

Until that time, we have a great working relationship with 

Alberta so that our citizens will not wait any longer than as long 

as it takes to find an appropriate kidney, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan was once a world 

leader in kidney transplants. And it’s been under this minister’s 

watch, this minister’s watch in the Assembly, that we’ve seen 

the decline of the program. Simply sending patients to Alberta 

is not satisfactory to the many Saskatchewan patients and 

families that are waiting. On April 15th, 2010, nearly two years 

ago, the minister set a target of three to four months to have the 

program up and running. It’s been 22 months and 23 days since 

the minister set that target. Patients are anxious. They want to 

know when the program will be fully up and running in the 

province. They’ve heard the minister set targets before. 

 

My question to the minister: what is his explanation for the 

extensive delay that these patients are having to wait and suffer 

with their families? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I will say that it is not 

the ideal situation when a patient has to go outside 

Saskatchewan to receive services, for example, a kidney 

transplant. But I will also say, Mr. Speaker, that those people 

that have been outside of Saskatchewan are very pleased that 

our government has such a good working relationship with 

Alberta and have received appropriate care, returned back to 

Saskatchewan and received all the support services that they 

need, Mr. Speaker, on a recovery basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these specialists are highly educated, are 

subspecialties, Mr. Speaker. We have done a review of the 

kidney transplant program. We realize what is needed. We are 

working to that end goal, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that we have a 

fully functioning program here in Saskatchewan. And I am very 

confident, Mr. Speaker, as the appropriate professionals receive 

the appropriate training, that program will be up and running 

fully in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s made promises 

before about the program, and we’ve seen those targets come 

and go. There’s no question that the primary concern is about 

the patient and their well-being and their quality of life. But 

there are also very significant financial implications for the 

province. Hemodialysis on an annual basis costs about $60,000 

per patient. On the other hand, a kidney transplant is about 

$23,000, and there’s an annual cost of about $6,000 to maintain 

that transplant. So for each successful transplant that we see in 

the province over a five-year period, there is a savings, a 

savings of $250,000. 

 

My question to the minister: while patients wait, while the 

Saskatchewan program has declined and we’re waiting for it to 

be fully operational once again, how many patients are on the 

waiting list? And how much could be saved if the program was 

fully operational here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in my previous 

two answers, the ideal situation is to have a fully functioning 

kidney transplant program here in Saskatchewan. Having said 

that, while we are waiting to have the appropriate professionals 

trained and attracting continually, always recruiting and 

attracting to Saskatchewan, those patients are going outside the 

province. I said earlier to the member opposite and I will 

explain again to him one more time. If a person is on a wait-list, 

it doesn’t mean that they can’t have their surgery; it means that 

the kidney is not available. There is a huge difference there. 

 

So if a person is on a waiting list and they’re waiting six 

months, it’s because a kidney hasn’t become available for six 

months, Mr. Speaker. It isn’t because the surgery was not 

available. Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a good working relationship 

with Alberta and in Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, as well as across 

internationally. When the proper kidney is available, the 

surgery will be conducted, Mr. Speaker. The member is trying 

to mislead by a wait-list that doesn’t apply to the surgery, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Funding for Independent Schools 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, education is vital to the 

well-being of our province and to students from a social and 

economic perspective. In December the Sask Party announced 

they would divert education funding to previously unfunded, 

private, independent schools without consulting school boards, 

teachers, parents, the entire education sector. This decision has 

been widely criticized. 

 

To the minister: how does making major policy changes that 

have a direct impact on our publicly funded education system 

and on students without any consultation create a culture of 

trust or good policy? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

our government is very committed to good quality education 

within our province. And there was a consultation process on 

independent schools and how independent schools should be 

funded within our province that was initiated actually when the 

NDP [New Democratic Party] were government. And the 

consultation process undertook a couple of years, and then the 

report was issued to the minister in, I believe it was 2010. 

 

We didn’t immediately act on the report. We decided that the 

funding formula was more critical than dealing with the 

recommendations within that report. The recommendations was 

that we follow the example of the other Western Canadian 



March 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 391 

provinces, which in the Western Canadian provinces have some 

level of funding for independent schools. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, there was absolutely no 

consultation with the education sector on that announcement as 

a plan. In fact the boards were without an education funding 

formula for the past three years, and it was a complete surprise 

to the entire education sector when it was announced. 

 

The Sask Party should be working to support students by 

enhancing and enabling the publicly funded education system. 

Many new Canadians, for example, are choosing to build their 

lives in our province. This provides an excellent opportunity for 

us as a province. 

 

Instead of taking this opportunity to build inclusion, social 

cohesion, unity, and celebrate diversity and ensure educational 

excellence through the publicly funded system, this government 

is diverting already thin educational dollars to private 

independent schools. This move reduces equity, standards, and 

support for students and serves to fragment and erode our 

education system. To the minister: honestly, how is this in the 

best interests of our students and our province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 

opposite has been told a number of times, and he just chooses to 

ignore it, that this is additional funding that’s going into 

education. There is accountability that will be required in order 

for schools to receive this funding. It is not funding coming out 

of the existing budget within our province which, by the way, 

the Saskatchewan Party government increased by over 18 per 

cent in our first term in government. 

 

However, when the member opposite talks about fragmentation 

and inclusion and public, we have historically in this province, 

we have a very, very strong public education system. We also 

have a very strong Catholic education system. Mr. Speaker, we 

fund a French school division within this province. We fund 

one Protestant school division within this province. We have 

historical high schools that we fund within this province which 

are independent and which are faith based. We fund and have 

traditionally funded associate schools which are faith and 

culturally based. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is sort of one last type of school that 

we’ve decided to give a level of funding to just like the other 

Western Canadian provinces. We’re not reinventing what is 

being done in other places in Canada. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Rightfully so, Mr. Speaker, the school 

boards and the education sector have concerns around the 

decision to fund private, independent schools. So does the 

public. Currently many communities are facing the prospect of 

school closure because this government has deemed them not 

viable because of their enrolments, schools in Regina such as 

Dieppe and Haultain — Haultain with more than 100 students 

— and rural schools like Nokomis and Bjorkdale and Pangman. 

Yet, inconsistently and hypocritically, this government is 

moving ahead with diverting funding to private, independent 

schools with no minimum enrolments. They can just have a 

handful of students, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Given this hypocrisy, how does the government, how does this 

minister expect a community to accept the closure of their 

school because, quite simply, it isn’t fair? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I know sometimes it’s really difficult 

to hear in the Assembly because of the noise. So I’ll repeat it 

again: we did not divert funding from the Education budget. 

This was new funding that we are going to give to independent 

schools. 

 

In addition the member opposite is criticizing funding for 

private independent schools and yet, historically in this 

province, when the NDP were government, we provided 

funding for historical high schools. We agree with that, Mr. 

Speaker. Historically when the NDP were government, we 

provided funding for associate schools which are also private 

independent schools. We agree with that. The NDP agreed with 

that then, and now obviously they’re doing a complete flip-flop 

from what they agreed to when they were government. 

 

The Speaker: — Before we move on, I would like to remind 

members to carefully choose their wording in questions and 

answers and not to imply or impugn the honour of another 

member. And that includes interrupting the Speaker. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

New Day Program Funding 

for People with Intellectual Disabilities 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

am very proud to rise in the House today to talk about an 

important announcement that I made this morning that will 

improve the lives of Saskatchewan people with intellectual 

disabilities. I’m very pleased also that Bev Bartok and Sharla 

Schofield are able to be with us today from the Cosmopolitan 

Learning Centre, and they were there this morning for the 

announcement. 

 

I’m proud to announce that on April the 1st, the Government of 

Saskatchewan will officially implement a new day program 

funding standard for ministry funded community-based 

organizations. It also gives me a great deal of pleasure to tell 

you that a portion of this new day program funding standard 

will be targeted towards individuals with complex needs. 

 

The total funding increase for both aspects of this new day 

program standard will be approximately $6.3 million in 

2012-2013. This includes a $4.6 million increase for regular day 

programs and a $1.7 million increase for day programs with 

clients with complex needs. By the time all the complex needs 

designations are completed in the year 2013-2014, the total 

annualized funding increase will reach $7 million. As a direct 

result of this new funding for day programs, additional 

resources will be provided to up to 54 day programs right across 

our province. 



392 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2012 

This new funding standard was piloted at eight sites right across 

the province between March 2010 and July 2011. Following the 

evaluation of the pilot in the fall of 2011, and after completing 

approximately 2,100 assessments in ministry-funded CBOs 

[community-based organization] across the province, the new 

funding model was developed. 

 

The current day program funding model was developed in the 

1970s. Mr. Speaker, it has not changed since that time. This 

model is based on a cost per space and does not take individual 

support of clients into consideration. The new model being 

announced today will allocate funding to day programs in a 

more customized way, based on individual assessed needs of 

each person and every program. 

 

In addition to this, the ministry will also be implementing 

expanding funding standards in current and new residential 

programs operated by community-based organizations that 

support individuals with complex needs designations. 

Expansions of the current residential funding standards will 

result in an increased capacity of group homes to more 

appropriately support individuals with complex needs. This 

expansion begins on April the 1st, 2012. And in the year 

2012-2013, $560,000 will be allotted to this expansion and the 

total supports will grow to $2 million when fully implemented 

in 2014-15. 

 

Over the past decade, the profile of people served in day 

programs has changed as higher needs individuals are now 

being served in the community instead of in the institutions. As 

a result, community-based organizations are challenged to 

provide services that meet those higher levels of need. This 

increased funding announced today will help address these 

challenges head-on and allow community-based organizations 

to provide the best possible service to all their clients. This 

funding will also assist with our government’s goal of making 

Saskatchewan the best place in Canada for people to live with 

disabilities. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank all the people who 

work and volunteer at the community-based organizations right 

across our province. The work they do makes a very big 

difference in the lives of Saskatchewan people with intellectual 

disabilities. We can’t thank them enough. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to respond to the ministerial 

statement today, and I want to thank the minister for sending 

this over in advance so we could have a look at it. And I just 

also want to welcome the special guests to the legislature for 

this very important announcement. 

 

It is indeed positive news. I assume it’s part of the pre-budget 

announcements and we’ll have a time to ask more questions 

about this in estimates, and this is the appropriate time. But 

today is a good news day and I think this is the right thing to do. 

We all want to make this the best place in Canada for people 

with disabilities to live, and to support those who work in the 

CBO sector because there are a lot of challenges in the CBO 

sector and we’re becoming more and more aware of the 

challenges indeed. 

 

So thank you to all the folks who work in the CBO sector. And 

of course this, as I said, is a good news thing. There’s not much 

more to say. I think the minister has laid it all out with the 

details and we look forward to seeing the good results of this 

and that people can live in dignity in their own communities. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 34 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Bjornerud that Bill No. 34 — The 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation Act, 2011 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s with 

some interest that I rise to participate in the debate today on 

crop insurance changes, Mr. Speaker. I come from a family that, 

we still have the home quarter out in Montmartre country, 

100-plus years, Mr. Speaker, 105 I believe we’ve now held title 

to that particular quarter section, McCalls. 

 

And as relates to insurance and the changes that have been 

made over the years, it’s always, when you go through a season 

like last year with the flooding that had gone on, it was with a 

certain interest that I watched what had happened out in the 

Southeast. Because of course I came to be a resident of the city 

of Regina, and McCalls, my father and my grandmother, came 

into the city of Regina in the mid-’50s following fairly severe 

flooding out in their neck of the woods. And I guess it’s always 

interesting to talk with my father about going through that time 

and the kind of ditching that they had to do and the way you’d 

come home with a headache from using the dynamite in a way 

that . . . To this day if he smells cordite or certain of those 

things, how it brings back memories of that time — which was 

quite frankly terrible, Mr. Speaker, for a number of reasons. 

The cattle that they tended to, the flooding was so bad in some 

circumstances, and the inability to properly attend to the 

livestock, some of the cattle, their hooves were rotting off, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

I know in a very direct way just what an ordeal that was for our 

family and what hardship can be inflicted on our producers 

when it comes to the acts of mother nature, and how hard it can 

be for producers who work hard, who plan very diligently, and 

who get that good crop in, but the way that things can change in 

an afternoon of bad weather or an evening or what have you. 

But one of the things that I always think about, I guess, when I 

hear about different situations as it relates to producers that are 

undergoing problems as it comes to the damage that mother 

nature can do to their livelihood and to those crops that they put 

such pride in. 



March 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 393 

[14:30] 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, the kind of changes as well that have 

taken place over the years for the different insurance schemes, 

for crop insurance, the major review that was recently 

undertaken, again we followed that with great and certain 

interest. So when the announcements were made in February in 

terms of the coverage for the 2012 crop insurance program, on a 

number of fronts it seems to be positive news. For example and 

I guess off the top, providing the unseeded acreage benefit up to 

$100 per eligible acre as well as another year of funding and 

coverage levels at significantly high levels, that is of course 

welcome news. The continued co-operation with the federal 

government in terms of being there for producers, again 

welcome news. 

 

I guess we followed the work of the minister quite closely on 

this, and it’s an evolutionary process certainly, working with 

partners. But the minister, of course, had a lot to say in the 

second reading speech on this and also when they launched this. 

And we’re quite glad to see that there’s favourable comments 

coming in from the SARM president, Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities president, Dave Marit, 

commentary from the Saskatchewan Oat Development 

Commission Chair, Dwayne Anderson, SaskCanola Chair Brett 

Halstead weighing in, and the Saskatchewan Forage Council 

president, Aaron Ivey — different stakeholders certainly 

weighing in. 

 

Another thing that was interesting to see, Mr. Speaker, is 

something that has traditionally not been covered but we’ll see 

how this works out for commercial fruit growers, the possible 

coverage to be provided for the replacement of saskatoon 

bushes, dwarf sour cherry, and haskap fruit trees. I’m not just 

saying that as a big fan of saskatoon pie, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 

not saying it to make you hungry either. I’ll get off that path, 

Mr. Speaker, before we’re rumbling our stomachs back and 

forth here. But again, these are segments of the market that 

traditionally have not been served by crop insurance and there’s 

definitely an interest on the part of that segment of the industry 

to have that assurance and the insurance from crop insurance. 

So we welcome this initial extension of coverage in these areas 

and we’ll be watching closely to see how that works out. 

 

But 2012, the budget is at $177 million. Coverage levels are at a 

high of $174 per acre. On average the . . . Again the way that it 

works, you’ve got to make sure that you’re funding the 

potential liability, Mr. Speaker. So we’re glad to see that the 

monies are being extended in that regard. 

 

We look forward with great interest to the work of our 

agricultural critic, the member from Saskatoon Nutana, who 

comes off a farm out Lafleche way, and somebody that’s got 

some pretty vibrant roots and ongoing connections with the 

sector, and I know she is following this file with great interest 

as well. 

 

That’s about all I have to say for now, Mr. Speaker, and as such 

I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 34, An Act 

respecting Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 34, The Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 1 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 1 — The Queen’s 

Bench Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 

1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to rise 

again to join in debate on second reading of Bill No. 1, The 

Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2011. It’s again always kind of 

interesting to see which departments provide a preponderance 

of legislative activity, and it’s been my experience over the 

years, Mr. Speaker, that the Department of Justice is no slouch 

when it comes to providing legislative grist for the mill here at 

the legislature. Again there are a number of measures contained 

in the Act. 

 

It’s also provided en français aussi [Translation: in French also] 

as Loi de modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la 

Reine. It’s good to see the, again, particularly as relates to 

justice measures, Mr. Speaker, the importance of the very law 

of the land having that bilingual capacity in the legislation 

itself. It’s good to see that. 

 

The Bill itself amends the former, The Queen’s Bench Act, 

1998, facilitating the appointment of the Associate Chief Justice 

for the Court of Queen’s Bench. According to the minister as 

related in his second reading remarks, the total number of 

judges on the court will be maintained at 32, including the 

Chief Justice and the Associate Chief Justice and 30 other 

judges, wherein the Chief Justice of the court is responsible for 

the court’s administrative functions, scheduling matters, 

participation in Canadian and Saskatchewan judicial councils, 

and ensuring that these administrative responsibilities are 

efficiently and importantly discharged for the smooth operation 

of the court. 

 

According to the minister as well, Mr. Speaker, the amount of 

time that the Chief Justice spends on administrative matters and 

the way that this impacts the ability to hear and decide 

important legal issues that come before the court — again the 

point in being Chief Justice is to be the Chief Justice and not be 

administrator in chief — so as enabled by this legislation, the 

sharing of administrator responsibilities with an Associate Chief 

Justice should provide the Chief Justice with a greater 

opportunity to hear matters and act as a judicial leader in the 

court. Again drawing upon the remarks from the Minister of 

Justice in his second reading speech, so we think that would 

seem to hold water, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The fact that the Chief Justice is obviously someone that has a 

significant amount of expertise and body of knowledge built up 

over a career and the recognition of that being invested in the 



394 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2012 

position of Chief Justice itself, again it makes good sense to 

make as best use possible of that wisdom, of that judiciousness, 

if I might say, Mr. Speaker. And not . . . Again this isn’t 

squandering it, but perhaps to spend a preponderance of time on 

administrative matters is not the best use of that knowledge and 

wisdom that is invested in that position or the individuals that 

fill that position. 

 

So that the amendments also allow the Associate Chief Justice 

to take on all the duties and responsibilities of the Chief Justice 

in the absence or in the inability of the Chief Justice to act. 

Again, provides a good insurance policy to ensure the seamless 

operation of the court and making sure that, should there be 

illness arising or the need to be away for an extended period of 

time, that that work will carry on. 

 

I guess one of the provisions the minister references, one of the 

other provisions that the minister references, wherein the Chief 

Justice of the Court of Queen’s Bench in most other provinces 

having the ability to assign some administrative duties to an 

associate chief justice, that amendment helps to remedy the 

situation where Saskatchewan hasn’t had that, and in fact as it 

stands right now, according to the minister’s remarks, we are 

one of only four jurisdictions, provincial jurisdictions in 

Canada. 

 

So right now we’re ranked among those. The other jurisdictions 

are Newfoundland, New Brunswick, and Prince Edward Island. 

Again nothing against our Maritime cousins, but given that 

Ontario, Alberta, and British Columbia each have one Associate 

Chief Justice, that’s good company to be in, as would be 

brought about by this legislation. 

 

The minister relates that Quebec has two associate chief 

justices, one in Montreal and one in Quebec City. And again 

those who are familiar with the two solitudes, arguably that 

holds true in that province in the difference between those two 

cosmopolitan regions. 

 

Nova Scotia and Manitoba courts being roughly the same size 

as Saskatchewan’s court, each of them have two associate chief 

justices, one for the general division and one for the family law 

division. And again as this government continues to evolve the 

differentiation between general division and family law, we’ll 

see how this impacts other processes and positions within the 

system. 

 

So the minister, when he had stated that it seems appropriate to 

amend The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 to facilitate the 

appointment of an Associate Chief Justice, we on the face of it, 

prima facie, Mr. Speaker, would agree. 

 

Apparently this is a joint legislative or a shared legislative 

authority with the Parliament of Canada, and as such, a 

corresponding amendment is required to the federal Judges Act 

before the amendments to the Saskatchewan legislation can be 

proclaimed. Apparently the government has requested the 

federal Minister of Justice to table the federal amendments 

when the Judges Act is next before the House of Commons. 

Again we’ll be keeping an eye out to see how that transpires. 

 

But to recap, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 1, The Queen’s Bench 

Amendment Act, at its base, we see it as a means by which to 

enable the Chief Justice to focus on being a judge and to focus 

on the . . . and get the most out of what has been obviously 

recognized as wisdom and knowledge and ensure that that is 

best deployed, and to perhaps better deploy on the question of 

administrative functions and the scheduling, the participation in 

other judicial councils and whatnot. 

 

So it’s not exactly a world-beating piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. And on the face of it, it looks to be of value and to be 

something that would largely fit under the category of 

housekeeping. And as such, we’ll continue to look at it and 

make sure it’s not meeting up to the law of unintended 

consequences or that there are other measures that weren’t 

touched upon by the minister’s remarks, but are borne out in the 

actual items in the legislation itself. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would, as regards Bill No. 1, The 

Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2011, I would move to 

adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved 

adjournment of Bill No. 1, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 

2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Bill No. 2 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 2 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Collaborative Law) Amendment Act, 

2011/Loi corrective (droit collaboratif) de 2011 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to rise today to speak to Bill No. 2, 

An Act to amend certain Statutes with respect to matters 

concerning Collaborative Law. 

 

And it’s always a good thing that we keep on top of new 

developments, and so I took a lot of interest in this Bill to see 

what kind of changes. Again it’s a short one. It looks like it’s 

updating good practices, best practices, in an area that our 

families are most fragile in terms of coming to law to solve 

issues that we all hope that things would never get to that state. 

And so this is a good piece of legislation to bring forward and 

to discuss. 

 

I do have some questions and some suggestions — some 

questions that I’m sure that the minister, hopefully before we 

get to committee, may think of. Because you know, one of the 

things we do is we do write letters to other stakeholders or 

people that would have interest into this and ask them their 

opinion about this. And so I’d like to share some of those things 

in a few minutes because I think they make some very 

worthwhile comments. 

 



March 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 395 

But first of all, what we’re talking about is just three pieces of 

legislation that exist today — The Children’s Law Act, 1997, 

The Family Maintenance Act, 1997, and The Family Property 

Act — and inserting into that better language around 

collaborative law services and mediation services, and making 

sure that the applicant or the respondent, the two parties to the 

dispute, have the opportunity to make use of those services if 

they so choose. And I think this is a wise thing because I think 

clearly nobody wants to make a bad situation worse. And when 

we have families who are in dire circumstances for a whole host 

of reasons — and this is part of the human condition is when 

families break down and when children are involved, where 

family homes are involved — clearly the province should be 

there with the supportive regulations to make sure that they get 

the appropriate supports. And when they go to their lawyers for 

best advice and help to move forward, their lawyers, one, have 

the best tools, are kept up to date, but are also required by law 

to make sure that the parties have the best information and most 

current information. 

 

So I want to go through that. I just want to take a minute to 

review the minister’s comments. I always find that a good 

practice to do to make sure we understand the context. And 

sometimes the minister gives about right, sometimes a little 

less. I’ve never known him to give too much information. But I 

think this is an interesting piece. And I think that he states the 

circumstances quite appropriately, talking about how we want 

to create situations where people find themselves in a stressful 

situation that, in days gone past, we might feel like we have to 

go to court. But we actually don’t want to do that. In fact, if we 

can take it to mediation, that would be best. If there’s some 

other way to seek resolution to family law issues, this is quite 

appropriate. 

 

And he talks about how, over the past 50 years, I think that 

there’s been a lot of changes. And of course we would talk 

about the baby boomer years, or the years of the ’50s and the 

’60s, and a lot more kids were around. Families were sprouting 

up all over the place. And of course, then things started to 

change and we saw a . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Simpler 

time, exactly. That’s exactly the words, a simpler time. And it’s 

not so much any more, and of course that’s for a whole host of 

reasons. But that is so true. 

 

And now if we can get back to those times where it wasn’t so 

complex and make laws a little, a little more simpler, I think 

this is a good thing. And of course, the minister talks about 

how, while we did change things in 1997 and talked about The 

Children’s Law Act, The Family Maintenance Act in 1997, and 

mediation negotiations were considered cutting edge in ’97, 

they are part of the tool kit now. And this is something we have 

to recognize, and I think that’s a very good thing. And 

collaborative law is part of that tool kit, and we have to 

acknowledge that and bring that into the common terminology 

of law. And so I think this is important. 

 

He highlights — and I’m glad he did highlight this, because 

many of us would not realize this — that those who practise 

collaborative law . . . And, you know, it’s funny how we go to a 

law office now and you see the different magazines they have 

on the bookshelf, you know, like the divorce magazines. I don’t 

think 50 years ago you would have seen a magazine dedicated 

to divorce. You would not have seen that. But this is what 

divorce lawyers read these days, you know. And I find this very 

odd, but it’s actually very good because they keep up with the 

times. 

 

And so I guess there are new things . . . Or you see the 

billboards. And I know driving through Saskatoon you see 

billboards about collaborative law, and 50 years ago you would 

not have seen a billboard about a lawyer offering their services. 

It was very discreet, very quiet, and it was just not much you 

talked about. But it’s a different time. And so I think this is 

important that we understand that mediators and those who 

practise the art of collaborative law require special training and 

certification. That’s an important part. So I think this is very 

interesting to read and I appreciate that. And I think this is 

important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister points out, of course, unlike other 

family law Acts, The Family Property Act does not currently 

require lawyers to advise their family law clients about 

negotiation or mediation and so we need to change that and I 

think this is important. 

 

So it looks like a relatively straightforward piece of legislation 

and that there’s not much to really talk about. But I do want to 

raise one thing. And I hope that before we get to committee, as I 

said, that if the minister can consider this, or let us know why. 

 

And this is not actually something that this current minister has 

brought in. I think this is part of the old legislation. But it still 

needs to be asked because I think when we look at the actual 

changes — and I’m going to go through this with the 

explanatory notes, but I may not get it right — but what’s being 

inserted into the . . . while the Act overhauls the sentence, for 

example, in The Children’s Law Act, 1997, it’s subsection 

11(1), clauses (a) and (b). And he’s taking out whole phrases 

and substituting the new phrases, but really what’s new is the 

insertion of collaborative law services and mediation services. 

And actually I understand it’s not . . . The old law referred to 

mediation facilities, not services, and so there’s a change from 

facilities to services to modernize it there. 

 

But the one that I have a question about is, and it’s not 

explained well in the explanatory notes, but why does it say, 

“known to him or her”? And this is a key point because we did 

receive one letter and it was from Family Service Saskatoon. As 

we do and as I think all oppositions do, we write letters to 

stakeholders saying, what do you think of this piece of 

legislation? We did get one response back on this Bill from 

Family Service Saskatoon, and I’ll read this into the record so if 

the minister wants to take note of this, he can. And I quote, and 

it’s a letter of February 24th, 2012: 

 

The proposed amendment to subsection 11(1) clause (b) 

and similarly in subsection 16(1) clause (b), stipulates 

“inform the claimant or respondent of the collaborative 

law services and mediation services known to him or her 

that might be able to assist the parties in resolving those 

matters.” The wording of concern is “known to him or 

her” which could be strengthened to create a positive 

obligation with lawyers in order for them to remain 

abreast of current collaborative services and training 

available to them in the field of collaborative law. The 

current wording implies that if one has not taken the 



396 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2012 

opportunity to become aware of these services, there is no 

responsibility to offer or find such information. 

 

Now I read from the explanatory notes that every lawyer who 

provides a service and then ends up in court with a dispute has 

to sign a form saying that he did or she did actually inform the 

parties that there was another dispute resolution process. But 

what these people are saying — and this is from Deborah 

Bryson-Sarauer, executive director — saying, you know, if 

we’re updating the language, why does that phrase have to stay 

in there? Why does it have to say, known to him or her? 

 

We can change mediation facilities to mediation services 

because 15 years ago facilities seemed to be a better word to 

use, better choice of word. Now we’re saying services is a 

better place. I’m not sure why the difference would be. I could 

speculate. Facilities might imply a place. Services might imply 

that these people are willing to travel to wherever you need to 

be which may be more appropriate, I think, and I think that’s a 

good thing. 

 

So I do have a . . . I think that’s one question we’re going to be 

having, and that’s one thing that we’re going to be asking 

about: why does that phrase need to stay in there, and could that 

in fact be strengthened? And I think this is, this is important. 

Because otherwise the folks, the Family Service thinks it’s a 

very good thing. And in fact this is, to them, it’s actually 

keeping up with the times, and I think this is a very, very good, 

very good piece of legislation. 

 

And so with that . . . And the only other question I have — now 

I may be wrong in this — but I’d be asking this question too, is 

I see that it comes to it, in effect, it comes into force on July 1st, 

2012. Usually when we come into force, it’s upon proclamation 

or assent. It’s not usually on a date necessarily or at the end of 

the year or at the end of a fiscal year. So why would be July 

1st? What’s special about July 1st? I don’t know why that 

would be the case. So I have some questions. I have some 

questions. It’s a curious question about why July 1st. Why not 

December 31st? Why not March 31st, the fiscal year? I’m not 

sure. 

 

So having said that though, I do think this is an important piece 

of legislation. We should always . . . This should be a priority 

for the government. As I said, nobody wants to see this kind of 

stuff happening in terms of when families find themselves in 

these kind of circumstances that they want things to be as 

simple as they can. And hopefully if divorces or whatever 

happens can be friendly, then that’s a good thing. It’s when it 

gets to be ugly and tools of law are misused not to find justice 

but to find vengeance, we don’t want to see that. 

 

And I think collaboration is a good, good way to go. And as 

somebody who’s not a lawyer, doesn’t really understand all of 

these things, and fortunately, I think, count my lucky stars, I 

haven’t had a lot of experience in that. And I think that the 

more we can do to help out . . . And as I say, lawyers do want to 

do as much as they can to be in the know, but this is one way to 

encourage them to be in the know and making sure they’re 

offering their services in the best way to their clients. And if it 

encourages them to be a better lawyer by taking some of these 

courses, getting certified, then I would say that we are all for it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that, looking forward to having the 

discussion with the minister. My interest has now picked up a 

little bit about why these certain things happen, but I’ll be 

looking forward to hearing some of the explanations. So with 

that, I would like to move adjournment of Bill No. 2. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Centre has moved 

adjournment of Bill No. 2, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Collaborative Law) Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Bill No. 3 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 3 — The 

Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2011 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to join in on debate this afternoon on Bill No. 3, the 

summary offences procedure Act, 2011. 

 

What we’re looking at in this piece of legislation, as I 

understand in reading the minister’s comments, is in many ways 

a modernization and movement forward as far as bringing some 

efficiencies to the justice process in general and to our peace 

officers here in Saskatchewan. And certainly in looking at a 

couple of these measures, two of them certainly seem to make a 

fair amount of sense at first glance. When I’m looking at 

specifically the ability to have officers in the field and 

responsive to fresh evidence and on the scene in a timely way, 

this of course is important to the efficient delivery of justice and 

actual delivery of justice and bringing safety to Saskatchewan 

people and to communities. So this is certainly something that 

looks to be supported. We’ve done some consultation and will 

continue to seek input as it relates to this piece of legislation. 

 

Consultation to date has supported the two pieces around the 

electronic tickets, the summary offences, and as well around the 

piece around warrants being able to be accessed by way of 

telephone. So those two pieces seem to bring merit and look to 

be sort of a modernization of an Act in making sure that we’re 

responding to some of the needs in the community. 

 

When I’m looking at the Bill itself or the Act itself and some of 

the minister’s statements, and I’m looking at the summary 

offence tickets that now will be able to be filled out 

electronically, what the contention is is that this will allow 

officers to be more efficient with their use of time, to be able to 

be more attentive to where they’re best utilized, and that’s 

responding to community needs and to challenges that exist. 

And this seems to make sense. And it seemed in a way that it 

was rather impractical to have officers limited in a sense of 

having them having to fill out hard-copy paperwork. That was 



March 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 397 

not where their time could be best spent, Mr. Speaker. So if this 

is a more efficient process that allows greater community 

safety, that’s something we support. 

 

We know this is something that’s been called upon and urged 

upon by the police chiefs of Saskatchewan and calling for this 

change. We’ve heard that from the police chiefs, and we’re glad 

that government’s listened to being able to make some of these 

refinements on their behalf and their members’ behalf. But also 

this has been something that’s, I believe, as I understand, has 

been supported by law enforcement personnel across the 

country, including the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police], who have certainly as I understand a strong preference 

for this electronic format that will allow officers to be more 

efficient when spending their time on that sort of data and that 

sort of information filing and be more focused in being able to 

be more responsive to the important needs within our 

community. And it comes down to community safety and 

efficient delivery of service. So we certainly heard many of 

these aspects from our peace officers, from our enforcement 

officers, and in the respect of stakeholder organizations. And on 

this front, it seems that it is good to see government hearing 

some of those calls as well and making some of those 

refinements. 

 

Of course we’re going to be doing broader consultation on this 

as well to make sure both on this change, but the three others in 

this piece of legislation, that those in fact are in the best 

interests of Saskatchewan people. And that consultation’s vital 

to making sure that we understand the direct impact on those 

that are affected. And certainly an important group in this case 

would be law enforcement officers here in Saskatchewan, and a 

learned experience that we can likely hear from across Canada, 

but broader consultation as well. And that allows us to make 

sure we understand from government what their intent is with 

this legislation, to make sure we understand what the challenges 

are for stakeholders right now on the ground. And we need to 

make sure then that this legislation both is as responsive and as 

efficient in addressing those challenges, but also not creating 

some unintended consequences maybe not contemplated by 

government. And I say that that consultation process and the 

thorough examination that we will undertake as an opposition 

and as this Bill proceeds is very important. 

 

Unfortunately what we’ve learned far too often in this 

Assembly is that this Sask Party government is awfully reckless 

in putting together legislation and that really shirks its 

responsibility as it relates to consultation with those individuals 

affected by legislation. So we need to make sure we bring that 

sober second thought and effective scrutiny to this sort of 

legislation so we don’t end up in circumstances as we’ve seen 

in the past where this government’s rushed forward without any 

consultation, just out of ideological pursuit and ended up . . . In 

fact in one case, Mr. Speaker, if you can believe it, and it’s a 

shameful story for Saskatchewan people, but actually brought 

forward unconstitutional legislation to the people of this 

province. 

 

Of course we don’t see that sort of approach just in legislation, 

Mr. Speaker. We also do see it, unfortunately, manifest itself as 

well in the actions of ministers as they create regulations and 

programs. And that lack of consultation with those that are 

impacted and know the circumstances best is certainly not the 

best approach to either derive policy or to create program or to 

respond to people’s needs. And we see that occurring across the 

piece, whether it’s in health care, Mr. Speaker, or whether we 

see it in education, and then of course there’s consequences in 

those scenarios for Saskatchewan people. 

 

So we’re pleased to weigh in on this discussion here. And as we 

see with potentially some greater efficiency found on summary 

offence tickets, that’s certainly something that we should be 

able to support. It’s something we’ve heard from the law 

enforcement community and something that should allow those 

officers who are there protecting and working on behalf of the 

public to be as efficient as they can be in their usage of their 

time and placing those energies into where they’re best utilized, 

which is responding to the demands and needs in the 

community and providing safety and bringing about timely 

justice. 

 

Just to give a bit of an example on some of the tickets that 

we’re speaking about here, there’s a wide range when we’re 

talking about provincial offences, from minor traffic offences to 

more serious offences, whether that be infractions in hunting, 

let’s say poaching, or environmental pollution. Unsafe transport 

of goods on our highways would fit into these sorts of pieces. 

So there’s quite a range of infractions that would fall into 

summary ticket offences, and as you can see, that these are 

likely numerous scenarios for an officer. And you know, if 

we’re providing a more efficient system for officers to share 

information to file these tickets, then I think that that’s a 

positive step. We’ll continue our consultation on that front. 

 

I know another aspect of this Bill is as it relates to seeking 

warrants on provincial matters or for provincially regulated 

crime, Mr. Speaker. And I know that that’s . . . What we see on 

this case is actually coming in line with what occurs from a 

federal perspective as it relates to the Criminal Code and the 

more serious offences. This already is allowed for in that 

scenario, as I understand it anyways, Mr. Speaker, in 

consultation with stakeholders. So this allows us to modernize 

and be more efficient on this front. 

 

And I guess if we’re thinking about being able to access a 

warrant by telephone, certainly I can see the merits in a more 

efficient process, especially if we think of some of our rural or 

northern regions or all sorts of circumstances where it might be 

impractical or challenging for a peace officer to appear to 

receive a warrant. This should allow, with these changes which 

have been called upon by law enforcement officials here in 

Saskatchewan and across Canada, it should allow officers to be 

quickly responding to an incident and gaining fresh evidence 

and ultimately seeking or ultimately being in a better position to 

provide that timely justice and certainly the community safety 

that comes with that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I know we have a few officers in this Assembly, or former 

officers in this Assembly, and I suspect that they probably have 

some level of support for these sorts of changes as well and 

making sure that the men and women who do the good work on 

behalf of Saskatchewan people in keeping communities safe 

and providing timely justice, making sure that their time’s being 

spent as efficiently as it can be and on where they’re best 

utilized for the outcome which we require, which is the side of 

community safety and ultimately justice. 



398 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2012 

I know there’s some other aspects that have changed around 

entering default convictions and some new structures for 

deterrents or alleged deterrents for the default convictions, 

where an individual’s supposed to appear before the courts and 

if they don’t appear, certainly there’s cost both to the public and 

by way of time to all those individuals to conduct a hearing. 

And in many cases, in most cases, I understand that if 

somebody doesn’t appear, they’re going to be convicted by way 

of their absence in default. And that’s neither the best use of our 

justice system and not necessarily a reflection of the real 

circumstance that we should be assessing. 

 

So certainly I recognize the problem and the challenge in 

default convictions, and I look forward to asking more 

questions on this front as to the deterrent structure that’s put 

forward, as to its impact and its potential effectiveness. And 

certainly it sounds like it’s an issue that we need to be 

responding to; we just need to make sure that this is the most 

effective way to go at it and that these deterrents aren’t going to 

have unintended consequences for Saskatchewan people. 

 

So these are all important aspects as it relates to timely delivery 

of justice, as it relates to community safety, as I say, as it relates 

to the default convictions. I really do think we need to do a bit 

of broader question asking on that front, both with our 

respective stakeholders, but also of the minister and of 

government and on some of the contemplations that they’ve had 

as it relates to the impact and what information is driving 

whether or not this is the best way to go at dealing with 

something that certainly, I think we can all agree, is a challenge 

for our justice system. 

 

When we’re talking about the issue of justice here as well and 

delivery of justice and community safety, at this point in time I 

know there’s a real ominous feel across the province right now 

and some concerns in municipalities when we have our 

Premier, just a few shorts days ago and just a little while ago, 

go before the public and to share that he’s going to be 

providing, I believe, some cuts to the funding for these services. 

And when we look at the growing communities and needs, 

whether it’s in Weyburn or whether it’s in Prince Albert or 

whether it’s in Meadow Lake or whether it’s in Regina or 

whether it’s in Saskatoon or Melville, it’s important that we 

look at the services as a whole. And certainly community safety 

is a vital part of that, and timely justice. 

 

So I think there’s really hard questions that law enforcement 

officers are asking of this Premier at this point in time. I know 

that that’s the case of many individuals across this province, 

many community leaders across this province that are 

questioning, at a time where we’re actually growing as a 

province, that in fact the Premier feels this is a time to reduce 

funding for police officers and community safety, Mr. Speaker. 

So there’s good questions. 

 

I know down in Estevan — I hear the member speaking up a 

little bit — this is an area where the RCMP in fact are under 

great strain in Estevan, and they’re working incredibly hard to 

bring about community safety. And I think it’s disappointing 

for a community like Estevan that’s in many ways contributing 

to the prosperity directly into provincial coffers of this 

government, Mr. Speaker, to then be told that they’re going to 

be cutting their support for RCMP services back to their 

community. 

 

So this is a concern. And this is a growing community with, you 

know, the beautiful Bakken field and the activity that’s going 

on and the workers that are employed there. And I know there’s 

many individuals — lifelong residents and seniors and 

otherwise — that are asking many questions about why they 

should be compromising their public safety and they’re 

receiving a reduced allocation for policing in their community 

when they certainly see needs that are needing to be attended to. 

And the case is the same here in Regina and across this 

province. 

 

So that’s a point that certainly hits directly to this piece here. 

And the reason I say that is, if we’re making some tweaks to 

modernize and make more efficient the time usage of officers, 

this is something that certainly we support. But if we’re 

reducing the support for communities and for the public at large 

to have the response of a team of officers providing the public 

safety that we, that Saskatchewan people deserve and that they 

expect, then that’s too bad. So it’s a bit of a two sides of the . . . 

speaking out of two sides of the mouth sort of an argument here 

when we get to a Bill like this. And it seems in a way that 

common sense may not be prevailing, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 

our biggest concern. We should simply be letting common 

sense prevail. 

 

When we’re looking at another aspect here as well, this Bill 

certainly does raise some other consequences that we need to be 

understanding and that we can’t get any analysis from this 

government on, and that’s the federal changes to criminal law, 

changes that they’ve made and the implications then back on 

Saskatchewan. 

 

[15:15] 

 

And we know the general implication of those changes, but 

we’ve had not a sniff of analysis from this government, not an 

ounce of analysis. And Saskatchewan people deserve real 

answers on this front because we’ve had a federal government 

unilaterally make changes that actually are going to be paid for 

by Saskatchewan people, and at a significant cost. 

 

So when we talk about ballooning expenditures, we see some of 

that being directly attributed to a federal government that 

continues to off-load on this province and on Saskatchewan 

people. And unfortunately we see a government that’s far more 

interested in sort of cheerleading press releases then to, at times, 

take the principled stand that they need to for Saskatchewan 

people and the thoughtful analysis to say, wait a minute here; 

we’re standing for Saskatchewan people. So this is something 

we’re watching and it’s of great concern. Because on so many 

fronts, we see this federal off-loading onto our provincial 

budget, onto our residents of Saskatchewan, our taxpayers. This 

comes at a direct cost to Saskatchewan people. 

 

And this is interesting in the context that we have a federal 

government that will send us, any Bill the federal government 

sends us, this Premier’s so willing to accept. He just says yes; 

no, we’ll pay for it. Whether it’s in health care, whether it’s old 

age security, whether it’s the federal jail Bill, on so many 

fronts, this Premier’s just so willing to accept any bill that’s 

sent to him by the federal government. And these aren’t 



March 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 399 

one-time bills. These are bills that are incurred many years 

forward and in fact will balloon and grow without any level of 

analysis and standing up for Saskatchewan people’s best 

interests. And that’s disappointing. And his response to much of 

this is then to go back to Saskatchewan people and say that they 

deserve less as it relates to the programs and services that have 

been historical to Saskatchewan, whether that be in the 

classroom or in community health services or right across the 

piece, all across this province, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 

problematic. 

 

So it’s problematic when our Premier will welcome any new 

expenditure, ballooning expenditure, off-loaded onto 

Saskatchewan people into our budget without a principled 

position on behalf of Saskatchewan people but then looks to 

Saskatchewan people to take a compromise and to take less and 

to wear the impact of that. So on a few different pieces here, it 

highlights some important aspects of challenges that we see 

within this province and some areas that we would really like to 

see some improvement upon. 

 

But as it relates to Bill No. 3, The Summary Offences Procedure 

Amendment Act, certainly it’s good to see some of the changes 

that have been called upon by people on the ground 

understanding the circumstances best — our law enforcement 

officers and legal stakeholders — in bringing about some new 

efficiencies to those officers in the pursuit of providing public 

safety and timely justice. That’s something that in general is 

something that we’ve heard and something that in the two 

provisions we support, certainly with a little bit more analysis to 

be had and consultation as it relates to the process around 

entering default convictions. It’s an area that we need to ask 

some more questions and seek greater consultation. We 

recognize certainly the problem that exists. Now we need to go 

about this in an evidence-based manner that allows us to find 

what is the best solution. How can we be most effective in 

dealing with this challenge? 

 

So that’s what Saskatchewan people can expect from 

Saskatchewan New Democrats on this front as we move 

forward, making sure that we are responding to the needs. And 

we are also going to stand up to a government that is telling 

Saskatchewan people, a Premier right now that’s been telling 

Saskatchewan people that they should do less or pay more for 

policing services in Saskatchewan. We think that in a growing 

Saskatchewan community safety and policing is an important 

aspect of peace of mind and well-being and quality of life, 

whether that’s in Estevan, whether that’s in Regina, whether 

that’s in Saskatoon, or whether that’s in my good friend from 

La Ronge’s riding. And that’s something that we’re going to be 

calling for. 

 

Thirdly, as we speak about the off-loading of Mr. Harper and 

his crew federally, like I say, it’s disappointing that any Bill that 

shows up at our doorstep, to be paid by Saskatchewan people, 

the answer is just a quick, simple, yes from this Premier instead 

of analyzing the impacts of that. Squeezing and ballooning: 

ballooning our budget, squeezing Saskatchewan people. And 

now because of the lack of oversight or principled oversight 

that should occur on behalf of Saskatchewan people, now 

Saskatchewan people are expected to do less with institutions 

that have been long-standing in Saskatchewan, whether that be 

their health services up the street, reductions in their 

classrooms, or impacts and reductions for the most vulnerable 

in this province. We can do better than that, Mr. Speaker, and 

Saskatchewan New Democrats expect us to do better. 

 

It’s my pleasure to weigh in on debate on this Bill. We look 

forward to a broader consultation and certainly more questions 

of the minister on this front. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At this 

point in time I move adjournment of Bill No. 3, The Summary 

Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 3, The Summary 

Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 4 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 4 — The Pension 

Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to weigh in on debate of Bill No. 4, The Pension 

Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 and offer some insight into this, 

and to examine further what sort of direction the minister is 

taking, this government is taking as it relates to pensions and 

income security in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I understand that this in many ways is in response to a national 

agreement, a new national agreement that all provinces have 

signed on to and represents pan-Canadian changes to pensions, 

and in fact changes an Act that’s quite old — 1968 agreement 

— and reflects some of the modernization that’s needed to 

simply reflect changes, both in the way of pensions, but in the 

way of work and what’s going on in different jurisdictions. So 

certainly some of these changes seem to make sense. They’re 

simple updating that’s important for pension plans and for 

people, and that’s certainly something that we support. 

 

Something that I always look very closely for, particularly with 

this government, Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate, but is what kind 

of consultation has occurred when this government brings 

forward legislation. On this front here we’ve been engaging in 

some of the consultation with the relevant stakeholders, and I 

understand that certainly some consultation has occurred. The 

government claims that consultation has occurred across the 

piece in a wide way, whether that’s with retiree associations or 

whether that’s with unions or whether that’s with 

representatives of the pension industry and pension experts. 

And we hope that that’s the case. We would expect that to be 

the case. 

 

Our concern would be that this case may be like others where 

this government has not done that due diligence on behalf of 

Saskatchewan people, not done the consultation that they 

suggest that they have, and then we end up with a whole host of 



400 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2012 

unintended consequences and negative impacts for which 

weren’t contemplated because of a reckless process to drive 

policy. And we see that far too often with this government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And you’ll be well aware of the case where this government 

actually brought forward an Act where they had no consultation 

with stakeholders that were going to be impacted, shifted the 

balance of power out of the hands of working people and 

directly over to the ledger, entirely into the hands of that of the 

employer in a very unfair, unbalanced way — very ideological, 

didn’t reflect any common sense, didn’t reflect any level of 

balance. And now embarrassingly, Mr. Speaker, that piece of 

legislation has now been ruled unconstitutional in this very 

province, Mr. Speaker. Of course this is an embarrassment, 

certainly for government, but for Saskatchewan people, but 

hopefully provides an opportunity to bring forward fair and 

balanced legislation to Saskatchewan people and workers in 

making sure that their rights are protected. 

 

So that’s why we’re so careful when we see these sorts of 

pieces of legislation put forward, Mr. Speaker, because in our 

history with this government, we’ve learned very quickly that 

due diligence, respecting stakeholders, understanding what 

impacts there are for Saskatchewan people aren’t what this 

government respects in their legislative process. It’s simply not 

their priority. 

 

But what I look at when I look at this piece of legislation, it 

seems to me that this is in response to a new national 

agreement. It’s bringing in some level of, I guess, some level of 

standardization across Canada, and I think we need to make 

sure we fully understand what those impacts are from that. It 

likely also brings about some level of portability of people or 

portability of workers or portability of plans to respective 

jurisdictions. And that can certainly be helpful from a 

perspective of us having workers come to Saskatchewan or a 

whole host of individuals coming to Saskatchewan or for 

Saskatchewan people who are going to be offering 

contributions in other parts of Canada. 

 

So certainly I think I take at face value from what I see is likely 

a modernization. It likely does reflect industry standards. It 

seems to be consistent with a new national plan, new national 

agreement that all other provinces have entered into. And on 

that front, that’s a good thing. But I would hate to . . . It’s 

disappointing, I guess, to see this being the actions of 

government and only this as the actions of government as it 

relates to income security, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, income security and retirement security is a 

significant issue and challenge for Saskatchewan people, 

whether it’s retirees at this current point in time or whether it’s 

individuals who are working so hard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 

build their careers and plan for that stage of their life. And it’s 

in many ways simply not a priority of this government. And 

that’s unfortunate because it’s a real hardship for so many in 

this province and across Canada. 

 

And unfortunately if we’re looking at the statistics and changes 

to pensions and some of the different financial challenges, this 

is a going to be a real challenge and arguably a growing 

challenge, as we move forward, for that next generation of 

workers, and when they’re looking for that time to retire and to 

have that peace of mind and dignity in their life that I think all 

people who have spent their life contributing and offering their 

services and working and building their lives deserve to have. 

 

And far too often we see scenarios in this province where an 

individual or a family spends their life working and they’re 

close to that moment where they can retire, and they recognize 

that that’s simply not going to be possible for them. And they 

continue on piecemealing together work well beyond the years 

for which they hope to be in the workforce. They hope to be 

spending time with grandkids and with family and having 

another stage of their life, but that’s not the reality for far too 

many under some of the challenges that we see. 

 

And unfortunately this isn’t assisted by conservative 

governments, provincially or federally, Mr. Speaker. And I 

guess this gets into a broader discussion, one right now that’s 

going on that has a direct impact on Saskatchewan and for 

which we haven’t heard a peep from this government on for 

Saskatchewan people, and this is the federal government’s 

desire to reduce old age security benefits for Saskatchewan 

people. And this is unfortunate because it impacts so many 

across this province. 

 

Certainly seniors today have many questions. But certainly 

many hard-working young people and individuals at various 

stages of their career, that are planning their income security for 

years forward and making sure they have the dignity and peace 

of mind that they deserve, are really unnerved by this. And we 

find it, I find it incredibly disappointing to not hear a peep from 

the Sask Party government, not a peep from the Premier as it 

relates to standing up for Saskatchewan people when a federal 

government is dismantling and reducing a program that brings 

some level of dignity to so many seniors’ lives. 

 

And really when we look at it, this isn’t a program bringing 

great affluence to seniors or retirees. It’s basic dignity, Mr. 

Speaker. And even in the current scenarios that we have, we 

certainly see far too many seniors in the grip of poverty, Mr. 

Speaker. And we see that in rural Saskatchewan. We see that in 

urban Saskatchewan. We see that on First Nations. We see it 

right across this province. And we need to do a far better job on 

this front and putting this as a very important priority area. 

 

I can certainly relate to Saskatchewan people that the official 

opposition, Saskatchewan New Democrats, are pushing hard on 

this front. It’s an important priority area. We’re calling on this 

government to stand up for Saskatchewan people. And we’re 

disappointed that again we see a Premier simply allow, by 

stroke of a pen or a quick change federally, direct impacts, hurt 

and challenge placed back on to Saskatchewan residents. And 

the role of the Premier, the role of government is one to stand 

up for Saskatchewan people, to understand the challenges and 

pressures that are there, and to be responsive to that. And on 

this front we’re disappointed and we’re concerned. And we’re 

going to stand with Saskatchewan people on this front, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

One other area that we should definitely touch on as it relates to 

pensions . . . And we see some changes here to portability of 

pensions in this Act. But what we should be seeing is certainly a 

government standing up for Saskatchewan seniors and workers 



March 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 401 

as it relates to their income security and old age security. But 

we should also see a government that would stand with other 

provinces in support of expanding the CPP [Canada Pension 

Plan], the Canadian pension plan. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And we’ve had multiple opportunities for that to occur. And 

unfortunately at one point this government seemed to have 

suggested that they might support such a plan, and I don’t know 

what happened, but over the course of the last two years they’ve 

retreated from that position. And this is disappointing for 

Saskatchewan people because, as I’ve said, income security and 

retirement security is something that’s of great concern to 

Saskatchewan people of all demographics, not just retirees 

themselves but young workers who are planning for the future. 

And we’re seeing a growing challenge on this front. 

 

CPP itself is a very efficient plan, one of the lowest cost plans 

to administer, and an incredibly portable plan. And it would be 

one of our best mechanisms to provide that sort of broad-based, 

pan-Canadian support to workers and to retirees. And I find it 

disappointing that this Premier and this Finance minister have 

not supported expansion of the CPP. At one point they had 

suggested that they could be onside with that. Now that’s 

changed. But there’s opportunities before us, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and I would urge every single member that’s sitting in 

here today . . . And I know it must be frustrating for some of the 

backbench MLAs that don’t have a role in cabinet, but they do 

have an important role for their constituents and for 

Saskatchewan people on this front. And it’s to talk to the 

Premier, to talk to cabinet about supporting some of the changes 

to the CPP and the expansion of the CPP. And it’s really the 

least they could do when they’re spending the time that they are 

in this Assembly, to take the time to — at some point over the 

next month or so, Mr. Speaker — to simply request of cabinet, 

to request of the Premier, a priority on expansion of the CPP. 

 

You know, I think whether you’re in Moosomin or whether 

you’re in Rosthern-Shellbrook or whether you’re in Moose Jaw, 

I think that all seniors and all workers deserve to see a strong 

future for themselves, and a dignified retirement. And it’s unfair 

for the uncertainty that exists, and I think that, like I say, we 

could work on this as an entire Assembly in a co-operative 

fashion. We know that the Premier has gone astray from his 

original position of support for this expansion, but that doesn’t 

stop an Assembly from calling upon a government and on a 

cabinet and on a Premier to reconsider something that’s a very 

efficient, affordable way of expanding dignity and income 

security to all Canadian people and all Saskatchewan people. 

 

And you know, I think whether . . . You know, I suspect it’s 

awfully boring for some of those members that spend hour after 

hour not taking their feet to offer any contributions to this 

Assembly, but one place they could be incredibly effective is 

just taking a brief moment with the Premier or with cabinet and 

sharing their view that they believe their constituents deserve 

income security, that they deserve the kinds of improvements 

and peace of mind that expansion of the CPP would provide. 

And this is the kind of an issue, I think, that it would be nice to 

see some rallying behind and some co-operation across, 

throughout this Assembly, and to bring forward something 

meaningful for Saskatchewan people. 

And I think the opportunity exists in a significant way, and I’ll 

give timelines to all members in this Assembly that we have, I 

believe, a Finance ministers’ meeting that’s coming up in June. 

This is a prime time for Saskatchewan, in advance of that, to 

take a position of supporting expansion of the CPP, to bring 

forward the kind of protection to workers into their retirement 

and for retirees themselves to make sure they have the benefits 

that provide simply a decent quality of life, simply dignity, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

All the information we have right now is that simply it’s 

unacceptable, the current level of poverty that exists with 

seniors across Saskatchewan currently. But sadly if we play that 

string out and look at all the independent data that suggests 

where the next generation of workers, when they retire, what 

those circumstances are going to be, this is a very significant 

problem for Saskatchewan people. So I urge all members in this 

Assembly, all members of this side of government, and 

certainly it’s important for Saskatchewan people to know that 

the official opposition, Saskatchewan New Democrats, have 

been urging this position for a significant period of time, have 

been solid on this issue, and the reasons being is that it’s the 

right thing to do for Saskatchewan people. It’s efficient. It’s 

affordable. And it responds to their needs in making sure they 

have the deserved peace of mind, Mr. Speaker. So let’s try to 

work together as an Assembly on this front. 

 

We recognize that the Finance minister and the Premier, who 

once said, I believe conveyed some support on this front, who 

have gone astray — there’s a real opportunity for all of us, and I 

make that urging here today, and I do it from the floor. And I 

know that there’s many members that aren’t able, aren’t 

allowed to enter into debate, represent the views of their 

constituents. But they can still do so by taking a moment with 

the Premier or cabinet and making sure their voices are heard to 

address something that’s a significant challenge both today but 

into the future. And that’s the sort of planning and the kind of 

responsiveness that people expect of their government. It’s the 

kind of common sense that Saskatchewan people expect of their 

government. And they reject a government that just pursues 

ideological pursuits. What they respect is a government that 

brings forward common sense solutions, that responds to the 

needs that they have within their own lives. 

 

So that’s something, I guess a bit of a rallying call to this 

Assembly to be able to show our support for the expansion of 

the CPP, to make sure we can get this Premier and this Finance 

minister onside and in support of this — currently right now 

they’re not in support of providing that sort of dignity to 

Saskatchewan people — but making sure we each think of our 

constituents when we spend the time door knocking, and the 

different circumstances that are there and the hard-working 

young families that are moving towards that stage of life, to 

make sure that we have them in mind as we enter this debate. 

Certainly our side of the Assembly, the official opposition, will 

have that in mind when we’re giving speeches and making our 

push on this. But certainly I think it’s a space for all MLAs, 

government or opposition, to make sure they do what they can 

to bend the ear of the Premier and to ask him to provide the 

kind of support that Saskatchewan people simply deserve. 

 

So that’s an interesting little piece that maybe we can work 

together on as an Assembly here. The Finance ministers’ 



402 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2012 

meeting is going on in June, and we have some time to get this 

right. And I know there’s some members over there that are 

probably picturing the scenarios I’m picturing in my mind, 

whether it be in Melfort or whether it’s in Moosomin, but 

circumstances where you know that there’s individuals that 

have worked hard that are going to be retiring with inadequate 

income and the pressure it places on individuals that have 

contributed so mightily to their communities and offered 

service to their communities and have worked their entire lives, 

to then live in a setting that doesn’t provide basic dignity and 

quality of life. And we can do better, Mr. Speaker, and this is an 

issue for which we have a practical plan that we can move 

forward together. So that’s important. 

 

And then just on the last piece, I urge this government to 

provide some scrutiny and some understanding and some 

analysis as to what the impact is for Saskatchewan people as it 

relates to the federal plan to cut old age security benefits to 

Saskatchewan people. And we haven’t heard anything from this 

Premier or from this government on this front and that’s really 

disappointing, but again there’s opportunity. So let’s urge this 

government to stand up, to step up, and to represent 

Saskatchewan people who deserve to have income security, 

peace of mind, dignified quality of life, and not simply accept 

every foolhardy plan that comes by way of the federal 

government, and to make sure that we’re standing up for whom 

we should, being Saskatchewan people. 

 

And I know I can picture all sorts of constituents and family for 

whom we’ll want to make sure that we’re making income 

security a priority. I suspect that members opposite may be 

picturing some of those same scenarios and I think that quite 

simply we need not accept this failed agenda from the federal 

government. We need not accept this new position of the 

provincial government to not support expansion of the CPP. 

And we need to expect better from this Assembly, from this 

government on this front to provide that sort of peace of mind 

and dignity to Saskatchewan people. 

 

At this point in time as it relates to the Bill at hand, we have 

much more time we’ll be able to have as far as questions for the 

minister in some key areas. Certainly we’ll continue our 

consultation. What we see here is some modernization and a 

reflection of a new national agreement that’s been brought 

forward, and certainly we know that all other provinces in 

Canada have supported that agreement. So while we are likely 

to support changes in this Act, what we call on this government 

to do is to bring real, meaningful actions as it relates to the 

broader question of income security, and not to just tinker with 

Acts that, you know, when we get requests from a federal body 

to come into compliance or to modernize, we certainly have to 

do that, but a government’s other job is to respond to the needs 

of the people they represent. And on that front as it relates to 

income security and retirement income, we can do a much 

better job because currently what we’re doing, what this 

government’s doing is failing Saskatchewan people. 

 

So on that front I certainly move adjournment of debate on Bill 

No. 4, The Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 4, The Pension Benefits 

Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 5 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 5 — The Credit 

Union Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to enter into the debate on Bill No. 5, an Act to amend the 

credit union, 1998 and to repeal the credit union central of 

Saskatchewan Act, 1999. And it seems relatively 

straightforward, and of course the devil is in the detail and so 

we do have some questions. But we have been out talking to a 

few people about the necessity of this and we have reviewed the 

minister’s remarks. 

 

But before I get started too far down the road, I do want to say 

that on this side of the House, and I think on both sides of the 

House, especially in light of the fact that we know that the 

credit unions and the co-ops play such a huge role in 

Saskatchewan and in Canada — in fact it is the international 

year of the co-ops — and these folks along this kind of business 

model play a significant role in shaping our society. What they 

do is they have a real values-added model, and they really take 

social values to heart in terms of quality and community-based 

ideas. And I think even though the intention of this Act has 

helped them establish more of a national presence, as I 

understand it, it’s still going to be a hometown type of 

enterprise where they recognize that the good stays in the 

community and that people can get ahead in their lives. And I 

think this is an important movement here, the credit unions and 

the co-ops. 

 

And so we’re delighted to have discussions. I know that my 

colleagues on this side had discussions with the SaskCentral 

representatives not too long ago actually, discussing why the 

necessity of this Act. And they met to make sure we understood 

it. And this is how this House works, talking to people so we 

can understand. And they talk about how they want to work 

towards a national co-operative of credit unions. And even 

though that’s many years down the road, they see that in their 

business plan this will help out credit unions, because as a 

larger group there’s much stronger financial leverage. 

 

And of course when you’re dealing with the five multinational 

banks, it’s hard to play in that game when you are just a 

provincial credit union or a small-town credit union. And so 

they see a lot of advantage having a national organization, a 

national co-operative. And you know you can see the national 

banks, how they’re even moving into America. I understand 

there’s more TD [Toronto Dominion] Banks in the United 

States than there are now in Canada and just how this world is 

changing. 

 

And so I think this is an important fact. And so SaskCentral is 



March 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 403 

looking to move forward, to be federally incorporated, and 

that’s why this Act is so necessary. And so this is an important 

thing and I think that this is straightforward. And of course this 

is what the minister says, so it seems like everybody’s on the 

same page. It’s part of an evolution, and I think this is really 

key. 

 

I think that for us to . . . I’ve always appreciated how the credit 

unions make sure that they keep us in the loop, both through 

their lobby activities in terms of just helping us understand the 

challenges they face but also the successes they have. 

 

You know, yesterday I talked about international year of the 

co-ops and talking about how the top one-third of 

Saskatchewan’s top 100 businesses are actually co-ops or credit 

unions. I think that’s phenomenal. That’s a phenomenal stat that 

actually, that’s talking about our own success stories here in 

Saskatchewan. And that’s what we talk about in terms of true 

economic development that the money is from the people here 

to help people meet their own needs here, and it’s exciting to 

see. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And I know that in Saskatoon, my hometown where I represent 

— my current hometown, I mean — the credit union is a 

phenomenal leader in terms of both economic activity but also 

in terms of social responsibility. And so I think hats off to the 

folks in the credit union movement and hats off to Credit Union 

Central to have the wherewithal and the skills and the capacity 

and they see that with a good business plan, of which this Act 

helps out, that they can make the move to have a stronger 

presence federally. And because of that, that will help them 

move forward in terms of the things that they want to achieve 

for their members. And of course because it’s a democratically 

run organization, we understand that this is truly what the 

members want and we feel pretty confident that this would go 

well with that. 

 

So just in a couple of minutes, Mr. Speaker, I will be moving on 

so we can allow the next speaker to speak. But with that, I have 

not too much else to add, except that we’ll have questions when 

we go to committee. And we understand that this Act only 

affects SaskCentral; it doesn’t affect The Credit Union Act, and 

so this is very important. 

 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to move 

adjournment of this Bill. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — The member’s moved to 

adjourn debate on The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Oh, okay. The member from Saskatoon Centre has moved The 

Credit Union Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Bill No. 35 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 35 — The 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 

2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l’Assemblée 

législative et le Conseil exécutif be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — I recognize the member 

from Regina Elphinstone. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s a pleasure to rise 

and join in the debate today on Bill No. 35, The Act to amend 

The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2007. 

Previously when this measure was brought to the House by the 

Minister of Justice then — who is of course the Minister of 

Justice now — in providing for fixed-date elections, it was 

funny at the time, Madam Deputy Speaker, that the Minister of 

Justice introduced it as the fixed election legislation, which we 

don’t know if that was a Freudian slip or if it was, you know, 

got truly to the heart of the matter as regards the way that this 

government has approached the electoral law in this province. 

We think it worked on a number of levels, Madam Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

But as regards the attempt to move the election date itself, 

moving to, moving . . . again, the problem being there are a 

number of other jurisdictions including the federal government 

that have a fixed-date election to take place overlapping with 

the window of November 2015. So moving from there to April, 

the first Monday in April of 2016. So I guess the election night 

the government should have been chanting, four and a half 

more years, perhaps. But this is the . . . It’s a fairly reasonable, 

on the face of it, approach to trying to remedy the situation, the 

Bill, but again with certain provisos, Madam Deputy Speaker. I 

wouldn’t want to be quoted as somehow supporting this, full 

stop, period. 

 

It’s interesting in that this was one of the last Bills brought 

forward in the dying days of the fall session, and certainly one 

of the last Bills on the legislative agenda of this government, 

that it also was accompanied at the time by a letter from the 

Premier to Prime Minister Harper requesting that the feds move 

their election, the timing of their election. Now that was 

December 2015 that . . . pardon me, December 15th, 2011, that 

that letter was sent to the Prime Minister. 

 

It’s been a few months, and it would be good to know from the 

members opposite what happened to the letter. Has there been a 

response? And is this, in fact, a done deal? So I would request 

of the members opposite, is there a way that they can update the 

House as to the progress of the correspondence with the Prime 

Minister and if this is in fact the situation? I’m suspecting of 

course that the Prime Minister is saying no; you’re welcome to 

do what you will, but our fixed election date stands . . . 

fixed-date election stands. But we shall see where this winds 

up. But if the government was looking to be helpful, this would 

be good information to make public in terms of whatever 

response has been made by the Prime Minister and the 

Conservative government in Ottawa, who are certainly 

preoccupied with a number of Elections Canada related themes 

these days, Madam Deputy Speaker. 

 

So the next election, if this legislation goes through, would take 

place April 4th, 2016. Again, I think we on this side don’t have 

a problem with fixed-date elections legislation. If they are 

looking to renovate fixed-date election legislation, there’s some 



404 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2012 

examples in Manitoba in terms of extending the blackout period 

that this government would do well to look into and in terms of 

ensuring that the election period is not being unfairly used by 

one side or the other, but that it’s a fair and balanced playing 

field for the competitors in our electoral system. 

 

One thing that’s of particular note, Madam Deputy Speaker, is 

the way that this accompanies the legislation around the 

constituency boundaries redistribution, and certainly we’re 

going to be having a fairly fulsome debate on that score. But 

other measures that this government has brought forward in 

terms of electoral law change, one being the provision of the 

photo ID [identification] requirements and then the whole back 

and forth that we had around the use of attestations and the way 

that the regulations were dropped August, you know, literally 

weeks before the election was to take place, the way that that 

singled out First Nations, the way that this government was 

brought to heel by the Acting Chief Electoral Officer in making 

sure that First Nations on reserve weren’t singled out in a way 

that is not even a case in the federal legislation, Madam Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

There are a number of things that have happened when it comes 

to election law, as regards to the track record of this 

government, that even something like this, that would seem to 

be fairly commonplace or fairly common sense, we can’t help 

but be suspicious of. And certainly as regards to the changes 

being proposed for the constituencies boundary redistribution, 

we think it’s more than passing strange that they’re 

recommending three additional MLAs and changing the 

formula to completely discount the citizens under the age of 18 

in this province. 

 

So Bill 35 itself though, it’s interesting that, you know, it didn’t 

take very long after the election to come forward with this 

proposal. Again it was not presaged anywhere in the election 

commitments or documents on the part of the government. This 

is something that they knew was coming that they didn’t have 

the common courtesy to share this position with the people of 

Saskatchewan during the election. We think it is kind of 

strange, Madam Deputy Speaker, but certainly part of a pattern 

when it comes to the actions of that government. 

 

So I know that other members of the opposition caucus are very 

interested to participate in this debate. We’ll be looking at 

providing their perspectives on this. This one is interesting but 

of course, Bill No. 36, what that means for the practice of 

democracy in this province, Madam Deputy Speaker, we think 

this is where the government has got some things dramatically 

wrong. 

 

So I will move to conclude my remarks in the debate on Bill 

No. 35, An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act, 2007. And as such, I will move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 35, The 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 

2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 36 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 36 — The 

Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to conclude my remarks from last 

night. There were a few more remarks that I wanted to say 

because I felt, and I still feel like, as I said last night, that how 

egregious this Act is. I think this is one that needs to be 

withdrawn. I think there is serious errors in this Act. And I 

think that some of the comments last night I want to review. 

 

And I want to talk a little bit more about some of the things that 

I’ve come to understand since then too, about how contentious 

this was in the ’80s — in the late ’80s, in fact, went to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal and then to the Supreme Court 

for a ruling. And the percentages that were involved there, when 

Grant Devine tried to establish 25 per cent was an acceptable 

margin. And actually, when it got to the Supreme Court, I 

understand — now I could be wrong, but — actually the 

Supreme Court rule that I talked about, effective representation. 

 

But at that time, when he got the ruling back, caused him to be 

able to call the election, and that was what happened in ’91. 

And then causing that, the government of Premier Roy 

Romanow held consultations. He established an independent 

commission, travelled around the province to find out what 

should we do about having an effective representative electoral 

system here in Saskatchewan. In fact the commission had 

visited some six locations, had 46 presentations and 25 written 

documents to it, exhibits. 

 

And so I think that it’s really important to look back and say, 

how do we do things right? How do we do things wrong? Can 

we learn from history? And of course we all celebrate and we 

all think this is a good thing that this province is growing, that 

this province is growing. We have no doubt about that, that 

we’re all on the same page of that. But what is it that we are 

really trying to establish by passing this Act? 

 

And I think that we really need to revisit this because we are in 

some unique circumstances now. I said last night — and I think 

this is the case, but I think that it could be open for further 

discussion — that probably the right time to have had a 

travelling or a public consultation about adding more MLAs 

would have been last year or the year before because we all 

knew that the census was going to be done this year, but we all 

knew as well what the population stats were. There are other 

ways of doing it through the health records or other very 

effective means. We have a sense of what our population is. We 

don’t have to wait every five years for the StatsCan report even 

though we hold that in high regard and even though the last two 

— the 2001 census we used and the ’91 census we used — 

we’ve used that as the benchmark. 

 



March 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 405 

[16:00] 

 

But I think we could go back and take a look and say, what do 

the people think? Do they really think that we need to have 

three more MLAs? Other provinces are wrestling with this. We 

are not the only province that is growing in population. We 

know Alberta is. We know BC [British Columbia] is. And what 

have they done? We know in BC particularly they have had a 

commission to go out and wrestle with this very, very issue. 

And what did they find? They said, you know, we see that the 

ridings are going to get better but the electorate, the people have 

spoken. What they want are more services. 

 

And as we’ve talked today, we think about how can we best 

spend 700,000. Maybe $700,000 is not a lot of money and when 

you have a provincial budget of 10, $11 billion, you might say, 

well what’s 700,000; it’s not very much. But for a lot of people 

who expect some basic services from this government and 

whether it’s a rental supplement or whether today we were 

talking about how we can help people with intellectual 

disabilities, it’s a lot of money. It’s a lot of money, and it’s 

about priorities. How do we set our priorities? 

 

And so, Madam Speaker, I do think I continue to say, and I will 

say that we need to rethink this Bill. This is not the right thing 

to do at this time. It’s never a wrong thing to think about how 

we can make sure we effectively represent our people, but to lay 

it out so prescriptively like this is wrong. It’s wrong. We need 

to set our priorities and especially when the government is 

sending out messages about austerity and saying, but in this 

case it doesn’t really matter. 

 

You know, the other point I wanted to make in my remarks is 

that at one point I represented all the high schools in the west 

side of Saskatoon, west of Idylwyld. I had Bedford, Feehan, and 

Mount Royal. Now there are two further high schools out there, 

Bethlehem and Tommy Douglas, and the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview represents them. But it was an honour to 

think that I represented all the high-school-aged kids on the 

west side of Saskatoon. That was a real, real privilege that I 

could say that was in my riding. Because I really feel and I truly 

believe, the youth of this province should be counted. They 

should be counted. And clearly in this legislation where it says 

that 18 years of age or older shall be, it should be added, so kids 

who are younger than 17 no longer count. And what are the 

ramifications for that? I think this is a real problem that we have 

because this is a real paradigm shift in terms of who do we 

represent after the elections. 

 

You know, during the writ period we go out there and we go 

hard in terms of putting out our platform and our policies and 

we say we think this is the best and we live by the results. We 

live by the results. We all wish and, you know, we have to live 

by the results. We wish we could do better, but they are what 

they are. The electorate has spoken. But the day after the 

election, I represent everybody in my riding. I don’t say to 

anybody, you’re not old enough, you’re not old enough, you’re 

not a citizen, you’re too old, whatever. I just say, if you live in 

my riding, I represent you. I represent you, and we represent 

everybody in Saskatchewan. 

 

And last night as I was talking about this, there’s some 240,000 

people that we’re going to say, no longer are you part of the 

formula. And that’s truly what it is. And I think that’s wrong. 

That’s very wrong. They should be part of that formula. They 

should be part of that formula. 

 

One of the things we have, one of our greatest challenges in 

Saskatchewan is that we are a young province, a young 

province. But that’s our greatest strength too. It’s our potential. 

And one of our challenges is how to say to young people, you 

matter; you matter so much we want you to be part of the 

democratic process. But we’re sending them mixed messages 

here by saying, you don’t really count until you’re 18. You 

don’t really count till you’re 18. Why is that? 

 

We know seven other provinces count them. We know the 

federal government, when they set up their electoral boundaries, 

they count young people. So why is it that we are moving this 

way? Is it something that people have asked for? And that’s 

what I would like to know. Has there been a consultation 

process through this that somehow we have missed? Have 

people been saying, you know what; we really want to change 

this? Has there been some briefing notes, documents that we 

could read to say, oh okay, this is what the people of 

Saskatchewan want? But I don’t think there is. I think this is 

ideologically driven by the Saskatchewan Party who believe 

somehow this is the right thing to do. 

 

And we had challenges around this last year and the year 

before, issues around voter ID and the challenges that present to 

certain demographics and certain communities. I know in my 

riding that it was harder than ever, harder than ever to get 

people enumerated. I know people were living there, but it was 

tough to get people to go and get those people enumerated. And 

even when they did get enumerated, there were still challenges 

of getting them across to the voting stations. 

 

And so what we should be trying to do, we should be really 

trying as hard as we can to get more people engaged in the 

democratic process, not less people — not less people. And it 

was interesting, as I said last night — and I think this will be 

one of the stories that I will hold near and dear — is when I was 

talking on a panel with young people, recent immigrants, and 

they were asking about the robo-call scandal at the federal level. 

And they were saying, so why should we trust politicians? Why 

should we trust politicians? 

 

And I have to ask you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that’s a tough 

one to answer when we’re putting forth this kind of legislation, 

when we’re putting this kind of legislation out there. Because 

we’re saying, trust us, but we’re not going to count you. You 

don’t count any more. And that’s simply what this means. It’s 

simply what it means. No longer are we talking about effective 

representation of everyone, but we’re talking about only those 

who vote. And that’s wrong. That’s wrong. And I think that’s 

just not why this legislature was set up the way it was. It was 

for everyone. Everyone who lives in this province should feel 

like their voice is heard here every day, every day, not just on 

election day. 

 

And so I’m quite upset about this. And I have to say the other 

issue that really makes me upset is the fact that there was 

nothing in the platform, nothing in the platform. We all knew 

that there was going to be a boundaries commission established 

because that’s out by statute and that would be happening, but 



406 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2012 

nothing in the Sask Party platform about increasing the number 

of MLAs or cutting youth out of the formula. Nothing was in 

the platform, and nothing was in the Throne Speech. All of a 

sudden that came out of the blue. 

 

And I know the minister often will say that he takes exception 

to the fact that we say he doesn’t consult very often. But 

clearly, if he has consulted on this, please let us know who he 

consulted with and who brought these ideas forward. Because 

I’ve just got to tell you that this is . . . I just can’t believe this is 

a priority, and so I’d be very curious to know who said, we 

would rather spend $700,000 on three new MLAs, and by the 

way, can you make sure you cut out the young people because 

we don’t think they’re part of the system? They’re not part of 

the democratic system. 

 

We think this is clearly, clearly inappropriate and wrong. This 

represents a fundamental shift in the wrong direction of 

democracy. And so for those four reasons: no advance notice in 

terms of the platform or Throne Speech; the increased cost; that 

you’re cutting out 240,000 young people out of the formula — 

and I mean, I think these young people should be clear that 

when you’re . . . the signal is that you don’t matter any more, 

you don’t matter any more; and the lack of consultation, I have 

some serious reservations. 

 

And I think this is a severely flawed piece of legislation. And I 

think that, as we’ve said on this side of the House, that when we 

are all in favour of effective representation, effective 

representation, but there are processes to make sure you do that 

so everybody knows about it, and that you don’t get to a point 

where you go, where did that come from? Where did that come 

from? Who thought that up? And I have some real questions 

about that. 

 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a lot of people that I 

know want to talk about this. And particularly I know the 

members opposite raised the whole issue about what happened 

in the late ’80s and about the court challenges. I think that 

that’ll come out. I think there are many people on our side of 

the House who can speak more eloquently to outlining the 

events of the late ’80s that caused that fiasco, that fiasco of 

democracy, and how we don’t want to recreate that here in 

Saskatchewan. We have the opportunity to do it right. 

 

And the irony is we have many more people here that’ve come 

here because they believe this is the right place to be. This is a 

good place to be. And we don’t want to start it off by doing this 

wrong. They’re looking forward to being voters and members, 

full members of the Saskatchewan community. And for us to 

get this wrong now I think would be a travesty. So with that, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move adjournment of Bill No. 36. Thank 

you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 36, The Constituency 

Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 6 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMillan that Bill No. 6 — The 

Miscellaneous Business Statutes Amendment Act, 2011 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

to rise to speak to Bill No. 6, An Act amending certain Business 

Statutes to provide for Extra-provincial Matters and Common 

Business Identifiers. And this particular piece of legislation is 

moving in tandem with Bill No. 7, which I will speak to in a 

while, which is The Co-operatives Amendment Act. 

 

And effectively what these Bills intend to accomplish is to 

make sure that the registries that we have in this province mesh 

with the registries of the provinces to our west: Alberta and 

British Columbia. And these are pieces of legislation, these are 

ideas, these are concepts around making business work better in 

Western Canada that are the next step on a path that has been 

followed for many years. 

 

We know that our Western Canadian economy has been tied 

together in many different ways ever since the Hudson’s Bay 

Company was effectively setting up business right across the 

West. And when you look at any century or at any decade in the 

century, there are always steps that are taken that assist with the 

further development of business. 

 

This particular legislation relates to the fact that when one 

registers business incorporation documents, which used to be a 

fairly standard process, lawyers in Saskatchewan would have a 

number of companies on the shelf, I guess we used to call it. 

But they had a number on them, and they were basically ready 

to go. And somebody would come in with a very good idea for 

a new business, and effectively you would prepare all the 

documents and file them with the corporations branch and 

proceed with letting the business go based on the 

documentation that was there. And there were lots of very or 

relatively efficient ways of doing that. But one of the 

jurisdictional limitations was that businesses needed to operate 

within the confines of the province of Saskatchewan. And if 

they were going to go and do business in Alberta or in 

Manitoba or other parts of the country, there needed to be 

extra-provincial registration of that business or some other form 

of that. 

 

What this legislation is accommodating is a couple of things. 

One is that it allows for the registration of a business here in 

Saskatchewan to be recognized in Alberta and British Columbia 

immediately. And so it’s based on agreements that the minister 

will enter into with the ministries in the other provinces, and 

once again, it facilitates the ability to do business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we think this concept is a good idea and it builds 

on what we’ve had before. So when you look and you see what 

are the steps that are being taken to accomplish this goal, well 

some of the key ones relate to the sharing of information. When 

you’re in business and you’re dealing with another corporation, 

you like to be able to know that you can get the information 



March 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 407 

about that corporation quickly and accurately and do it on a 

very, very regular basis. This document will assist in that 

process very, very ably. So, those things are positive. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Now one of the interesting aspects of the legislation also 

emphasizes and talks about the further facilitation of the 

Information Services Corporation and the types of forms and 

registries and things that can be entered into that particular 

system. And I think as the minister stated last December when 

he was introducing this particular legislation, he talked about 

how this was part of a broader concept of a business portal that 

is being managed by the Information Services Corporation in 

conjunction with other similar corporations. 

 

Reading this and hearing this is very important to me because 

when I was the minister in charge of the land titles system back 

in the ’90s — it’s a little while ago — one of the challenges that 

was presented to me as a new minister was how do we respond 

to the long time that it takes for people to get titles registered 

because realtors were waiting for their fees. People were 

concerned that their mortgages weren’t getting registered in 

time. And there was a whole concern — that I think a number 

of times where the concern was raised here in this legislature — 

about how long it took to register documents in the land titles 

system. 

 

Looking back, what we all realize was that we were using very 

effectively a paper system that had been developed in the 

middle of the 19th century. And it was very accurate. There 

were not that many errors in the system based on the number of 

transactions, but it was not meeting the needs of a modern 

community. So at that point we started on a journey. This is 

what I’m talking about today. This legislation is part of that 

continuing journey. But back then we started on a journey to 

end up with an online or electronic registry in the land titles 

system. 

 

And there was consultation about how to do this and lots of 

ideas, and we started that project. And there’s no question that it 

had continual criticism, is one word, but also advice, I guess I 

would put it, from members of this legislature, from lawyers, 

from realtors, from all over the place. And it took much effort 

by many people and many groups to finally get it working in an 

appropriate way. But I can say that within the sort of timelines 

of the original plans, maybe extended a couple of years, we had 

the Information Services Corporation which was handling the 

land titles system. 

 

As that was further amended and updated and brought into the 

picture with new technology, new ideas, and with succeeding 

groups of professional people and managers who all added 

some very important things on how that system was developed, 

we now have a very robust land titles system that is based at the 

Information Services Corporation. 

 

But when we were selecting a name for the corporation, there 

were some who said, well it should be called the land 

information system or the land titles system corporation or 

another name. But there were quite a few of us who said no, this 

is about information services and that a name like ISC 

[Information Services Corporation] would work on a broader 

basis because there are other places within government and 

within the community where information is being managed. 

 

And the first step after the land titles was to incorporate the 

personal property registry which is a registry of securities 

around movable items in the community — cars and trucks and 

farm machinery and things like that. So that took place. Then 

there was a recognition that — and I’m not sure if I got the 

exact order here — but of a whole number of other areas 

including the corporate registry, which is what we’re talking 

about here. And then in the next Bill we’re talking about the 

co-operatives registry, that they should be included here. 

 

More recently the whole information management part of the 

health area has been moved into the Information Services 

Corporation because many of the skills that have been 

developed there and the tools that have been developed there 

are able to be used as you manage the registration of births and 

deaths and similar types of information. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, when we look at this particular Bill and 

the changes that are made in this particular legislation, it’s 

being changed the way it is to facilitate agreements that will 

complement this work that’s being done at the Information 

Services Corporation. 

 

I think there are other pieces of legislation on this legislative 

agenda that actually speak to some of these issues as well. But 

what we know is that we’re getting closer to the original dream 

that I know I had, and some of the senior people working with 

me in the Department of Justice had, which was that when you 

registered your company name, or when you registered your 

personal name, you’d only have to do that once and it could be 

used right across all of the registry systems of government. And 

I note that the minister, on December 13th, talked about the 

business portal or the entry and the ability to do this within 

Saskatchewan, but also to tie it in with the federal government’s 

revenue agency and with municipalities. And there are so many 

things that we can do on this base that make it easier for 

businesses to get at the task they’re to be at, which is to serve 

people or provide products or do other things that make for a 

healthy corporation and therefore be part of a healthy economy. 

 

So when we’re making changes on legislation like this, we 

always need to be careful that we’re accomplishing what we set 

out to do. And we have to make sure that we provide the 

security of legislation which relates to public confidence in that 

these are the rules and they’re not going to change very easily, 

and then also the regulation side which has aspects of the 

system that are changed a little more easily, maybe by the 

minister and Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

 

So some of the questions that we will have, as we move forward 

with this particular legislation and I think some of my other 

colleagues will have as we look at this particular piece of 

legislation, will be whether that common sense balance that was 

the original idea back in the ’90s when we were going forward 

with the Information Services Corporation, whether that 

common sense balance between security of the legislation and 

the flexibility to respond to changing business is here in this 

particular legislation. And so we’ll be watching this and asking 

questions, and we will be listening for any advice that we get 

from the community as we proceed forward with this type of 



408 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2012 

legislation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that some of my other colleagues 

who are also supportive of making things better for businesses 

in Saskatchewan and in Western Canada, they also want to 

make some comments and present some perspectives on this 

particular legislation. So at this point I will move to adjourn the 

debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The Opposition Leader has moved 

adjournment of Bill No. 6, The Miscellaneous Business Statutes 

Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 7 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMillan that Bill No. 7 — The 

Co-operatives Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la 

Loi de 1996 sur les coopératives be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Leader. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise to 

speak to Bill 7, An Act to amend The Co-operatives Act of 

1996. And, Mr. Speaker, as I just indicated a few moments ago 

when I was talking about Bill No. 6, the Act to amend the 

legislation with respect to business statutes, I indicated that this 

particular piece of legislation is complementary to the other 

piece of legislation. And effectively what this does is take the 

changes that are set out for special rules for extra-provincial 

matters that are part of the business corporation legislation and 

extend it to the co-operatives legislation in this province. 

 

We have a long, proud tradition of co-operatives in the province 

of Saskatchewan and they have been some of our biggest 

businesses. And I’m thinking of the Federated Co-operative 

who have businesses right across Western Canada. They ended 

up being . . . now using much of the national co-operative 

legislation to govern what they do. But we also have some 

fairly large co-operatives that are using this particular 

legislation and actually will end up having the ability to work 

right across the provincial borders in Western Canada. 

 

So what this legislation will do is, once again, give the minister 

the power to enter into agreements with our neighbours to make 

sure that the co-operatives can compete in the business world 

with the same kind of ease and facility that the business 

corporations can right now. 

 

Now when the rules are created by ways of agreement, they end 

up, in this particular legislation, also having to find that fine 

balance between legislation and regulation. And so what we 

will be watching as we proceed with this legislation is to see 

which areas are justly put into the legislative side versus which 

areas are put into the regulatory side, which allows for more 

discretion by the people who are running the overall system of 

registration. We know that the rules have been working without 

much of a problem. And clearly the goal with this legislation 

would be not to cause or create more problems but to once 

again facilitate the economic activity which is important to our 

community. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And once again I note that when the minister introduced this 

particular legislation last December, he once again referred to 

the role of ISC, the Information Services Corporation, and their 

ability to work with similar agencies in Alberta and British 

Columbia to make sure that the registration that would happen 

in Saskatchewan can be easily translated into the systems that 

we have in other provinces. 

 

That probably is not a major issue, because I know ever since 

we were initially looking at the land titles changes back in 1995 

and ’96 and ’97 that we had much conversation, especially with 

British Columbia and Alberta, as we developed the registration, 

or the Information Services Corporation. Because we all had 

experience with different aspects of the registry, but there were 

sometimes situations where in British Columbia or Alberta, 

because of the increased activity in a certain area, they would 

have had more experience. And by the same token, we in 

Saskatchewan would have had more experience in registration 

and the use of the tools in the system. 

 

As it relates to co-operatives, which is the subject of this Bill 7, 

clearly Saskatchewan has a long history of very strong 

co-operatives that also have been very effective at providing 

good advice to governments over the decades to make sure that 

their business model is strengthened and enhanced and so that it 

can fit in with what’s happening in business in Western Canada. 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we are once again going to be asking the 

questions about whether the balance has been appropriately 

attained in this particular legislation, once again, between that 

security of having an Act or whether a certain aspect of the 

legislation can be dealt with in a regulation or maybe even just 

by an agreement between provincial officials. 

 

And what we all know is that businesses don’t like uncertainty. 

And any time legislation is introduced into the legislature of 

Saskatchewan or Alberta or British Columbia or anyplace, 

where uncertainty is created, that’s bad for business. And we 

want to make sure that what’s being done in this particular 

legislation is not bad for business but that it actually is 

something that will enhance everything that we need to do here 

in Western Canada. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that security of appropriate regulation and 

appropriate legislation is a part of our long history here in this 

province, which I know that we will all celebrate. So I look 

forward with some of my colleagues to being able to ask some 

questions about this when we get into committee. But before we 

get to that point, I know that my colleagues will also want to 

make some comments about this legislation from some of the 

other perspectives. I know some have been very strong 

participants in co-operatives and may end up with some 

interesting comments about that, and so I think that it’s 

appropriate for me, Mr. Speaker, to adjourn the debate at this 

time. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 7, The Co-operatives 



March 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 409 

Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 8 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMillan that Bill No. 8 — The Land 

Titles Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 

afternoon, after question period and after listening to adjourned 

debates for some time, to enter into the discussion on this 

specific piece of legislation. And as the Clerk’s table just read 

out, this is Bill No. 8, An Act to amend the Land Titles Act, Mr. 

Speaker. For individuals that are following at home, the 

minister’s second reading speech, if they would like to see what 

he said on this piece of legislation, his speech was provided to 

the Assembly and to all Saskatchewan people on December 

13th, 2011 and it’s provided on page 165 of Hansard. So I 

thought I would provide that source there for anyone at home 

listening and wanting to read what he had to say. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation is somewhat consistent 

with certain changes that have been occurring in the area of 

land titles and I suppose also is a connection, though not 

necessarily directly, to some of the remarks that the Leader of 

the Official Opposition just made when it comes to talking 

about the evolution of different systems and processes and how 

things operate. In this specific situation, it’s looking at the issue 

of The Land Titles Amendment Act, and what is being proposed 

here by the minister is the creation of a document storage 

library that will reduce the number of duplicate documents that 

are required to be filed with the registry. 

 

So it’s the idea of one central spot, Mr. Speaker, and where 

these documents would be provided electronically and 

eliminating some of the duplicate copies that individuals or 

organizations or businesses, banks, credit unions may have to 

submit or, as they’re retrieving information, as to how they 

would access the necessary information they need, as they need 

the information to do with transactions in the economy. And so 

it’s the traditional work that The Land Titles Amendment Act 

has done, but it’s proposing a new approach in terms of a 

central spot where documents are gathered in the library on an 

electronic basis as opposed to multiple copies being filed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suppose this is part of a larger shift that we see 

within society in terms of moving to systems that can be more 

efficient and provide better access to individuals. And it’s my 

hope, Mr. Speaker, that this particular system would in fact 

accomplish that end. There have been instances, Mr. Speaker, 

where a system has been designed or a stated goal has been 

provided to the public and the course of events have not panned 

out exactly as intended. And so with this situation, Mr. Speaker, 

if this is the stated goal that the minister has provided with 

respect to establishing a document storage library, I hope that is 

in fact the case, and I hope it is successful. And as I said, Mr. 

Speaker, we have seen this type of development in other areas 

of society as technology has advanced. There have been more 

creative or, perhaps, efficient ways to accomplish traditional 

tasks which can make life easier. 

 

Sometimes changes also make life more difficult in certain 

ways, in certain respects. And sometimes they can be more 

expensive as well. But we have seen changes, and one example 

I can think of, Mr. Speaker, is the advent of electronic medical 

records and electronic health record within the realm of health 

care and how many physicians’ offices, for example, are 

making the shift and the transition to electronic medical 

records, and how that information then can be better shared 

within an electronic health record so that the quality of care 

provided to individuals remains high, and that when 

practitioners, health care deliverers, need information they can 

have access to. And the patient has better access to that 

information and the sharing of that information within the 

understandings of privacy protection. 

 

Now in this situation, Mr. Speaker, it’s not in the realm of 

health care, but it is within the realm of business transactions. 

So as individuals, as businesses, as the people involved with 

having an interest in acquiring information around land titles do 

their work, I would take it that it’s the hope of the minister that 

this change, this development of the storage library, will better 

facilitate the work that they want to accomplish. 

 

As with any type of change when we do see different 

developments, there are other questions that do need to be 

asked. With this change, I would be curious about how much it 

will cost, what type of technology is going to be used, and 

where that technology will be obtained — whether a system is 

being designed from scratch or whether a system will be 

borrowed from other jurisdictions perhaps or other efforts that 

the land titles individuals have already been developing and 

pursuing. That would be interesting and some questions that I 

would be interested in knowing, basically how Information 

Services Corporation intends to accomplish this objective in 

developing the storage library. 

 

And it would be interesting, Mr. Speaker, to have a bit more 

detail in the minister’s second reading speech to discuss how he 

thinks this will affect the service and the quality of service that 

individuals receive when accessing the land titles — how much 

faster it will be, what sort of problems it will be addressing, and 

what are the expectations the people can see coming in 

hopefully the near future. 

 

When receiving services, Mr. Speaker, there are also, of course, 

fees attached and associated with the endeavour. And I think 

it’s important for those that have requested this change, as the 

minister would suggest in some of the discussions that have 

occurred, if the possible expenses and costs associated with this 

change, how those costs will be paid for and whether the user 

can expect a significant increase in service charges or whether it 

will be covered or whether it will be . . . just basically what the 

terms are as to how the individuals will access land titles 

information in order to conduct business and do the necessary 

work that they need to do. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, of course access to land titles and the work 



410 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2012 

that the Information Services Corporation provides of course is 

very important because it facilitates the work that happens in 

the economy. So when individuals want to pursue a transaction, 

it’s necessary that they have the timely and appropriate access 

to the information they need to conduct that transaction. It’s my 

hope, Mr. Speaker, that the creation of this document storage 

library will in fact accomplish that goal and that it will be done 

on a fairly speedy basis and that the cost associated with this 

change would not be unreasonable for the people requesting the 

change and the people that will be accessing the service in the 

long run. 

 

So those are some of the greater questions and details that I 

personally have when we look at this particular piece of 

legislation. And as I said before, it’s Bill No. 8, The Land Titles 

Amendment Act, 2011. And I know, Mr. Speaker, there may be 

others on this side of the House. I know a few of my colleagues 

have already had the opportunity to speak to this Bill, but I 

know there may be some others because the concerns and the 

questions that I had, Mr. Speaker, I know may be echoed by 

other members on the opposition side. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in addition to the comments and possible 

concerns that I raised, there may be additional questions and 

concerns that my colleagues will have. And I think it’s 

appropriate that we have the opportunity for members on this 

side of the House to ask the questions that are necessary and the 

questions that the Saskatchewan public would like us to ask. So 

on that note, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn debate 

on Bill No. 8, The Land Titles Amendment Act as I look forward 

to colleagues weighing in on this issue. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Massey Place has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 8, The Land Titles 

Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Bill No. 9 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hutchinson that Bill No. 9 — The 

Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Having just 

spoken to the previous Bill, Bill No. 8, it’s still just as much of 

a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak to Bill No. 9, The 

Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

This piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, addresses how, it 

addresses how the resources that are earned through the casino 

operations in Regina and Moose Jaw, how those resources are 

spent. But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, it also addresses how 

the decisions around funding and the decisions around the 

governance of the CIF — which is the Community Initiatives 

Fund — it details how in fact the governance of the CIF is to 

occur, as well as stating more clearly in a legislative sense the 

objectives and clearing up a few other matters that I will get 

into during this discussion of Bill No. 9, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We do know that the Community Initiatives Fund, as I just said, 

is a fund that is created through profits from the casino 

operations in Moose Jaw and Regina. And it’s through these 

profits, Mr. Speaker, that a number of programs and activities 

within the province of Saskatchewan are funded. And I think 

that’s an important thing to realize, that not everyone on the 

street would probably know what the Community Initiatives 

Fund is and where the money comes from, but most people on 

the street would have a sense for some sort of, would have an 

idea of the programs and the services that are provided through 

CIF dollars. 

 

And so I think that’s an important point. And I state it, Mr. 

Speaker, because while not every citizen would know the fine 

detail about the fund, it shows the importance of the programs 

and the services that are provided through the CIF. And as the 

minister states in the second reading speech . . . And I’d like to 

thank the officials who helped with the drafting of the 

minister’s remarks on his second reading speech which 

occurred December 12th, 2011, for clearly outlining what the 

objectives of this piece of legislation are. That is appreciated. 

 

What the objectives of . . . or the different streams within the 

CIF as identified by the minister, and I think it’s important to 

reiterate so that listeners at home have a sense of what the CIF 

actually does, the funds are used for: (1) community grants for 

human development; (2) youth leadership and Aboriginal 

inclusion, including the urban Aboriginal community grant 

program; (3) physical activity, including Saskatchewan in 

Motion; (4) problem gambling and mitigation payment; and (5) 

community vitality program which includes small capital 

investments and milestone community celebrations. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the idea here that the fund’s being used, really 

it’s a fairly wide range, things like supporting human 

development and different programs that can be delivered in 

communities that individuals or groups can apply to receive 

funding for. Different projects: youth leadership and Aboriginal 

inclusion, including urban Aboriginal community which of 

course is a major consideration and ought to be a major priority 

for all members of the House, especially members opposite; 

special or unique endeavours to do with In Motion and people 

living healthier lives, which is a very important thing, also 

something that ought to be a top priority for the provincial 

government. Problem gambling and mitigation. We have seen 

throughout the city, I noticed the campaign under way right 

now about gambling myths and about the billboards that are 

around the province, and while gambling and gaming is legal, 

we know that there are also, there can be problems associated 

with it and it’s appropriate that steps be taken in order to 

provide the types of services to people that may be in need of 

them. 

 

And also the small capital investments in milestone community 

celebrations. I guess in the past few years or in the next few 

years, they’re having quite a few centennial celebrations for 

different buildings, for different towns, for different farms, all 



March 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 411 

types of different celebrations as it comes around. We’re around 

the 100-year mark from the start of a number of different 

projects going on in the province, and I think it is appropriate 

that we recognize and promote our history, so I’m pleased to 

see that the Community Initiatives Fund still maintains levels of 

funding for certain types of milestone markers because, as I said 

before when I was speaking yesterday about the community and 

development amendment Act, people in Saskatchewan, we are 

very proud of where we are from and the communities that we 

represent, and it’s important that, I think, that we recognize the 

historical milestones that are reached. 

 

As the minister states in his second reading speech, the fund is 

managed by an arm’s-length, government appointed board 

whose members all have extensive experience as community 

volunteers. So it is also important, Mr. Speaker, that the board 

involved with the CIF have roots in the community and that 

individuals know what in fact is going on. 

 

Well a major section of what this legislation is addressing, Mr. 

Speaker, is in the area of governance. And as the minister 

states, there was a number of clarifications that this piece of 

legislation is seeking to identify in terms of how the trustees 

and the boards should be operating. So it’s the normal things 

about a board, but it’s important to have the language and the 

policy around boards to be clearly stated. So it does touch on 

things such as the appointment of the board of trustees, the 

establishment of quorum, the designation of Chair and 

Vice-Chair, payments that are associated, and also the ability to 

engage technical expertise. 

 

So I find it interesting that this minister would include technical 

expertise in the legislation because everyone in the legislature 

knows he is a very strong proponent of technology and gadgets 

and gizmos, as he has promoted, and I also know his staff 

members are strong promoters of technology and being teched 

up. So it’s no surprise that the minister has chosen to include 

aspects of technical expertise in this legislation. I don’t know if 

he’s referring to himself in providing that technical expertise, or 

his direct staff, but it is good that technical expertise is included 

in the changes in this piece of legislation here. 

 

And I am pleased that the minister is able to introduce this piece 

of legislation because if there is a cabinet shuffle in the spring, I 

think he may not be the minister for this ministry any longer. I 

don’t know. It’s possible that he could be moved to the ITO 

[Information Technology Office] or some other technical 

ministry, but I guess we will see. And it’s obviously not up to 

me to determine where the minister may go in the coming 

months. 

 

But based on this piece of legislation, I am pleased that he did 

include technical expertise as one of the components of the 

legislation. And I think when we look at different pieces of 

legislation, we should examine whether or not, whether or not it 

is teched up as it ought to be. 

 

So that is some of the topics that are covered in this piece of 

legislation on governance. There are also a number of 

amendments that address four main issues as the minister 

identified in his speech. One clearly states that the trustees have 

. . . Well basically the one main goal identified is that the board 

be able to hire the individuals needed for the expertise. While 

trustees have skill and have that community background, they 

may not have all of that expertise that is needed, so there may 

be occasions when someone needs to be hired. 

 

Second, also important for people that are willing to serve on 

boards, it’s important that the necessary liability protection be 

there, and this enhances that and improves that. And I think 

that’s a good thing. If someone is willing to serve as a trustee, 

it’s only appropriate that it explicitly be covered in the 

legislation that that person has all of the normal responsibilities 

of being a trustee but also the protection and the benefit that is 

necessary. 

 

Third, this piece of legislation tightens up some of the 

stewardship and oversight responsibility for the CIF. And by 

this what the minister stated in his second reading speech is that 

the reporting relationship with the fund is not only supported by 

an MOU [memorandum of understanding] that is not legally 

binding, but also that it is necessary for the minister to have 

stewardship and oversight responsibility over the Community 

Initiatives Fund. So again it’s clearly stating and providing an 

understanding as to what the relationship is between the 

minister and the CIF. And I think it’s appropriate that that sort 

of explanation is provided. 

 

And fourth, Mr. Speaker, the amendment will update and 

modernize the wording of the granting provision. The 

modernized wording will ensure the board members are able to 

fulfill their mandate to ensure that Saskatchewan communities 

receive tangible benefits from casino profits. So this is the 

notion, Mr. Speaker, that it’s only appropriate as, in the same 

way as I spoke to the previous Bill where we look at 

modernization of technology to provide better services through 

a common library, we also know that changes occur within 

society and within programming and that there needs to be 

changes to language. And so if the language can be modernized 

to better reflect what the duties and the job and the roles are of 

the different individuals from minister to trustee to staff, I think 

that is an important and a very good thing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in the few brief moments I’ve had on Bill No. 

9, I’ve been able to underscore a number of important things. 

The one message that I attempted to deliver was that the profits 

that are delivered to the Community Initiatives Fund, they come 

from the casinos in Regina and Moose Jaw, and they provide 

important services to Saskatchewan people — services in 

developing our youth, services in providing culture, services in 

some of the problems associated with gambling. I think that is 

important and necessary not to overlook. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, anything that develops also requires 

updating. It requires that changes in governance be brought up 

to speed to best reflect the reality of 2012. It requires that the 

language around the role of the board and the trustees be current 

and that full protection to individuals be provided. I think that is 

very important as well, as well as, Mr. Speaker, tightening up 

that relationship, as I stated earlier on. Sometimes over time 

patterns of behaviour can develop through convention. So when 

we have the opportunity as legislators to look back at a piece of 

legislation and see how can this be better clearly detailed so that 

there’s less ambiguity and uncertainty as to what the roles are 

and who is supposed to perform those roles, I do, Mr. Speaker, 

think that is a positive development. 



412 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2012 

So again, for the listeners at home, the piece of legislation that 

I’ve been speaking to today is Bill No. 9, and that piece of 

legislation is The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 

Amendment Act. So it’s an amendment to an existing piece of 

legislation, an existing Act. The minister has brought forward 

some changes focusing on a number of things including 

technology. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve identified some of the 

purposes of the CIF and some of the changes that have 

occurred. And I think some of them, it sounds as though many 

of the changes are positive. I hope everything is as it appears 

and that there are no problems with what the minister has put 

forward and there’s nothing hidden in the fine print, so to speak. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I thank members for having the 

opportunity to speak to this important piece of legislation. And I 

do in fact look forward to other people on our side of the House 

who may want to weigh in and talk on this issue. And you 

know, if individuals at home were listening and watching and 

had some questions, most certainly they can contact me via 

Twitter. They can contact me through my email address, or they 

can contact me through a handwritten note if they really want 

to. But I think the minister’s preference would be that they send 

me a tweet, so I would encourage listeners at home to do that. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate on this 

piece of legislation. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Massey Place has 

moved adjournment of Bill No. 9, The Saskatchewan Gaming 

Corporation Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The House is now adjourned until Thursday 

morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:58.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 383 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 383 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 383 

  Doherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 383 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 383 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................... 383 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 383 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 384 

  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 384 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 384 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 384 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 384 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 385 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Special Olympians Attend Winter Games 

  Merriman .................................................................................................................................................................................. 385 

 Lifetime of Community Service 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 385 

 Inspiring Leadership Forum 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................... 386 

 Rebuilding Dreams 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 386 

 A Saskatchewan Miracle 

  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 386 

 Volunteer Honoured with Health Care Philanthropy Award 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................... 386 

 Saskatchewan’s 21st Lieutenant Governor 

  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 387 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Number of Members in the Legislative Assembly 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 387 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 387 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 387 

 Education and Employment for Northern Youth 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 388 

  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 389 

 Kidney Transplant Program 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 389 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 389 

 Funding for Independent Schools 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 390 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 390 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 New Day Program Funding for People with Intellectual Disabilities 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 391 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 392 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 34 — The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation Act, 2011 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 392 

 Bill No. 1 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 393 

 Bill No. 2 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Collaborative Law) Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi corrective (droit collaboratif) de 2011 be now read a second time.] 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 394 

 Bill No. 3 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2011 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 396 



 

 Bill No. 4 — The Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 399 

 Bill No. 5 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2011 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 402 

 Bill No. 35 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 403 

 Bill No. 36 — The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 404 

 Bill No. 6 — The Miscellaneous Business Statutes Amendment Act, 2011 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 406 

 Bill No. 7 — The Co-operatives Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1996 sur les coopératives 
  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 408 

 Bill No. 8 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2011 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 409 

 Bill No. 9 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 410 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


