




















































Hansard: November 21, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 16A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 21, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2101 

 November 21, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, through you, I respectfully 

request leave to make an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave to make an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of the Assembly, it’s a pleasure 

to introduce some very distinguished guests that have joined us 

and are seated in your gallery. I’d like to introduce Mr. Mohd 

Haniff Rahman, Mr. Hares Lisot. I should indicate Mr. Haniff 

Rahman is the consul general of Malaysia in Vancouver. Mr. 

Hares Lisot is at the consulate of Malaysia in Vancouver. And 

they’re joined by Mr. Hazil Jematt who’s the consul of 

investment, Malaysia Investment Development Authority. 

They’re based in Los Angeles, California. We want to welcome 

these three gentlemen to the Legislative Assembly today, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Many will know that Canada was one of the first countries in 

the world to recognize Malaysia’s independence and establish 

diplomatic relations in 1957. Since then our country and 

specifically our province have forged a very mutually beneficial 

relationship. In fact, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan was Canada’s 

largest exporting province to Malaysia in 2011, providing 40 

per cent of all of Canadian exports to that country. 

 

Malaysia is a buyer of Canadian wheat. The majority of that 

wheat comes of course from the great province of 

Saskatchewan, from our producers. And in the last five years, 

our exports to Malaysia have averaged $218 million annually, 

primarily in the areas of agricultural products and pulses but 

significantly in potash. In fact by the end of 2012, Malaysia’s 

expected to become Saskatchewan’s fifth largest offshore 

market for potash. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while in our provincial capital here in the 

province, the delegation will be meeting with the ministers. 

They’ll be meeting with the Minister of Advanced Education, 

the Minister Responsible for Trade and Resources, as well as 

the Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan. They met 

already briefly and had lunch, I think, with the Provincial 

Secretary and other officials. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think the Provincial Secretary passed along 

to them our intention to include Malaysia in our next Asian 

trade mission. We were in the neighbourhood not too long ago, 

and we very much look forward to building this relationship 

through that kind of an in-person meeting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to say, in welcoming these gentlemen to this Legislative 

Assembly, thank you. Thank you through them to the people of 

Malaysia for the trade relationship we have and the mutual 

benefit that flows from that relationship. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask 

all members to welcome them to this Legislative Assembly 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 

with the Premier in welcoming the consul general and the two 

consuls here to our Legislative Assembly. 

 

Malaysia is another parliamentary democracy like ours, so we 

have many things in common. One of the interesting things 

though for us in Saskatchewan is to realize that Malaysia is 

about half the land mass of Saskatchewan but it has almost 30 

million people. And so they have very different political issues 

to deal with at home. But internationally one of their most 

important exports is oil, in the same way that we export oil. 

And so when we are sending our potash there and our food 

there, we’re helping with all of the people issues at home, and 

we all can work together. 

 

I think that as Malaysian citizens you would really like our 

motto for our province, which is “from many peoples, 

strength,” because I know Malaysia is one of the most diverse 

ethnically of any country in the world, and that’s also important 

that you can show the world how you can live together with 

many groups of people. So we’re very happy to have you here 

and we look forward to many decades more of trade with you. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I respectfully ask 

leave for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Regina Walsh Acres has 

asked for leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, it is an honour to rise today and introduce guests 

seated in your gallery. Mr. Speaker, joining us today are a 

group of first year students from my alma mater, the University 

of Regina. They are here because they are some of the first 

recipients of the Saskatchewan advantage scholarship, which 

reduces tuition by $500 per year with a lifetime maximum of 

$2,000. The students were here earlier today for an 

announcement that over 4,000 scholarships have been 

authorized to date worth $2 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of meeting some of these 



2102 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2012 

bright, young students earlier today and I’d like them to wave 

as I introduce them now: Christopher Bryant, Anna Currie, 

Courtney Domoney, Allison Fletcher, Aaron Fritzler, Brooklyn 

Orban, and Breana Whippler. Mr. Speaker, as well as some of 

their parents: Erica Fletcher, Connie and Gordon Fritzler, and 

Raeleen Hamann. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these students are here to recognize this 

government’s commitment to keeping post-secondary education 

affordable, and I’d ask that all members of the legislature 

welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the member from Walsh Acres in welcoming these students and 

parents to the Assembly. In the Assembly we often get to have 

the opportunity to debate issues related to the post-secondary 

sector, including affordability and the financial picture on 

campuses. So it’s always a good opportunity and a time when 

we can have students in the Chamber to remind us why we have 

those debates here on the floor of the Assembly. 

 

So I’d like to join with the member and all members in 

welcoming these individuals to the legislature today. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Parent: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to all 

members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce 36 grade 8 

students and their teachers, Tanya George, Crystal Lambert, 

Skylar Walkingbear, and chaperone Mike Wyka from Caswell 

Community School, seated in your west gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 100 years ago the children of the first classes at 

Caswell Community School played games at recess among the 

livestock in Robert Caswell’s pasture. Today the Caswell 

neighbourhood is well-known for its character homes and quiet 

side streets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to welcome these students to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join in with the member from Meewasin in welcoming the 

students from Caswell School. 

 

This is a very special school for me. My kids graduated, three 

of them, from Grade 8 in Caswell. And I actually taught at 

Caswell for a few years, and so I know the school well, and I’m 

only about a block away from the school. It’s a great school and 

it’s great to see you here. Welcome to your legislature. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of this 

honourable Assembly, Mr. Brennan Turner seated in the west 

gallery. 

 

Brennan grew up on a farm near Foam Lake where his family 

has been farming since 1929. Brennan went to Notre Dame 

College in Wilcox and went on to obtain his degree in 

economics from Yale University while playing hockey there. 

 

After school Brennan returned home with an idea and saw an 

opportunity here in Saskatchewan. With the end of the 

mandatory Canadian Wheat Board, Brennan saw an opportunity 

to bring grain farmers and buyers together. Brennan is the 

founder and president of Farm Lead Resources Ltd., which is a 

risk-free, non-subscription website service that helps farmers 

find buyers for their products. It also allows grain buyers to 

post offers online. He has been working hard on his new 

venture and is in town at Agribition this week. 

 

I wish Brennan all the success in his new business and all his 

endeavours, and I ask all members to welcome him to his 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Through 

you and to you and to all the members of the Legislative 

Assembly, I’d also like to welcome Mr. Turner to his 

Legislative Assembly and congratulate him on the fine work 

that he’s doing in this post-single-desk world. We know there’s 

a lot of work that needs to be done, and we really congratulate 

him on all the work that he is doing. So thank you and welcome 

to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, 

seated in your gallery, it’s a pleasure to see the students that 

have joined us here today. And I see one very familiar face 

there, and that’s Aaron Fritzler who has joined us. 

 

Aaron is a very bright young man with a big future ahead of 

him in this province. He is studying business at the University 

of Regina, and he’s someone that I count as both a friend and 

someone that I count as a youth advisor to myself, Mr. Speaker. 

So it’s a pleasure to have Aaron Fritzler join us here today. I 

ask all members to provide him the warmest of welcomes. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Caswell is a great neighbourhood, 

and it’s so great that it actually has three MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] to pay attention to the needs of Caswell. 

 

And I do want to join with the member from Meewasin and 

Centre in welcoming the students from Caswell, as my 

constituency also covers a good part of the neighbourhood. And 

I recognize a number of familiar faces there from the 

neighbourhood and from the park, so I want to welcome all of 

the Caswell students, teachers, and chaperones today at the 



November 21, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2103 

Assembly. Thank you for coming here. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to stand today to present a petition in reference to 

cellphone coverage, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nation, along 

with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans 

Bay; Buffalo River First Nation, also known as Dillon, 

and the neighbouring communities of Michel Village and 

St. George’s Hill; English River First Nation, also known 

as Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch 

Narrows First Nation, along with the community of 

Turnor Lake, and all the neighbouring communities in the 

northwest part of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are from 

all throughout these communities and many other communities, 

but the ones that have signed this particular petition, Mr. 

Speaker, are from Jans Bay and Green Lake. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan who are concerned about our finances. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide responsible, sustainable, trustworthy financial 

management as deserved by Saskatchewan people, 

organizations, municipalities, institutions, taxpayers, and 

businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents from 

Swift Current. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Saskatonian Wins B’nai Brith Award 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise in 

the House today to congratulate Orest Chorneyko on receiving 

the B’nai Brith’s 2012 We’re Proud of You Award. Orest was 

given the award at the B’nai Brith’s 58th annual Silver Plate 

Dinner on November 14th in Saskatoon, where I had the honour 

of being joined by the Minister of Advanced Education, the 

Attorney General, and about 900 other people at the event. 

 

The Saskatoon B’nai Brith chapter presents the annual award to 

a citizen of Saskatoon who has provided an exceptional level of 

volunteer service. Mr. Speaker, Orest’s community 

involvement covers a wide span of areas including sports, 

charity, and tourism. He has served on the boards of Saskatoon 

Sports and Tourism, Saskatoon Prairieland Park, as a director of 

the 2010 World Junior Hockey Championships, and as the 

leader for the Royal University Hospital Foundation’s corporate 

multi-million campaign. Mr. Speaker, Orest is a model citizen 

with values that reflect and reinforce the very best of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Silver Plate annual dinner is a major fundraiser for the 

B’nai Brith. Mr. Speaker, this year’s dinner raised 

approximately $50,000 for various youth-oriented organizations 

supported by B’nai Brith. This year’s new charity of choice was 

the Ronald McDonald House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Orest Chorneyko on receiving the 2012 B’nai Brith award, and 

I ask all members to join me in thanking him for his 

outstanding commitment and dedication to the people of 

Saskatoon and Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

New Football Teams in La Ronge Area 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the La Ronge and area now has 

two high school football teams. Recently the Churchill 

Community High School Chargers made history by winning 

their first game as a new team by defeating the Big River 

Rebels 31 to 21. The Churchill team was newly formed this fall 

under the coaching of teacher Gabe Andrews. 

 

Senator Myles Venne high school on the Lac La Ronge Indian 

Band Reserve also fielded a new football team this year known 

as the Huskies. The Huskies are coached by teachers Devin 

Bernatchez and Glen Trites. The Huskies played their first 

exhibition match against the Churchill Chargers on October 

17th. Both teams played exceptionally well for novice players. 

The Chargers beat the Huskies by a score of 26 to 12. The 

interschool competition has created a lot of excitement in La 

Ronge, and perhaps one or two of the players will one day be 

wearing Roughrider green. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to please join me in 

congratulating the good work of La Ronge high schools and 

thanking coaches Gabe Andrews, Devin Bernatchez, and Glen 

Trites for giving their time to providing healthy options for our 

youth. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 



2104 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2012 

Moose Jaw Health Foundation’s Festival of Trees 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For those of you 

who may not have heard the news, there’s a phenomenon in 

Moose Jaw that continues to amaze year after year. This past 

Saturday was the 21st annual Moose Jaw Health Foundation’s 

Festival of Trees. 

 

Marj and I, and along with 440 other guests, experienced a 

night of truly epic fundraising in the friendly city. This year’s 

theme was A Canadiana Christmas, eh!. And we were treated to 

an evening of exceptional Canadian-themed music, decor, and 

food including the iconic poutine. This room’s ceiling was 

decorated with stunning pine boughs and several antler 

chandeliers, and of course the elaborate displays and auction 

items that have become synonymous with the Moose Jaw 

Festival of Trees. 

 

What sets apart this particular Festival of Trees is the depth of 

continuous community support. You’ll find guest tables of 

supporters who attended the very first Festival of Trees and 

now their children are attending as well. Next-generation 

businesses help to keep our event one of the most successful in 

the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this amazing event raised over $311,000. A night 

of this is meticulously planned by many volunteers and local 

groups. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Moose Javians have once again shown their 

generosity of time and dollars. I ask my colleagues to join me in 

congratulating them on their sense of community, and yet 

another hugely successful event. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Canadian Western Agribition 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, once again it’s that time of year 

when Canada’s agriculture industry gets a chance to truly shine 

as Regina hosts the 42nd annual Canadian Western Agribition. 

Over that time, Agribition has developed into one of the biggest 

agricultural events in the world, attracting more than 500 

exhibitors. This world-class event has earned the title of the 

best beef show in North America with over 3,500 head of 

livestock. 

 

But this show doesn’t stop at the livestock. It’s also host to the 

Grain Expo. Although Agribition is an important place for 

farmers, it is always of interest to non-farmers as well. 

Agribition is a multi-faceted attraction of trade, entertainment, 

and education. Through the Agri-Ed program, it is expected that 

approximately 6,000 children will learn this week about the 

importance of continuing agriculture for future generations. 

 

Last year the event brought in an impressive $27 million in only 

six days. One hundred and twenty-six thousand people visited 

Agribition, and 800 of those individuals came from 70 different 

countries. They all came because of their great interest in the 

agricultural products western Canada has to offer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are fortunate to live in a province that believes 

in the future of agriculture. People in Saskatchewan have a 

connection to the land and it has made us world leaders in 

teaching people how to grow the good food we all eat. Please 

join me in thanking the Canadian Western Agribition president, 

Bryan Hadland, and the rest of his team for putting together 

another incredible showcase that displays the hard work of our 

agricultural producers. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Research Chair Established at University of Regina 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to highlight a recent announcement at the University of 

Regina about research funding. Cisco Canada announced this 

week it will provide the University of Regina with $2 million 

over a 10-year period to establish a specialized research Chair. 

Through this funding, the University of Regina will establish a 

record . . . Chair in e-governance. The Chair will look at how 

governments can more effectively communicate with citizens, 

businesses, and other governments through enhanced use of 

technology. 

 

The Chair will research ways to incorporate the latest 

technologies into daily work — improving client satisfaction, 

lowering operating costs, and providing faster service. The 

Chair will be located within the Johnson-Shoyama Graduate 

School of Public Policy at the University of Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are very excited to see the University of 

Regina partner with a world leader in networking like Cisco. 

The establishment of this research Chair will further enhance 

the university’s reputation for excellence in innovation in 

Saskatchewan and outside of the province. As a government 

we’ve always encouraged our universities to look for 

partnerships with industry, particularly when it comes to 

research. This is a great example of such a partnership. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan I’d 

like to thank Cisco Canada for this generous donation and to 

congratulate the University of Regina and the 

Johnson-Shoyama Graduate School of Public Policy on 

establishing this new research Chair. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Saskatchewan’s Economic Growth 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Conference 

Board of Canada’s Provincial Outlook autumn 2012 report 

shows the Western provinces remain in the best position to ride 

out the current global economic weakness. According to the 

report, Saskatchewan’s economy has performed strongly and 

the province’s near-term prospects are more favourable than the 

rest of the country. Capital expenditures in Saskatchewan’s 

potash industry are accelerating, putting our province on track 

to overtake Alberta in 2013 and 2014 as the fastest growing 

economy in the country. In Saskatchewan and Alberta it is 

forecast that the real economic growth will remain at or above 3 

per cent in 2014. This is the best forecast growth in the country. 

 



November 21, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2105 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to ensuring 

Saskatchewan’s positive economic growth continues. This is 

why we released The Saskatchewan Plan for Growth: Vision 

2020 and Beyond. Our government has set targets that will 

make our economy one of the fastest growing and best 

performing in the country, including investing 2.5 billion in 

infrastructure over the next three provincial budgets, increasing 

exports by agriculture and food products by $15 billion by 

2020, and cutting the provincial debt in half from its 2007 level 

by 2017. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to ensuring that 

Saskatchewan’s economy continues to lead in provincial real 

growth, and we are committed to making Saskatchewan the 

best place to enjoy life, to work, and to raise a family. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Video of New Democratic Party Debate 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker. Last Saturday 

the NDP [New Democratic Party] held its first leadership 

debate. A video of that debate is now posted on the NDP 

website. It starts with a brief opening video showing the past 

leaders of the CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] 

and the NDP in Saskatchewan. But when I watched this video, 

it seemed like something was missing. There were pictures of 

Tommy Douglas, Woodrow Lloyd, Allan Blakeney, Roy 

Romanow, Lorne Calvert, and the current leader of the NDP. 

 

But still, it didn’t seem quite right. I couldn’t put my finger on 

it. It was like there was some sort of missing link in the history 

of the NDP. It seems to me there should have been someone 

between Lorne Calvert and the current leader, but he must have 

been a forgettable character, Mr. Speaker, because even the 

NDP seems to have forgotten him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I really hope the NDP will go to this link on their 

website, do some research, figure out who is missing, correct 

this terrible historical oversight, and fix this video. Other than 

that, it was a great video. It’s like a chain that links today’s 

NDP to the past. But you know what they say, Mr. Speaker: a 

chain is only as strong as its weakest link. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Information Services Corporation 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party legislation to 

privatize ISC [Information Services Corporation of 

Saskatchewan] arrived with no mandate from the people, and 

people don’t believe this sale makes any sense at all. 

 

Murray Mandryk wrote in the Leader-Post: “So, lower 

dividends, possibly less money from the sale of ISC than the 

government is suggesting and more costs to both users and 

taxpayers? Why would the government even bother?” The 

StarPhoenix editorial board wrote, “ . . . the proposed model 

seems to be the worst of all worlds.” And the Saskatchewan 

land surveyors said their association “strongly opposes this 

contemplation by the government.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, ISC functions very well as a Crown. Why won’t 

the Sask Party accept all the advice that it should stay a Crown 

corporation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I don’t know if we want to continue the great 

columnist of Murray Mandryk, but I know he did say earlier 

when we were talking about the NDP having ISC in the 

legislation and then having it out, he said it was like the NDP 

were caught with their pants down on this one, Mr. Speaker. So 

if we want to quote Mr. Mandryk, that was one of the quotes 

regarding the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a corporation that served the people in 

Saskatchewan very, very well. I would disagree with the 

editorial board, Mr. Speaker, regarding it’s the worst of both 

worlds. We believe this is the best of both worlds, Mr. Speaker. 

This gives the company the opportunity to grow and expand out 

of the province with control, some control, Mr. Speaker, left 

here in Saskatchewan with representation on the board, with 

membership on the board, and shareholding within government, 

Mr. Speaker. That way we can ensure the service is here in 

Saskatchewan as well as allowing the corporation to grow and 

expand outside the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan are 

surprised by the minister’s answers and want to know who 

asked for this sale. It wasn’t the voters in the last election. The 

privatization of ISC wasn’t in the Sask Party’s platform, but 

surprise — now privatization is back on their agenda. It wasn’t 

the business community, who heard no mention from the 

Premier about privatization because they rely on ISC services, 

but surprise — something they haven’t asked for is now the 

government’s priority. The Sask Party’s policy is to prevent 

Crowns from seeking out-of-province opportunities, but 

surprise — ISC is being sold for not finding out-of-province 

opportunities. So who was it, Mr. Speaker, besides the most 

ideological partisans in their party, who asked for the 

privatization of ISC? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I guess we could ask the 

same question of the members opposite. Who asked for an 

evaluation to be done in 2003? Who asked for the evaluation to 

be done in 2006? Who asked for the piece to be in the 

legislation and taken out? Oh yes, we remember who that was. 

That was Pat Atkinson, even though the Leader of the 

Opposition can’t seem to remember it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people in the last election spoke very, very 

clearly on a platform that was laid out by our Premier and this 



2106 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2012 

government which was, do not affect any of the Crowns that 

were protected in the Crown protection Act, Mr. Speaker, but 

they voted for a government that was pro-growth. Mr. Speaker, 

49 to 9 represents pro-growth. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, let’s review the facts on ISC. 

The Sask Party has campaigned for multiple elections on 

keeping the Crowns public. Fact. The Sask Party committed to 

keep ISC public in its annual report. Fact. ISC has paid strong 

dividends that help pay for health care, education, roads, and 

services. Fact. ISC has an increasingly larger role for 

government, handling vital statistics and corporate registration. 

Fact. Other jurisdictions have been very interested in partnering 

with ISC. Fact. And the Sask Party has a restrictive policy 

preventing the Crowns from exploring good out-of-province 

business opportunities. Fact. 

 

So why, Mr. Speaker, would the Sask Party want to sell a 

profitable, useful Crown corporation or is it simply a fact that 

they will pursue ideological privatization against any ounce of 

common sense? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we’re certainly glad to 

talk about facts. NDP did an evaluation in ’03. Fact. NDP did 

an evaluation in ’06. Fact. NDP took out ISC out of the 

legislation. Fact, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, NDP, the capitalist 

barons that they are, invested around the world, Mr. Speaker. 

Fact. Mr. Speaker, they lost $90 million in Navigata. Fact, Mr. 

Speaker. They lost $15 million in Channel Lake. Fact, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they lost $10 million in Craig Wireless 

in Manitoba. Fact, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can go on and on about the facts under the NDP . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Keep going. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — No, we’ll keep going later maybe but, 

Mr. Speaker, the fact is ISC is positioned very well in this 

province and positioned very well to be successful around the 

world. Fact. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Health Care for Refugees 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s been a few weeks 

since Conservative MP [Member of Parliament] Kelly Block 

put out a household flyer, bragging about the elimination of 

health care for refugees in Canada, including refugees living 

here in Saskatchewan. My question to the provincial Health 

minister: what discussions has he had with the federal 

government to ensure that refugees here in the province are 

treated with dignity and receive the health care that they need? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the member is correct that in April of 

this year the federal government announced changes to 

supplementary health benefits for certain categories of refugees. 

I can tell the member that ministers, provincial and territorial 

ministers of Health, had a discussion with the federal Minister 

of Health in the late summer of this year, Mr. Speaker, about 

these changes and these concerns. 

 

We know that, Mr. Speaker, once the decision was made in 

April, there was a change that was made quietly by the federal 

government to reincorporate some of those categories back into, 

into the supplementary benefits that are covered. But, Mr. 

Speaker, to this point there is certainly still a lot of confusion 

between the federal government and provincial Health 

ministries in terms of what exactly is being covered because it’s 

not exactly clear which categories are not being covered with 

supplementary benefits. And we continue those discussions to 

determine what the federal government is intending by this 

policy. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, and through the confusion 

individuals who need care are suffering. While the decision to 

eliminate the health care for refugees is a federal decision, the 

impact is being felt by people here in the province and 

individuals who access the provincial health care system. 

 

I’ve been in contact with a refugee who’s in Saskatchewan and 

receiving chemotherapy for cancer that was diagnosed after he 

arrived here to the province. While his chemotherapy thankfully 

is now being covered, the anti-nausea medication that he needs 

in order to do the treatments, Mr. Speaker, is not. And for 

anyone who has a loved one or a friend who’s gone through 

chemotherapy, they know how important anti-nausea 

medication would be to actually take the care. 

 

As a result of not being able to afford the anti-nausea 

medication, Mr. Speaker, this individual had to go to the 

emergency room because he was so badly dehydrated. This is 

not humane treatment in my view, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t 

think it would be humane in the view of most Saskatchewan 

people. To the minister: does he agree that it is a humane 

treatment for a man who’s receiving chemotherapy treatment to 

not have anti-nausea medication at a cost of only $200 per 

treatment? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Certainly in the discussions with the federal government we 

have determined, we believe, there are 11 different categories 

that the federal government is now using to determine which 

refugees receive benefits across Canada. Those benefits, it has 

been stated by the federal government that coverage would 

follow if the need is urgent and essential in nature. And yet as 

the member has identified, we clearly have cases in 

Saskatchewan where reimbursement to this point is not 

forthcoming from Health Canada. 



November 21, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2107 

And so we have proceeded to provide in this case — and I 

know the case that the member’s talking about — we have 

proceeded to provide cancer care for this individual, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I don’t . . . And that is the policy that we 

will go forward with in determining on a case-by-case basis of 

which benefits that we will be able to provide in the province of 

Saskatchewan now that the federal government has made this 

change. We’re going to do that, Mr. Speaker, because as I’ve 

said, it seems that there are now 11 different categories that the 

federal government is using. And so we’ll proceed on a 

case-by-case basis. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am told, Mr. 

Speaker, that the individual is able to receive chemotherapy 

treatment, and that of course is a very good thing and a 

necessary thing. I am told very recently though, Mr. Speaker, 

that the individual still is required to turn to charity in order to 

have his medications covered for the anti-nausea medication. 

 

So in the state of this confusion, while it’s a total mess between 

the communication between the province and the federal 

government, people are falling through the cracks and people 

are suffering. Other provinces, Mr. Speaker, across the country 

have responded in a way where they’re providing coverage 

during this confusion. Manitoba for example, next door, is 

providing coverage to fill the gap and sending the bill to 

Ottawa. 

 

So my question to the provincial minister here is: will the 

provincial government act in a humane way, provide coverage 

now upfront while this matter is being sorted out with the 

federal government in order to ensure that people who are 

falling through the cracks because of the mean-spirited cuts 

have the care that they need to live with dignity? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we have . . . As the 

member has indicated, other provinces have approached the 

federal government about reimbursement, and certainly in this 

case as well as other cases, we have approached the federal 

government. When the federal government denied that 

coverage, Mr. Speaker, it was our opinion that the health 

region, in this circumstance, as well as the Saskatchewan 

Cancer Agency, continue to provide service, and we will worry 

about who’s paying the bill at a different time. 

 

We believe that the needs of this patient and all patients in this 

type of situation, considering that it is in this case a situation of 

cancer, that require coverage, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll certainly 

endeavour to ensure that that coverage is provided. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, providing health care to refugees 

is not only the humane and compassionate thing to do. I think 

it’s also the economically smart thing to do. I’ve met many 

refugees who come to this country fleeing religious persecution 

or fleeing war. They come here, Mr. Speaker, with nothing. 

They work hard. They get jobs. They pay taxes. And they give 

back to the community. So even if it costs us upfront, Mr. 

Speaker, we know the benefits to this country are great and 

they’re long-lasting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t make sense to deny pre-natal care to a 

mother while she’s pregnant, knowing that a sick baby actually 

costs the health care system more in the long run. It doesn’t 

make sense, Mr. Speaker, that a man undergoing chemotherapy 

treatment doesn’t have anti-nausea medication, knowing that he 

shows up in the emergency room because he’s dehydrated. 

 

So my question to the minister: instead of a one-off basis, will 

the provincial government step up to the plate as other 

provinces have done, ensure that the benefits that were taken 

away, the health care that was taken away by the feds, will be 

there now for the Saskatchewan refugees who are here, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — As I said, Mr. Speaker, in one of my 

previous answers, we are working closely and the Ministry of 

Health is working closely with the federal government to 

determine what exactly is intended by the changes to the federal 

program in terms of supplementary health benefits. While it 

may appear that this is a fairly clear policy change by the 

federal government, what we are learning is that we believe that 

there are now 11 different categories, and individuals will fit 

into different categories. 

 

Certainly there may be some existing programs that refugees in 

Saskatchewan could be covered under, including the 

Saskatchewan Assistance Plan or the SAIL program, the 

Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living program, Mr. 

Speaker. But again that would depend on their particular 

circumstances. And to this point, we’re working through all of 

those situations as they arise in the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Land Transaction 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. There’s 

a great injustice being done to our province and to our people 

who work very hard to protect important wildlife habitat. The 

Saskatchewan Party’s had a busy summer of closed-door deals 

involving Saskatchewan’s Crown land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party’s fire sale of 

Saskatchewan’s assets has included a giveaway of Crown 

Wildlife Development Fund land next to Greenwater Provincial 

Park. A quarter of valuable, accessible, and expensive wildlife 

development land has been traded away to Alberta interests. 

What do the Saskatchewan people get in trade, Mr. Speaker? A 

piece of swampland further from the park. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can the Minister of the Environment explain why 

the valuable Crown wildlife development land adjacent to the 

Greenwater Park has been given away by his government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 



2108 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2012 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, nothing could be 

farther from the truth. The minister alleges that land was given 

away. Certainly no land was given away . . . Or the member 

opposite makes that allegation. Wildlife protection is something 

that we take very serious. We’re looking at individual parcels of 

land, what needs to be done to ensure that that protection goes 

forward. And in this particular case, it was examined and it was 

a decision that a trade of land was to be made and it was indeed 

made. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, trading valuable wildlife lands 

for a swamp stinks. But this deal gets even smellier, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In your gallery today is Jerome Plaskan. This Wildlife 

Development Fund land was owned by his parents, Steve and 

Anne Plaskan. This was their family homestead. This land had 

great importance to this family, which they sold to the 

government in 1974. In 1984 the Plaskan family tried to buy 

back that homestead land for their parents’ 50th wedding 

anniversary, but they were told no. It seems that they just 

weren’t politically connected enough because now the land has 

been sold under the Saskatchewan Party watch to an Alberta 

friend of the Sask Party and not to a pioneering family, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

My question to the minister again: if the Crown land was not 

for sale to the original owners, why was it up for grabs for your 

Alberta friends? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much. I thank the 

member for the question. This land was appraised and it has 

been in question for quite some time. Discussions were going 

back and forth on it. It was appraised at a value . . . Both 

quarters of land were close to . . . I believe they were within 

$10,000 in appraisal in difference and a decision was made to 

trade the land, to swap the value, and to ensure that wildlife 

protection continues. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party did a 

better job admitting their error in an email they sent to a 

concerned citizen. And the minister wrote, “As you are aware, a 

decision was made in April of this year and to proceed with the 

trade.” But the minister writes he made the deal anyway. He 

said, “The ministry recognizes that there was a lack of adequate 

prior consultation regarding this trade.” 

 

This deal should have never been approved in the first place, 

and the minister admits that. But even though the minister 

admitted that the Sask Party made a huge mistake, he’s still 

asking and making the people of Saskatchewan pay the price 

for it. Once again to the minister: why would you approve a 

land sale that you’ve admitted has gone completely wrong? 

And will he apologize to the people for this horrible mess and 

to this family that’s here today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I will take no lessons 

from the member opposite about consultation. This government 

consults far and wide when it comes to The Environmental 

Assessment Act, when it comes to the Environmental Code, Mr. 

Speaker. We continue to do vast and wide consultations to 

ensure that we have a growing economy and that we have 

environmental protection in place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this particular case there’s always a question if 

more consultation could be done. Our ministry is undertaking 

more consultation whenever necessary, Mr. Speaker. But at the 

forefront will be a growing economy and ensuring that we have 

wildlife protection and environmental protection in a 

sustainable way. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, smelliest of all is the Sask 

Party seems to believe these days that anything that’s not bolted 

down is up for sale. They are putting up our personal 

information Crown for sale. They are having a fire sale of 300 

affordable social housing units. And with this land sale near 

Greenwater, the deal is as fishy as they get. As Jack Woulfe 

wrote in a letter to the editor on the deal, “There is a bad odour 

here that someone in government covered this up and slipped it 

through.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if this deal turned rotten as a result 

of the Sask Party government’s incompetence or as a result of 

their recent decision to go back to their 2003 ideology of 

privatization and fire sale of everything, Mr. Speaker. My 

question again to the minister: what will the people of 

Saskatchewan lose next after the Sask Party’s wall-to-wall sale? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much for the 

question. Certainly I’ve received correspondence on both sides 

of this issue, some that were in favour of this transaction taking 

place, some that were against this transaction taking place. I 

consulted with ministry officials who have been dealing with 

this for many, many years, Mr. Speaker, and a decision was 

made. A decision was made on appraised values with $10,000 

difference. The money changed hands, the two. But at the end 

of the day, Mr. Speaker, wildlife protection remains, and we 

have the environmental protection at the forefront, Mr. Speaker. 

Thank you. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Business Location and Global Transportation Hub 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The province 

of Saskatchewan has spent millions of public dollars to develop 

the Global Transportation Hub, the GTH, and related 

infrastructure west of Regina. 

 

Currently a $25 million project, a Kal Tire distribution plant, is 

at our doorstep but at risk of being lost to another province — 

Manitoba. Mr. Speaker, a spokesperson at Kal Tire said last 



November 21, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2109 

week that they couldn’t hold out much longer, that a decision 

had to be made, that this mess had to be sorted out. It would 

seem the perfect location for such a plant would either be at or 

near the GTH. To the minister of the Global Transportation 

Hub: when did Kal Tire first engage at the GTH and why did 

they choose not to locate there? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Global 

Transportation Hub is, of course, an operation on the west side 

on the city of Regina that is expanding very rapidly, anchored 

by CP [Canadian Pacific] Rail and Loblaws. A number of other 

companies are locating there. There’s about 400 acres currently 

developed land that’s available that is for sale now and we’re 

moving along very, very well. 

 

With respect to Kal Tire, on Monday of this week, a couple of 

days ago, I was in Vernon, BC [British Columbia], sat down 

with the officials from Kal Tire. They indicated that it was their 

preference to locate outside of the Global Transportation Hub. 

They have made an offer on a purchase of some land and 

indeed are moving forward. They were very, very pleased at the 

discussions that we had on Monday and we look forward to 

further ones with them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The deal hasn’t been sorted out though 

yet at this point in time and I understand they’ve been engaged, 

the Global Transportation Hub. This plant seems like a natural 

fit for the Regina area and economy and for our province. The 

GTH has been built by the public, by taxpayers, and is largely 

controlled by government. Despite the lofty rhetoric about the 

GTH and also our economy, we’re at risk of losing these new 

jobs and a boost to our local economy, in fact $25 million of an 

investment that’s on our doorstep, Mr. Speaker. To the 

minister: was the asking price for land at the GTH more than 

Kal Tire was willing to pay? If so, why are these costs so high 

that it’s driving away investment? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the premise of the member’s 

question is completely false. The folks from Kal Tire indicated 

that it was a visibility issue with respect to the property. They 

wanted to have access to the bypass as it will be built at some 

point in the future. 

 

They were very, very happy at the response of this government. 

We talked to them on Friday. I was on a plane on Monday, sat 

down with them Monday afternoon, sorted out their problems 

as of today, and had a telephone conference call with him just 

prior to lunchtime this afternoon. They are very, very pleased. I 

would want the member opposite to know that we believe that 

this facility will be moving forward. We’ll be having further 

discussions with them after question period here this afternoon, 

with other folks after question period this afternoon. 

 

But I would say this: this province is a business-friendly 

province. The people of Kal Tire were very, very receptive to 

the actions of this government and knowing full well that this is 

a province with a lot of growth prospects ahead of it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this file’s gone on for 

months, and there’s been a lot of confusion and there’s been a 

lot of conflicts, Mr. Speaker. And the public, let’s be reminded, 

the taxpayer, has in fact built the GTH. In this whole affair, the 

Sask Party in fact holds all the cards and wears many hats as far 

as making this deal happen, whether it’s in the RM [rural 

municipality], at the GTH, or at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we hear some positive words from the minister here today 

at the eleventh hour of making this decision. But it represents 

something very interesting, Mr. Speaker, is that the province 

itself has a vested interested in the GTH. It wears many hats on 

this front, and this is a circumstance that’s rife with both 

confusion and conflicts of interest. My question to the minister: 

why so much confusion? Why so many conflicts of interest? 

And why is this file so off track, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the whole concept of the 

Global Transportation Hub was started under the NDP. They 

couldn’t get it right, however, and couldn’t get it put together. 

The fact of the matter was that it took a change in the 

administration of government in this province before it started 

out there. 

 

Now we have a facility out there that’s employing hundreds of 

people. It’s creating a tremendous amount of economic 

development for the people of Saskatchewan. There are people 

now employed out there that never would be under the NDP, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is the people from Kal Tire chose 

another location. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Will the member for Athabasca come to 

order, please. I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — The people from Kal Tire chose a different 

location. We support that. They have made that decision. I 

spoke with the vice-president, John Mullin, not more than a 

couple of hours ago. He indicated his extreme pleasure with the 

actions of the province of Saskatchewan. If you would just get 

on board with this program, it would do the province a lot more 

help. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 72 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2012 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments Corporation. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I move that Bill No. 72, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 

2012 be now introduced and read for the first time. 



2110 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2012 

The Speaker: — The Minister for Crown Investments 

Corporation has moved first reading of Bill No. 72, The Traffic 

Safety Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of this 

bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 73 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 73, The 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister for Government Relations has 

moved first reading of Bill No. 73, The Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of this 

bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 74 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2012 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 74, The 

Cities Amendment Act, 2012 be now introduced and read a first 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Government Relations has 

moved first reading of Bill No. 74, The Cities Amendment Act, 

2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of this 

bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 75 — The Northern Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 75, The 

Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Government Relations has 

moved first reading of Bill No. 75, The Northern Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of this 

bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 76 — The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 2012 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 76, The 

Municipal Board Amendment Act, 2012 be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Government Relations has 

moved first reading of Bill No. 76, The Municipal Board 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 



November 21, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2111 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 78 through 114. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 

questions 78 to 114 inclusive. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 70 — The Education 

Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2012 

modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. I rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 

70, The Education Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2). 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Education has consulted 

extensively with our education and government stakeholders 

about these changes. We have consulted the Saskatchewan 

School Boards Association; the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation; the League of Educational Administrators, 

Directors and Superintendents; and the Saskatchewan 

Association of School Business Officials. We have also 

consulted with other ministries including the Ministry of 

Finance and the Ministry of Government Relations. We 

undertook these consultations to ensure the proposed legislative 

changes reflect the current needs of educators, students, and 

their communities. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to have this 

opportunity to explain the significant changes included in this 

legislation. 

 

First, Mr. Speaker, I propose to amend the compulsory school 

age that is presently seven years of age to six years of age. The 

present compulsory school age has been in place since 1940 

and is not consistent with other jurisdictions in Canada. Most 

Saskatchewan children in grade 1 are six years of age, so this 

change will not result in a significant increase in enrolment 

when the compulsory age is changed from seven years. 

 

Research shows that children who have access to education at 

earlier ages have improved academic and social outcomes. This 

change will not only bring Saskatchewan in line with practices 

across Canada, it will also benefit students in the long term. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to propose a change to the definition 

of school to reflect that pre-kindergarten programs are also 

provided at school sites. The change will also reflect the 

different approaches for delivering the province’s education 

programs through virtual schools as well as custody and care 

facility schools. 

 

The change to the school day definition is intended to reflect 

the regulatory amendments we are enacting on January the 1st, 

2013 regarding the new school year. The new definition 

recognizes that a school day could be comprised of instructional 

time and non-instructional time. The proposed revision to the 

definition of school day has been identified as necessary during 

our work to finalize new regulations for the school year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, research and experience is highlighting the 

importance of early years programs for children. 

Pre-kindergarten programs provide early interventions that 

contribute to children’s school success. The proposed 

amendment would grant the Ministry of Education the authority 

to develop policies and regulations for pre-kindergarten 

programs which will continue to contribute to more consistency 

and accountability among the province’s pre-kindergarten 

programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are presently sections in the Act for 

non-compliance of various provisions of the Act related to 

school attendance, school safety, administration, just to name a 

few. Through our consultations with stakeholders, we found 

that fines in their present state are out of date or are set at too 

low a rate to serve as any kind of a deterrent. As a result, Mr. 

Speaker, fines are rarely applied. Our stakeholders want to 

retain the fines but have told us that increasing the fine amounts 

would serve as a more effective deterrent for offences. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I propose that fines associated with various 

offences be increased. Fines are presently from $500 or less for 

an offence. I ask that fines be increased to a minimum amount 

of $5,000 for a first offence, and I also ask that fines increase to 

$10,000 for subsequent offences. Increasing the fine amount to 

these levels will send a clear message that non-compliance is 

taken seriously, which will in turn give school divisions the 

backing they need to impose fines if necessary. Mr. Speaker, 

the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation and the Saskatchewan 

School Boards Association have indicated their support of 

increasing these amounts to serve as a better deterrent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want to make it easier for newcomers to enrol 

in schools by clarifying who is considered a provincial resident. 

The present wording in the Act does not sufficiently describe 

who is a resident for the purposes of participating in our 

education system without cost. The regulations prescribe that 

tuition fees be charged to those who do not meet the criteria. 

Most provinces and school divisions accept children of 

temporary residents, refugee children, and reciprocal exchange 

students. However the Act presently does not clarify these 

considerations. 

 

This change will also support those who come to Saskatchewan 

from other countries on temporary work permits with children. 

At the present time we provide publicly funded education to 

those who come to Saskatchewan with young families from 

other countries on temporary permits for post-secondary 

education. This change would clarify that this right is equally 

applicable to those who are here on temporary work permits. 

Their children are entitled to be educated in the province 

without charge, and the Act will now explicitly state this. This 

change would further support our government’s promotion of 

permanent immigration to the province. Mr. Speaker, given the 

province’s commitment to attract new residents, it is important 

The Education Act be updated to ensure families who have 

chosen to call Saskatchewan home are not charged tuition fees 



2112 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2012 

for their children to go to school. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, families residing along the borders of school 

division boundaries are often faced with a situation in which the 

nearest school is in a neighbouring school division. These 

families undergo a long process so their children can attend the 

neighbouring school in a school division in which they do not 

reside. They must submit a request for boundary changes to 

school divisions and the Ministry of Education. The Ministry of 

Education then processes a minister’s order for the submission 

to amend the boundaries. Last year, Mr. Speaker, there were 22 

requests for boundary changes. Of those, 90 per cent involved a 

student who lives within just 5 kilometres of the school division 

boundary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I propose an amendment to create buffer zones 

that would allow students within 5 kilometres beyond the 

school’s division boundaries to attend school in that division. 

Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure that the neighbouring school 

division has the capacity to accept the student, therefore there 

are considerations to be made before the division accepts the 

student. 

 

For example, the division will accept the student if they have 

capacity in the school and on the bus the student will take to 

attend the school. Additionally the receiving school division has 

to determine that they have the program that meets the student’s 

needs. If these considerations are met to the satisfaction of the 

school division, the student would be able to attend the school 

without the family, division, and ministry having to undertake 

the boundary revision process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I recommend that the reference to making capital 

grants with boards of education and the conseil scolaire be 

updated. Capital agreements will retain ministry authority to 

issue capital grants and will allow terms and conditions to be 

attached. Formal capital agreements will also be used for shared 

partnership arrangements under the authority of The 

Government Organization Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I recommend we clarify the submission of returns 

to the Ministry of Government Relations, who will include this 

provision in that ministry’s statute. As a result there is no need 

to duplicate this provision in the Ministry of Education statutes. 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I ask that we repeal the statute in The 

Education Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I propose a redefinition in The Education Act that 

will allow for regulations to be made prescribing property 

classes and tiers similar to municipal legislation. The change 

would be retroactive on January 1, 2013 and apply to the 

upcoming tax year. The change will allow more flexibility 

whenever changes are required around definitions of property 

classes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my final proposal is based on a report in 2009 that 

recommended adding an additional board representative from 

La Ronge on the Northern Lights School Division. Presently 

there is only one member at large allowed for each of the two 

subdivisions of La Ronge. Since La Ronge is the only town in 

the Northern Lights School Division, the mayor of La Ronge 

and the school division have expressed the need to increase the 

number of members at large. The Act presently allows only one 

member at large for each subdivision. The new authority will 

allow the minister to grant such requests, providing that the 

general principle of representation by population is met and is 

subject to regulations. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments to The 

Education Act demonstrate our responsiveness to the changing 

needs of Saskatchewan families and school divisions. We will 

continue to work with our stakeholders to implement these 

changes. Our work together supports students, families, and 

school divisions. Our work together strengthens our education 

system to better support student achievement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move therefore that Bill No. 70, 

The Education Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved Bill 

No. 70, the education Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now read a second 

time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise today to provide some preliminary comments about Bill 

No. 70, An Act to amend The Education Act, 1995 and to make 

a consequential amendment to The Education Amendment Act, 

2012. 

 

This bill has quite a long title because it’s amending two pieces 

of legislation. I think I’ll deal with the second piece of 

legislation first. The amendment to The Education Amendment 

Act, 2012 bill that was passed earlier this year relates to the 

surprise announcement about the school year beginning after 

Labour Day. And when that announcement was made, they 

would move fairly quickly to try to create the legislation that 

would actually do what the Premier announced and it wasn’t 

totally thought out as far as how it would work. And so what 

this legislation appears to do is to make sure that that 

pronouncement or surprise from the Premier is accurately 

recorded in the legislation. 

 

And so where does that show up in this legislation? Well it 

shows up in the definition of school day. In the previous 

legislation, school days only included those days where there 

were actually students and teachers, and the students were 

receiving instruction. It’s obviously clear in a regularly or 

finely operating educational system that there will be days 

where the teachers are working and the administration are 

working, but the students aren’t actually in the schools. And so 

that particular issue had to be clarified. So that’s the 

consequential amendment to The Education Act from last 

spring. 

 

Now the amendments that are being proposed to The Education 

Act have been identified by the minister as coming from the 

community, coming from the teachers, coming from the school 

boards, coming from the officials within the Education 

department or ministry where they have identified specific 



November 21, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2113 

problems that have arisen over the last number of years. And 

that’s entirely appropriate. And there are, I think, a number of 

positive changes here, although we will obviously have to 

check them out with all of the various people who have interest 

in this, including the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, and 

the School Boards Association, and obviously parents and 

people within the community. 

 

And so part of the process in looking at this is to say, did the 

minister make the right choice on the solution to a particular 

problem or a particular issue? Now I think many people would 

be, in Saskatchewan would be surprised that the present 

legislation identifies age seven as the start of compulsory 

schooling. So basically compulsory schooling was from age 

seven until your 16th birthday. You know, most people would 

have thought it was age six, and this proposal that’s coming 

forward today from the minister confirms that sense. 

 

It’s also interesting that that definition about compulsory 

attendance is part of our rules around how we protect children, 

and we have protection for children in many pieces of 

legislation. But one of the places where we do that is in The 

Education Act because what we say is that in our province any 

child, between now what’s going to be the age of six and 

sixteen, should be full-time attendants at school. 

 

Now this is something we take for granted in Saskatchewan and 

in Canada, but in many parts of the world children don’t have 

that option. They end up being pulled into the workforce at very 

young ages — sometimes 12, sometimes even younger. 

 

And so I think we need to remind ourselves that when we put 

these simple definitions in our legislation, we’re actually 

making very proud, bold statements about the importance of 

education for children. So I think that’s a, it’s quite an 

appropriate step to make sure that we have the age now being 

six and that it will be in the legislation. 

 

Also together with this proposal then comes a whole number of 

other changes that clarify that the K to 12 or the kindergarten to 

grade 12 education part of our system, which this the Minister 

of Education is responsible for, also includes what we would 

call pre-kindergarten. So those are probably the, you know, 

five-year-olds or four- or five-year-olds who are part of the 

school system in many parts of the province. 

 

Now this particular legislation is enabling legislation setting out 

the responsibility of the minister as it relates to children prior to 

kindergarten. And what we know is that even the kindergartens 

in our province have been downsized or reduced over the last 

couple of years. And so when this responsibility is expanded 

beyond kindergarten to pre-kindergarten, we hope that there’s a 

similar initiative going to the Minister of Finance and the 

Treasury Board around making sure there’s proper funding for 

this important part of our education system. 

 

The evidence is clear. Many people have identified this, 

perhaps Dr. Fraser Mustard more than most, is that having the 

appropriate schooling and care for children as young as possible 

makes a huge difference in their success in life. And the flip 

side of that is it makes a huge difference in the amount of 

money that we are required to spend with children who haven’t 

received proper training. So this responsibility for the minister 

to have the responsibility for pre-kindergarten programs is 

important and, as is stated, it clarifies that the Minister of 

Education is responsible. It clarifies that this involves 

programming. It involves funding. It involves setting standards. 

And it recognizes that specific funds need to be provided to 

boards of education or conseils scolaires on an ongoing basis. 

 

Now what we hope doesn’t happen is that existing budgets will 

be given to the school boards across the province and they’ll be 

told, well yes, add another year or more in your responsibility 

but we don’t have any more money. Because what that does is 

further exacerbate the financial difficulties that we’re already 

seeing within the education system over the last couple of 

years. 

 

So pre-kindergarten is important for many purposes. It also is 

often something that is dealt with in conjunction with daycare, 

which we know is an important issue in the province as well. 

And we hope that the powers that are given to the minister 

under this legislation will also allow for then coordination for 

daycare to be provided across the province. 

 

And so we’ll continue to watch that particular area and, after 

discussion with people in the community, we may have some 

further suggestions about how to strengthen the wording here 

and also maybe to strengthen the clear point that there needs to 

be additional funds with the additional responsibilities that are 

set out here. 

 

Now when you go through the legislation as was stated by the 

minister, there are many, many issues or a whole variety of 

issues that have been identified by teachers and school boards 

and people within the ministry. And so what we end up having 

to look at is, well what kinds of things are being added? And 

clearly as it relates to the pre-kindergarten area, there is a need 

for new material and new types of programs and this legislation 

clearly gives the ministry the power to do that. Once again I 

hope that it will also include appropriate funding to make sure 

that these jobs are done. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So now another area that was identified in or by the minister in 

the legislation, where there’s a fix in a slightly different area, 

relates to the Northern Lights School Division. So here we have 

a very specific amendment that recognizes that in the Northern 

Lights School Division, given the great distances involved and 

in the size of the board, that they needed to have some 

flexibility on the rules. The flexibility allows for another 

member at large to appropriately represent the area in the 

North, and I think that that change is appropriate. 

 

We’ll obviously be checking with people in the North as to 

whether this gets everything exactly right so that they can 

actually accomplish what was requested. But it’s a good 

concept to make sure that there’s sufficient representation from 

the many communities that are part of the Northern Lights 

School Division. So practically that’s a very specific change. 

 

Then we go on to a change which is outlined in a couple of 

areas, and I guess there are amendments that relate to fines. The 

way the legislation was originally written, it included a specific 

fine for a particular problem. And so where there was a 



2114 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2012 

violation, for example under existing section 69 which involved 

a breach of the conflict of interest around contracting with the 

agency, ultimately you would end up being guilty of an offence 

and subject to a fine of not more than $100. There’s another 

area where there’s some fines that are also identified. 

 

What the legislation has done is consolidated all the fining 

provisions into section 364 which relates to general offences 

and fines. And I think that’s an appropriate way to deal with 

this. It gives the flexibility to have higher fines where 

appropriate and maybe in some cases, eliminate fines if that’s 

the appropriate step as well. So these particular changes reflect, 

once again, individual requests from school boards or from the 

ministry. 

 

Now there are also some issues around making sure that 

transportation services can be provided to pre-kindergarten 

children. The legislation has been very specific as to who can 

be involved in the school busing arrangements, and clearly 

there were a couple of reasons for that. One was to make sure 

that the budgets were being used appropriately. But the second 

one obviously is to make sure that the insurance policies that 

were obtained by the school boards to cover the activities 

within the school board responsibility would be clear as to who 

could be indemnified. 

 

And I think all of us recognize that school buses are to be used 

for the purpose intended, and they’re not set up to be regular 

transportation for family members or other people. So that 

legislation is being changed here, as I understand it, to make 

sure that the pre-kindergarten-aged children can be included as 

part of the responsibility of a board of education. 

 

And this whole issue around transportation of pre-K 

[pre-kindergarten] children has many other aspects to it, 

because often younger children are not there for a full school 

day. So there will be many other adjustments as well. I think 

that those types of issues will have to be reviewed by people 

within the field to make sure that this legislation actually 

catches all the nuances that are there. But it’s important that 

children obviously are protected and included appropriately, 

and that there won’t be any gaps in the insurance coverage, for 

example, for these children. 

 

Now another area that is quite interesting, and I found the 

solution proposed as appropriate, and that relates to the whole 

issue of boundary adjustments for students. It doesn’t happen, 

obviously, so much in larger municipalities in Saskatchewan, 

but in rural areas the boundaries for education can be quite 

important for families. And so the proposal to set up a buffer 

zone of, I think it’s 5 kilometres, of the school boundary to 

allow for discussions between school boards to make sure 

students are able to go to the most appropriate school, I think is 

a good solution. One of the things that we will be asking school 

boards about and teachers about and families about is whether 5 

kilometres is the appropriate buffer zone or if it maybe should 

be something a little more or something a little less. 

 

I know for my own personal experience, when I was in high 

school we lived on one side of the street and, when I was in I 

think in grade 9 or 10, we moved across the street. It happened 

to be in another school division, and there was a great deal of 

discussion between the basketball coaches as to which high 

school I should play for. But I got to stay with my old school 

and so effectively had a buffer zone like is set out in this 

legislation. So I know it’s a practical proposal and it will . . . 

hopefully it has enough flexibility in how it’s been drafted to 

solve the problems that are there. 

 

I know that it’s, because school funding is tied to individual 

students, it becomes an issue of financial consequence for 

boards as well. But ultimately the question becomes, what’s in 

the best interest of that child as a student? And it appears that 

the drafting of the legislation has captured that issue as being 

the main issue, and it will eliminate quite a few meetings and 

applications and many other things that have gone on over quite 

a number of years around making a boundary change every 

time a certain child hit a certain age so that the appropriate 

school would be identified for them to go to. 

 

So I laud the department for coming up with this particular 

solution, but once again I say we will be talking with teachers, 

with school boards, with parents, with students, to see whether 

it has sufficient flexibility to deal with the problem that’s been 

identified. 

 

Then we go on to other provisions that have been changed. And 

once again there’s an interesting clause I think that many 

people don’t realize is in the legislation, but section 149(1) as it 

exists right now says that: 

 

Except as otherwise provided in this Act, no person shall 

employ a pupil under the age of 16 years during the hours 

that school is in session, without the approval of the 

principal. 

 

And then it goes on to say there’s a fine of not more than $100 

if that provision is breached. And so practically I guess it would 

be the employer who hired a student during the school hours 

without approval, they would end up paying this penalty. 

 

Well what’s being proposed here is that the fine provision 

would be reduced, and then the change would be made that it 

goes to the general offence and fine section 364, and there the 

fine will be not up to $100 but up to $5,000 or $10,000 for a 

subsequent offence. 

 

So this is a, you know, fairly substantial fine, and it does relate 

to people who are hired to do work during school hours. And so 

I don’t think people always realize that that’s a particular issue, 

and obviously some young people really do like to work. And I 

guess you’d have to be very careful not to offend this provision 

or make sure you get the appropriate release from the principal 

of the high school. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that’s a particular protection again, so that 

practically The Education Act and the amendments here but The 

Education Act in general, it provides protection for children. So 

this provision, which in a way complements The Labour 

Standards Act, also then provides protection for children. 

 

So one of the other provisions in the legislation does deal with 

the whole issue of parents making sure that children actually go 

to school. So this is the whole area of I guess truant officers and 

the role that parents or guardians have in making sure children 

between the age of six, coming six in the new legislation, and 



November 21, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2115 

16 make sure that they’re in school. 

 

And so at the present time there hasn’t been a very substantial 

fine, and once again it was a fine up to $1,000. This legislation 

will change that and allow for a fine once again under the 

general offenses and fines section 364 of up to $5,000 for a first 

offense and then up to $10,000 for subsequent offenses for 

violation. This area gives obviously more, quite a bit more 

power to the school board in dealing with truancy of children 

that is in some way condoned by a parent or guardian. 

 

But I know from my own personal law practice that I had more 

than a few cases over the years of being hired by parents who 

were quite offended by the heavy-handedness of the school 

board officials who were given this job of making sure that 

there was compulsory attendance of children. And I know that 

ultimately the solution was always in better communication 

between the parents and the school board and between the 

school and the teachers and the students. 

 

But I think with a very large potential fine like this one now 

introduces, it may be that there will have to be even further 

discussion in the regulations or in some other place to make 

sure that there are appropriate further steps in between before 

you can finally get to this fine stage. Because as I’ve indicated, 

it’s often a communications issue between the teachers and the 

students, school board and student and parents, and that to have 

this heavy a penalty available by the school board at that stage 

would I think cause some further challenges, and although I 

suppose on the other side it’d probably end up with more work 

for lawyers trying to sort these things out. But ultimately the 

goal is to have the children in school. And we will continue to 

make sure that that is the goal, not giving heavy-handed power 

to a school board. I know that that’s clearly the goal of the 

teachers and of the school boards, but sometimes when we 

make these changes around fines we don’t always think through 

all the consequences. 

 

[15:00] 

 

So we will be asking what other processes will be put into 

place, whether they will be in the legislation, or they should be 

in the legislation, or whether they are in the regulations, or 

whether they’ll be in local school board policies. Because I 

think in the final analysis, if these fines of that size ever show 

up in court, the judge will want to know all the steps that have 

been taken by all the people involved because clearly these 

types of fines are a last resort. And so I think that it’s 

appropriate that we seek some advice from the community, 

from school boards, from teachers about that particular issue. 

 

Now there are a number of other provisions that are set out in 

the legislation where, once again, there are these penalties up to 

$100. But with the changes that are coming, which includes 

fines from up to 5,000 for a first offence or 10,000 for a second 

offence, section 162 may end up being a section that we want to 

change or that we want to watch very carefully. And the reason 

that I say that is that that particular amendment, where they’ve 

actually repealed it, it doesn’t necessarily allow for 

responsibility to be pinned onto parents or others as it relates to 

this. So I think that what we end up having to do is make sure 

that the provisions that are going to be in the new legislation 

will have the coverage that we want without losing some of the 

flexibility and ability to solve problems otherwise. 

 

Now the next section in this section is . . . Section 17 of the 

legislation deals with section 173(3) and the simple existing 

clause is, “Where neither a pupil nor any of his or her parents 

are either Canadian citizens or permanent residents, a board of 

education may charge tuition fees in the amount prescribed in 

the regulations.” And so the new provision under that section, 

which is the amendment, does provide some more information I 

guess, or a further definition that I think may be of assistance, 

but it appears that it may end up also having some problems. 

And let me explain why I say that. 

 

Effectively what this provision is to deal with is those people 

who come as visitors or as refugees or exchange students, and 

so the new legislation has taken the same clause and then said 

that they can charge tuition fees calculated in accordance to the 

rules for people who are not residents or where children of 

people who are residents, but also: 

 

“. . . where neither the pupil nor a parent of a pupil is: 

 

a Canadian citizen or permanent resident; 

 

lawfully admitted to Canada as a temporary resident; 

 

a refugee or the subject of a refugee claim made in the 

previous year; 

 

or a reciprocal exchange student”. 

 

So it limits it to those places and it doesn’t give any discretion 

to the board of education, and it doesn’t appear to give any 

discretion to the minister. That’s the point that I want to make 

here is that, there may be some other situation that isn’t covered 

by these words where it would be appropriate to have the 

people included and have them get an education. 

 

And this type of very, I guess, strict but not welcoming kind of 

legislation, we always have to watch carefully at that so that it 

doesn’t cause other problems. Now it appears they’ve tried to 

cover all possibilities, but we know from visiting with our 

fellow legislators from the United States that this whole area of 

the ability of the school system to take all comers, all the 

children in the community into school, is of great consternation 

in Texas and Arizona and New Mexico, parts of California, 

because of the number of unregistered people or whatever. And 

we want to check and make sure that this legislation doesn’t 

create some problems that have arisen there if we’d ever end up 

with a similar situation of people who are living in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I think practically we all know that that’s not how we do 

things in Saskatchewan so it shouldn’t be a problem, but 

identified here as something that we should watch, something 

that we should keep track of to make sure that we don’t get into 

a similar situation. 

 

Now as we move on in the legislation, we get into a whole area 

of where people are bringing in or basically there’s a specific 

. . . It’s almost like a criminal offence set out in section 193 

which probably most of us haven’t ever had to deal with. But 

basically it says, “No pupil shall bring explosives, firearms or 



2116 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2012 

other dangerous instruments, weapons or materials to the school 

premises.” And, “No person shall allow a pupil to bring . . .”, so 

in other words a parent or other, to bring these items to school. 

And if you’re guilty of this, you’re subject “to a fine of not 

more than $100.” 

 

So effectively that whole provision is being removed, and 

actually the whole section is being taken out of there. And I 

guess, you know, it’s a practical one and clearly some of these 

types of offences would be covered under the Criminal Code 

anyway. So that’s not necessarily a major problem, but it is 

interesting which things are included here. 

 

Now a further area relates to the reports that go to 

municipalities around collection of school taxes and then 

around the definitions of property classes, and clearly all of 

these changes relate to the fact that school boards no longer 

have the ability to levy taxes and are receiving funding directly 

from the provincial government. And so therefore some of the 

provisions that have been there for many, many years are no 

longer necessary. 

 

So we understand the proposals that are here, but it does remind 

us that when that ability to do local taxation has been removed, 

there’s also a responsibility on the provincial government to 

make sure that sufficient funding does go to the school boards. 

And that’s an area where we’ve had many calls over the last 

year around class size, around the elimination of the teaching 

assistants, around just the overall funds available for the school 

boards of the province. And so by removing some of these 

clauses in this agreement, it reminds us that we also have a task 

to respond to the public and deal with the issues around taxation 

which are effectively issues around school funding. 

 

And it’s a sad fact of Saskatchewan that many school boards 

are put in a difficult spot, and they’re not able to provide the 

education that we expect them to do. And as I said earlier, by 

adding the responsibility for the pre-K programming and 

funding, we need to make sure when we’re looking at the 

proposed budget of the Ministry of Education, the budget of the 

government, that they have sufficient funds to deal with all of 

these extra responsibilities. 

 

So what we’re doing in this legislation is making sure that some 

of these traditional ways of basically taxations, any vestiges of 

that is removed from The Education Act. Now there’s another 

part of this legislation that effectively sets out the rules around 

how the capital grants and agreements are entered into between 

the ministry and the department. And we’ll be looking at these 

ones very carefully as an opposition in light of advice we get 

from school boards especially but also from teachers and 

members in the community. Because one of the clearest 

methods of accountability around the funds does relate to the 

grants and then the agreements that are entered into, and we 

want to make sure that the responsibility goes to the funders 

around shortfalls that may be there. 

 

And it’s quite obvious already that with reduced funding or the 

flatline funding that school boards have now, it’s very difficult 

for a local school board to end up negotiating or getting more 

funds because of pressures right across the system. So there 

needs to be a recognition and a responsibility by the Minister of 

Education but also the Minister of Finance that when they make 

simple central decisions, it actually has consequences for 

children who are in classrooms, for teachers, and that those 

issues are extremely important for the people of the province. 

 

And so now as we get towards the end of the legislation, there 

are quite a few clauses that relate to fines and different issues 

that have arisen around fines, and most of these are now being 

dealt with through a general fines provision. 

 

So practically, the legislation has many different issues that are 

dealt with here. I know that what we will do as members of the 

opposition is that we will check with the school boards. We’ll 

check with teachers. We’ll check with parents to make sure that 

these proposed new rules around our education system are 

being complied with. They clearly come from requests from the 

community, but as I said earlier, the choices that are made are 

choices that are made by the ministry, and they may not always 

be the best ones for everybody concerned. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know that a number of my colleagues who 

have been involved in their careers in the education area will 

have many comments. I know we’ll also be gathering 

comments, as I said, from the various partners within the 

community. But I appreciate the chance to outline some of the 

things that we’ve seen in this legislation on a first review of it. 

And at this point, I would move adjournment of the debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 70, The Education Amendment Act, 2012 

(No. 2.). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Before we move on to the next item, 

I would request leave to do an introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

[15:15] 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — At this time I would like to introduce, sitting 

in the Sergeant-at-Arms chair, Don Maloney. And it is Don’s 

69th birthday today. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 71 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi 

de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées 

et des jeux de hasard 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it is my privilege to rise and introduce for second reading, Bill 

No. 71, An Act to amend The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Act, 1997. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I announced yesterday, our government has 

recently completed a review of alcohol regulations in 



November 21, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2117 

Saskatchewan, and the amendments I am introducing today will 

implement some of those changes. The Alcohol and Gaming 

Regulation Act, 1997 establishes the foundation for the 

regulations and licensing of alcohol and gaming products in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In October 2010 Throne Speech, government announced a 

regulatory accountability initiative aimed at reducing red tape 

for Saskatchewan businesses. As part of this initiative, 

government established the red tape committee as a 

subcommittee of the legislation and regulation review 

committee. The committee’s mandate is to work alongside 

government ministries and agencies to review Saskatchewan 

regulations and identify amendments to eliminate rules and 

processes that create unnecessary restraints and challenges for 

businesses operating in Saskatchewan. The regulation of 

alcohol was the first area reviewed through the new committee 

process. 

 

During July of 2011, an electronic survey of stakeholders 

involved in the industry was conducted. We heard back from 

permitted restaurants; taverns; manufacturers such as breweries, 

brew pubs, and wineries; festival organizers; service clubs; 

major venue operators; and sports and recreation facilities. The 

survey asked participants to identify irritants and concerns with 

alcohol regulation. 

 

At the same time, SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Authority] undertook a review of alcohol regulations and 

policies to identify areas where unnecessary regulation was 

occurring. SLGA strived to balance the concerns of private 

business, to modernize liquor regulations with the need to 

ensure that the sale of beverage alcohol continues in a socially 

responsible manner. In many cases, Mr. Speaker, the alcohol 

regulations we examined had not been put under the 

microscope for decades, meaning many rules on the books were 

outdated, often inconsistent with current social practices and in 

some cases simply no longer relevant. 

 

As a result of the committee’s work, Mr. Speaker, I was able to 

announce yesterday that our government will be introducing 

more than 70 changes to alcohol licensing and regulation that 

will increase flexibility for businesses already involved in the 

sale and service of alcohol, create new opportunities for 

businesses seeking to get involved in the industry, simplify 

application processes, reduce reporting requirements, remove 

unnecessarily regulation, simplify procedures, and provide 

clarity for permittees. Implementation of all of the changes will 

require amendments to the Act, will require amendments to 

some regulations and some SLGA policies. 

 

I am pleased to take the first step towards implementation by 

introducing Bill 71. The change that may be of the greatest 

interest to the public are amendments that will give restaurants 

the option to offer their patrons BYOW, which means bring 

your own wine. This change will bring Saskatchewan in line 

with most other provinces which already afford this opportunity 

to their restaurateurs. The decision on whether to offer the 

service will be entirely with the restaurant operator as well as 

the decision of the amount of corkage to charge patrons that 

choose to take advantage of this opportunity. 

 

One of the new business opportunities arising from the review 

of alcohol regulation which requires amendments to the Act is 

the creation of a permit for catering businesses that wish to 

provide alcohol service in addition to food. Right now a 

restaurant or tavern with an alcohol permit that offers catering 

services can provide food and alcohol at a catered function. 

Unfortunately businesses that do not provide food catering 

services from a permitted premise, such as a restaurant or a 

tavern, are not able to provide alcohol services as well. This not 

only puts this business at a disadvantage to their colleagues that 

can serve alcohol; it creates added process for the person 

seeking to host a catered event. Amendments included in Bill 

71 will facilitate the creation of a catering permit, which will be 

advantageous to both non-permitted catering businesses and 

their patrons. 

 

In 2008 we introduced the concept of having permittees recork 

partially finished bottles of wine at the request of the customers. 

This change has been beneficial for both permittees and their 

customers because it allows permittees to sell a bottle of wine 

knowing that they are not encouraging customers to 

overindulge. Customers are able to buy the bottle of wine 

knowing that they are not compelled to finish the whole bottle 

of wine and that they can take the remainder home to finish 

later. 

 

Since that time, we’ve heard from permittees that focus on 

unique types of beer who have requested similar treatment. 

With the growing interest in microbreweries and unique, 

imported beers, I believe it is time to allow permittees the 

ability to recork partially consumed bottles of beer upon request 

of the patrons. This provision is not intended to apply to 

single-serve bottles of beer but to the unique beers that come in 

a larger container size that generally cannot be consumed in one 

sitting. As with the previous decision to allow permittees to 

recork partially finished bottles of wine, this change will better 

enable the public to enjoy this type of beer without 

overconsuming and will give permittees greater flexibility in 

offering these types of products. 

 

In response to concerns that we heard from golf course 

operators, the Act is being amended to allow golf courses to sell 

alcohol to patrons, in closed containers, for consumption on the 

course. Current legislation provides that permittees, including 

golf courses, sell alcohol in open containers. While this makes 

sense for most types of permittees, I believe we need to 

recognize the unique circumstances faced by golf courses 

where service is infrequent, and the players wish to purchase 

more than one or two drinks to consume during the round. 

Notwithstanding this change, golf course permittees will 

continue to be responsible to ensure individuals are not 

overserved and that there is no service to minors. 

 

The last change I will address respecting reduction of red tape 

and increased business flexibility will allow patrons to carry 

beverage alcohol between two separate but adjoining permitted 

premises. Although changes to the Act will accommodate this 

occurrence, permittees will have discretion whether they will 

allow alcohol sold in the adjoining premises to be consumed in 

their establishment. 

 

As I mentioned, amendments to the Act will simplify 

application processes. Currently when a person applies to 

SLGA for a permit to sell and serve alcohol, the application 



2118 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2012 

must be accompanied by approvals from various municipal 

authorities proving the applicant has obtained building, fire, 

health, and safety approvals. Under the current provisions of the 

Act, SLGA cannot issue a permit unless those approvals have 

been received even though this is not an area that SLGA 

regulates. The municipal bodies providing the approval regulate 

and monitor these areas. SLGA adds no significant value to the 

process, and the requirement significantly delays the time for 

which it takes to process an application. 

 

Removing the requirement that applicants forward these 

approvals to SLGA will reduce the wait time for alcohol 

permits. The reduction in wait times and improved service to 

SLGA’s customers can be accomplished without risk to public 

safety because the authorities that have been properly tasked 

and trained to approve building, fire, health, and safety issues 

will continue to do so. The changes simply remove a duplicate 

level of oversight that is currently occurring. 

 

The other area where application processes will be simplified is 

in communities that have not had a permitted establishment or 

SLGA store for more than 60 days. Currently if SLGA receives 

an application in one of these communities, SLGA is required 

to notify the municipality and provide notice in the Gazette. 

This allows the municipality an opportunity to determine 

whether it wants to pass a bylaw precluding the establishment 

of an alcohol-permitted business in that community. While we 

believe the level of community involvement is important, it 

does add significant time to the applicant process for businesses 

seeking a permit in those municipalities. 

 

To balance community interest with that of business, 

amendments to the Act will increase the length of time without 

a premise or store that triggers this additional process from 60 

days to one year. As well, franchises will be included in the 

types of businesses that have not been present in the 

community. In addition SLGA will continue to provide written 

notice to the municipality of the application. However the 

amendments will remove the requirement that SLGA publish a 

notice in the Gazette. 

 

Mr. Speaker, two of the changes in this bill will enhance 

SLGA’s ability to continue to contribute to public safety in 

alcohol-permitted establishments. Intoxicated individuals would 

be able to remain in a permitted establishment until safe 

transportation can be arranged for them, and the Act will be 

clarified that permittees have an obligation to contact the proper 

authorities if they know of or become aware of any unlawful, 

detrimental, or prohibited activity taking place on the premise. 

 

I will speak first to the amendment that will allow permittees to 

allow intoxicated individuals to remain in the premises until 

safe transportation can be arranged. This is an issue SLGA has 

heard concerns about in the past. The Act as it currently reads 

requires that intoxicated individuals leave the premises. 

However it’s not always safe for them to do so, and permittees 

have expressed concern that making the individual leave can 

put their safety at risk. With the change, permittees will be able 

to keep intoxicated persons safe in the establishment until they 

can be safely removed. 

 

The other amendment that will contribute to public safety is the 

change that will clarify that permittees are accountable for 

illegal activity occurring in their premises. The intention of the 

new provision is not to create an obligation for the permittee to 

actively seek out and stop illegal activity, but it does require 

them to take responsible steps if they are aware of the illegal 

activity occurring. For example this includes calling the police 

if the permittee is aware of drug sales occurring in the 

establishment. It is not our intention to put permittees or their 

staff in harm’s way, but we do have to recognize the role 

permittees have in keeping our alcohol-permitted 

establishments safe for the people who use them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the changes contained in Bill 71 are just a 

sampling of the changes that I announced yesterday. And while 

I am happy to be putting forward these changes, I can assure 

you that we will not be waiting decades before looking at the 

liquor regulations once again. Going forward, we will continue 

to review and identify possible improvements on an ongoing 

basis, and government will continue to focus to eliminate red 

tape and improve the business environment in Saskatchewan. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks and move 

second reading of Bill No. 71, An Act to amend The Alcohol 

and Gaming Regulation Act, 1997. 

 

[15:30] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Investments 

has moved that Bill No. 71, The Alcohol and Gaming 

Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 be read a second time. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise to 

speak to Bill No. 71, An Act to amend The Alcohol and Gaming 

Regulation Act, 1997. I appreciate the minister’s comments 

about the explanation for the legislation. I note from the 

information that we’ve received from the minister that in the 

press announcement yesterday, there were 77 changes 

announced. It’s only 10 of those changes that are included in 

this legislation because most all the other ones can be dealt with 

in regulations or in policy. 

 

So I think it’s important to note that, that this particular 

legislation has some important things to do but it’s only a 

portion of all of the changes that were talked about in the initial 

announcement yesterday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we support most of these changes in the 

legislation. We know that they come from a careful review of 

all of the regulations that are in place and there are things and 

choices that are made. Part of what we will be doing is 

examining all of the changes but then also specifically the 

changes in the legislation together with people in the 

community. And these changes affect so many people that I 

think there will be quite a conversation. 

 

Now while we do support these changes to the liquor and 

gaming regulations and legislation and the policy, I think we 

also need to state very clearly that there is another side to this 

whole issue, and that is the area of addictions. We’re in a 

special week to recognize addictions, addictions counselling, 

and things like that that we have in our province. And it is a bit 

ironic that we’re dealing with this particular legislation during 



November 21, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2119 

that week. And so what we would also encourage the 

government to do is to make sure that they’re looking at the 

other side — all of the hurt, all of the damage to people, all of 

the damage to families and communities that happens because 

of the use of alcohol. And in this area it’s always important to 

get the right balance to make sure that there’s effective 

responsibility on the individuals using the alcohol products, but 

at the same time making sure that those who need the help get 

the help. And that part hasn’t yet been announced or hasn’t 

been reaffirmed and so we will ask a number of questions there. 

 

Because when the young people come forward and talk about 

the dramatic and drastic effects that consumption of alcohol by 

underage people can have to their lives and to their futures, we 

need to listen. When the Mothers Against Drunk Driving are 

speaking about these things, we need to listen carefully. And so 

whatever we do in dealing with the legislation and the 

regulations, we always have to make sure that we keep track of 

the important side of providing the appropriate treatment, the 

appropriate places. And whatever revenues that we get through 

additional use of alcohol, which maybe these rules changes will 

result in, we have to make sure that an appropriate share of that 

money goes to dealing with the problems that already exist as a 

result of the abuse of alcohol. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the changes in the legislation are quite 

interesting but they’re quite straightforward. And I think that 

effectively what the legislation does is make Saskatchewan’s 

rules a little more in line with other jurisdictions in Canada. 

And it doesn’t go as far as what we saw happen in a referendum 

in the state of Washington last fall, where basically alcohol 

sales were opened up to every retail establishment. And 

anybody who has been to Spokane or Seattle or Yakima, you 

get surprised when you go to the Lowe’s hardware store and see 

all of the bottles of alcohol next the hammers and saws in the 

hardware store. And effectively they made that change in the 

state of Washington. That’s not what we’re necessarily talking 

about here, but what we are talking about is that there is a much 

broader interest in making sure that the products are available. 

And so when we look at the specific provisions in this 

legislation, the changes are quite straightforward. 

 

So what we have is allowing for, for example, catering 

businesses to have a much simpler way of getting permits for 

their operations. That’s good for catering businesses. It 

effectively allows for, all the changes put together allow for a 

simpler world in one sense for restaurants and bars, catering 

institutions, other places like that to have multiple use of their 

facilities. And that’s not necessarily a bad thing, but it does 

open up more competition and clearly we’ll be hearing from 

some existing outlets that maybe are having troubles with this. 

 

So the other part of . . . If we actually go through the provisions 

in the legislation in order, we can see the changes that are here. 

And some of them just relate directly to the processes of getting 

liquor licences for stores, and we all have heard over the years 

that some of these provisions are much more complicated and 

maybe more expensive than they need to be. This will attempt 

to respond to some of those concerns and I think we’re not 

necessarily opposed to that, but clearly we’ll be asking about it. 

 

Another provision that’s been removed is, there’s been a rule 

that all the prices for all types of drinks that are available in a 

facility should be posted on a wall somewhere so you can look 

at them. And that rule has been changed, that they don’t have to 

be posted. But they do, you know, information should be 

provided to patrons about what kinds of alcohol are involved in 

each drink, but the necessity for prices to be posted in the same 

way has been changed. Clearly, clearly businesses will want to 

let the public know what, what their products cost, so I think 

that’ll be dealt with without much difficulty. 

 

Another area where the Liquor and Gaming Authority has spent 

a lot of time relates to actual licensing processes. And some of 

the changes to the section — I think it’s 56 — will allow for, I 

guess, less of a hassle in putting together your application. 

Because I know, once again from my law practice, people 

would come in and say, well how do we put together an 

appropriate package of information for the Liquor and Gaming 

Authority? And ultimately in the law firm you always had one 

or two lawyers who would try to keep up to date with the latest 

policies that were coming from Liquor and Gaming so that you 

could help your clients get the information together. But I think 

the goal here is to maybe reduce some of the great detail around 

some of that, and I think that’s not necessarily a bad idea. 

 

Then we go on to some of the processes around publication of 

notice and making sure that the local community knows that a 

new restaurant is going in where they’re going to serve alcohol. 

I think that some of that information will be provided but 

catering businesses won’t have to do it in quite the same way. 

Other events will take place and some of these notice 

provisions will not be required in the same way. 

 

The next provision is — and once again you have be reminded 

there is only 10 of the 77 provisions are actually in this 

legislation, so most of the ones that the public will have heard 

about are dealt with somewhere else — but the next provision is 

section 75. And the amendments are being proposed to that 

particular subsection 75(1) to deal with the issue of serving 

alcohol on golf courses. And it’s kind of an interesting one. But 

basically the rule was that people who purchased alcohol on a 

golf course — from the beer cart, I guess, as they’re 

colloquially known — would have to receive the product with 

the cap off or opened if it’s a beer can because that way it 

would be consumed there on the course. And that’s as far as the 

approval had gone. 

 

What they’re obviously saying here is, well if you want to buy 

two bottles of beer, you can have one with the cap on, one with 

the cap off. I don’t think that’s a major problem. I think people 

would understand that, and it also goes to deal with the ability 

to put a cap back on a bottle of beer if you haven’t finished it. 

That’s, I don’t think, usually a big issue in Saskatchewan. Most 

people don’t get involved there but some of the larger 

containers of beer, this may be an issue. And so the legislation 

is changed to deal with that. 

 

I think one of the interesting concepts, and there’s changes to 

various parts of the legislation to deal with this, does relate to 

the process or to the system whereby we’ll catch up to other 

places where you can bring your own wine or your own beer to 

a restaurant if you go out to the restaurant. This works quite 

well. I think Quebec comes to mind as the place where it’s 

probably the easiest. 

 



2120 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2012 

But effectively, the restauranteur is happy to have the business. 

They will serve wine if you want, or if you bring your own 

wine, they will charge you a fee for the glasses and maybe the 

service related to it. But it’ll be very clearly stated on the menu 

how much that costs. And if it’s a restaurant you go to 

normally, well then you would know what the procedure is. It 

looks like we’ll be able after some, probably some work to get 

the proper processes in place, do the same thing in 

Saskatchewan. And I think it will be something that gives 

another option for people who dine in our restaurants. And I 

think that’s a good thing, to encourage people to use the 

restaurants we have in the province. So a number of the actual 

legislative changes relate to that fact of bringing your own 

wine, having it used partially, taking some of it home, some of 

those kinds of things. They’re all, they’re all important ones to 

do. 

 

Now when we get to section 126 there’s an amendment, there’s 

a rule here that says that you can’t stay in a public place if 

you’re intoxicated and you can’t stay in a permitted premises if 

you’re intoxicated. And so, practically, this has caused 

problems in Saskatchewan related to our cold weather in the 

wintertime. And effectively this is obviously a request from 

people who have breached this rule because they don’t want 

somebody to be injured or something worse. And so that’s a 

practical solution that’s in the legislation, and we’ll see that. 

 

[15:45] 

 

It goes on to also talk about the kinds of entertainment that are 

available in permitted premises, and clearly the legislation will 

be changed to allow for regulations. And those regulations will 

clearly set out more of the rules. And as I stated before, only 10 

of the 77 changes are in the legislation. All the others are in the 

regulations or in the policy choices made by Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming. 

 

So practically, what we have here is a legislation that appears to 

follow in line with the announcement that was made yesterday. 

We continue to say that this legislation is important but that 

there also is another side to this and, as I stated earlier at length, 

we have to be part of both sides of this particular situation. And 

I know that the minister who’s bringing forth this legislation 

doesn’t have the responsibility on the addictions side. I think it 

comes through the Ministry of Health. So we would be looking 

forward to hearing what the Minister of Health will have to say 

as we look at the provision of services right across the province. 

 

We’ll be speaking with people across the province about this 

particular legislation. I know some of my colleagues will have 

comments as well, and we’ll work with the government to make 

sure that any changes are in accordance with a reasonable, 

balanced approach to the use of alcohol in Saskatchewan. And 

with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll move to adjourn the debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 71, The Alcohol and 

Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 60 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 60 — The 

Animal Products Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

to enter the debate today on Bill No. 60, The Animal Products 

Amendment Act, 2012. And basically what this Act sets out to 

do is, it’s about the ability of the provincial government to put 

in place a system whereby animal products are produced and 

then processed for people to eat, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the 

reason this bill is before us is because the federal government 

on December 31st, 2013 will be getting out of the business of 

inspecting food, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so the province has to 

step up to the plate and figure this out. 

 

This is another example of the federal government off-loading 

its responsibilities on to the province and creating more 

difficulties for the people here in Saskatchewan. What does the 

bill specifically set out to do? In the minister’s second reading 

speech, he talks about the animal . . . What this is, it’s an 

amendment to a previous Act. So what does this bill do? It 

updates this previous bill and will enable third party delivery of 

meats and brand inspection. 

 

So right now the current Act allows only for 

government-employed inspectors to deliver these services, so 

this will allow third party delivery of meat and brand 

inspection. It works in tandem actually. There’s Bill No. 59 

which comes before this one, The Animal Identification 

Amendment Act. But The Animal Products Act needs to be 

amended to allow for a new brand inspection delivery system. 

 

The other thing that the minister has said that it sets out to do, 

or the goal is, he calls it: “Another major initiative under this 

bill is to provide the livestock industry the flexibility it needs to 

move forward with a producer marketing assurance 

mechanism.” So in order to be able to enable this, the bill is 

adding, provisions are being added to the bill to enable 

industry-led producer marketing assurance funds, and these 

funds would allow industry to collect fees to establish the fund. 

And these fees would go into a fund that would then be used to 

compensate producers when livestock buyers default on 

payment. 

 

So the gist of Bill No. 60, The Animal Products Amendment 

Act, as I said is to create basically a provincial system for 

inspection. We all know . . . So this bill is very much about 

food safety. And we only need to look back a few months ago, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, to an incident with XL Foods just a 

couple of months ago where we had the largest ever beef recall. 

More than 2,000 meat products were recalled in the XL Foods 

beef issue, inspection and E. coli scare. Actually it wasn’t really 

a scare; it was a reality. Just until even a couple days ago, Mr. 



November 21, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2121 

Deputy Speaker, they were still discovering cases. There was 

one just a few days ago linked to XL Foods, and so that brought 

the total up to 18 cases of E. coli coming out of XL Foods. 

 

So we know as consumers that we need to be assured that our 

food supply is safe and secure, that when we go to the grocery 

store that what we purchase will not make us sick. So making 

sure that we have a strong food system is absolutely imperative 

with good regulations. But not just regulations; you need to be 

able to ensure that you’re resourcing inspectors properly with 

the skills but the money necessary to be able to hire the right 

amount of inspectors to be able to do the work. 

 

XL Foods, if you’ll recall, the federal minister that comes from 

Saskatchewan, it took the Americans refusing our beef to lead 

to the recall. We had a minister, a federal minister here who 

was, well, evasive and unwilling to recognize the issue. And in 

fact I think in one news conference he left it up to a civil 

servant, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So in terms of consumer confidence, that is absolutely 

imperative that with our agricultural products, we need to know 

that they are safe and good to eat because there can be very real 

consequences, especially for those who have suppressed 

immune systems, whether from illness or if you’re an elderly 

person or a young person. Some of the food-borne illnesses can 

be more harmful to others than some, but they’re not good for 

anybody, Mr. Speaker. And we don’t ever want to think that we 

would be at risk of contracting a food-borne illness because our 

food inspection system failed. 

 

So this bill is very much about consumer confidence, but if you 

think about it too, this isn’t just about consumer confidence. We 

need to think about our producers too and the impact that XL 

being shut down for more than a month had on them. And 

actually in fact the US [United States] and Taiwan had imposed 

restrictions on beef imports from the XL Food plants, and I 

believe that the US is still not accepting beef from XL. 

 

So consumer confidence is a big piece of that, but when we 

think about employees and producers, the producers who are 

providing the animals and the employees who are processing 

them, this is huge. So you think about all the folks who were 

laid off at XL Foods. The reality is, that’s fewer dollars in their 

pocket. Even if they’re EI [employment insurance] eligible, the 

reality is now it takes, I know here in Saskatchewan, up to six 

weeks to receive your first EI cheque. It used to be a two-week 

waiting period, but with federal cuts now, it takes about six 

weeks to be able to receive that first EI cheque. So some of 

these folks who were laid off maybe are just getting processed 

now for those EI cheques. 

 

And the other points, even though you might be eligible for EI 

and the money eventually arrives, 55 per cent of your wage 

sometimes is not enough to be able to continue paying your 

mortgage or all your utilities and the cost of living. And XL 

Foods is a very large employer in Brooks, Alberta, so I suspect 

that there’s probably even families who had one or two earners 

in a family who both worked at XL Foods which would be 

extremely problematic, which would be extremely problematic 

because then there would be no money coming into that 

household, Mr. Speaker. So this is about consumer confidence, 

but it also is about the ripple effects that it has on many other 

people, particularly the producers who lose the capacity to have 

their products processed but also the employees who work at a 

plant like XL beef. 

 

The other thing you have to think about in a community like 

Brooks, I remember reading somewhere that the wages lost at 

XL Foods, it was $200,000 a day in lost wages in that 

community — $200,000 a day for more than a month, Mr. 

Speaker. So not only does that impact those families and 

individuals, but what does that mean to all the other businesses 

in that community? Whether it’s the grocery store, the gas 

station, whomever it might be, the clothing stores, what does 

the loss of $200,000 a day mean to a business, Mr. Speaker? It 

has a huge, huge impact. 

 

So getting food inspection right is about consumer confidence, 

and it is about our economy as well, Mr. Speaker, because if we 

don’t get this right, the cost can be huge. It has a huge human 

toll with people who wind up sick and sometimes even die. 

We’ve had cases of that happen here in Canada, incredibly 

tragic, where we had a federal minister who still is this minister, 

the Minister for Agriculture, who had the audacity to comment 

about death by a thousand cold cuts, which is absolutely 

insulting and hurtful to so many people, Mr. Speaker. So death 

by a thousand cold cuts. Can you imagine that someone, anyone 

would say that, let alone someone in that position? 

 

So this again, Bill No. 60, The Animal Products Amendment 

Act is about making sure that we have a safe provincial system 

because the feds are bailing once again on the people of 

Saskatchewan. So it’s about consumer confidence, making sure 

our food supply is safe. It’s about making sure our workers and 

our producers are protected because if things go awry, it’s not 

their fault. I know producers work really hard to produce the 

best quality beef and other products humanly possible, Mr. 

Speaker. We should be very proud of that here in 

Saskatchewan, but if we don’t have a good, strong food 

inspection system and we don’t have confidence in that, it has 

huge ramifications. 

 

So I know that I have colleagues who will also be weighing into 

the debate and discussion on Bill No. 60, The Animal Products 

Amendment Act, 2012, and I look forward to their remarks as 

well. And with that I would like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 60, The Animal Products Amendment Act, 

2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 61 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 61 — The 

Railway Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A pleasure this 



2122 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2012 

afternoon to have the opportunity to enter in on the debate on 

Bill No. 61, An Act to amend The Railway Act. The Bill itself, 

Mr. Speaker, not too long, a few pages, but certainly covering 

some important content. If we look at the actual Act itself, it is 

fairly substantial and has had a number of additions to it over 

the years, and this, Mr. Speaker, is one more set. And that is not 

an unfamiliar thing to do with legislation as things change 

within the province, as problems arise, or as situations come to 

the fore. It’s appropriate, Mr. Speaker, that from time to time 

we look at pieces of legislation and ensure that they are in fact 

serving the best interests of the community as it relates to the 

issue that the legislation speaks to. 

 

So in this situation, Mr. Speaker, we’re dealing with the subject 

of railways. Obviously a very important topic. There is 

something about railways and trains that captures the 

imagination of many Saskatchewan people and many people 

around the world in fact. And we can think of the history of 

Saskatchewan, and we know how important the railway has 

been to many communities. It’s an important link to our past, 

and I would argue, Mr. Speaker, that railways are also very 

important for our future. We think of communities, Mr. 

Speaker, a lot of activity revolved around the railway. And 

when a railway was in a community, it meant that services 

could be provided. It meant that individuals could travel as they 

needed to, and there could be an elevator there in many 

instances, Mr. Speaker, for farmers to bring their crops to. 

 

[16:00] 

 

So it’s a very important issue. And we know that that’s been 

part of our history as a people here in Saskatchewan with our 

development. But we know that there have also been changes, 

which sometimes they have been changes beyond the control of 

this Assembly, and sometimes they’ve been changes coming 

from the federal government, and sometimes, Mr. Speaker, 

they’ve been changes from around the world. 

 

But we know because of these changes, communities have had 

to adapt and evolve based on the current reality that they face. 

And so we see, Mr. Speaker, how at one time railways were 

hugely important. And they still are hugely important — I 

shouldn’t say, one time — and for that reason, Mr. Speaker, 

they have captured the imagination of many Saskatchewan 

people. And there are those that love the history involved with 

the railway. And even when there’s little children, I know 

children love little train sets because it’s an important aspect of 

our history. It’s an important aspect of our story. And they still 

continue to serve a very important role here in the province. 

 

But we know, Mr. Speaker, there have been changes, as I 

alluded to in my earlier remarks. And in situations where we 

once had a very extensive railway network, because of actions 

that we have seen at the federal level, Mr. Speaker, we have 

seen many of the railways closing in different parts of the 

province. And that has major implications, Mr. Speaker, 

because in many of these areas, local economic activity 

remains. And that of course is a wonderful, important, and a 

good thing. 

 

So it’s necessary that as we consider what the future looks like 

for Saskatchewan, we have to ensure that the decisions we 

make around railways are in fact in the best interests of the 

province in the historical, cultural sense, but more importantly 

in the economic sense, Mr. Speaker, in the services that they 

provide and in their ability to encourage and facilitate industry 

in a given area. 

 

And we know, Mr. Speaker, that if goods are not being 

transported on the railways, they would then be transported in 

other ways. And that of course raises implications for our 

highway system and the maintenance of those roads. As more 

goods are forced from the railways to the highways, that is 

more wear and tear on our roads, so the maintenance of the 

roads, and puts a greater demand on repairs in given areas.  

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, it raises the issue of how to most efficiently 

and effectively transport goods and products. And we know 

that, Mr. Speaker, that with bigger trucks on the road hauling 

goods longer distances, this does raise implications for other 

traffic. It raises implications for the actual roads themselves. 

And so we need to I think as a province look at opportunities 

and look at ways where we can ensure that rail service 

continues in a given area and serves the needs of local 

communities. We need to ensure that that process is facilitated 

and encouraged and made as smooth as possible. 

 

So with that as the guiding principle that we have when we 

approach the issue of railways, we need to ask ourselves as a 

legislature, how can we best facilitate that process? Are there 

barriers? Are there steps that need to be addressed in order to 

ensure that we can have as many shortline railways as possible 

within the province? And that when communities come 

together and look at ways that they can ensure that their 

economic needs are being met, Mr. Speaker, we need to make 

that process as easy as possible, I would say. And, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s often the case that when a local community faces that kind 

of issue of the railway no longer existing or facing that 

possibility, it’s not through their own fault. It’s through forces 

beyond their control in many circumstances. So it’s important 

that we as legislators look at ways to facilitate that process. 

 

So as I read the . . . As I look at the piece of the legislation, 

which as I said is not overly long as legislation goes but does 

have some decent content to it, and as I read the minister’s 

second reading remarks, which are a time for the minister to 

clearly state why this piece of legislation is happening, I see, 

Mr. Speaker, a desire to encourage that process, which I at face 

value would say is a positive and constructive thing. 

 

And this amendment that’s being proposed in this piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, is speaking to the issue of facilitating 

the process where there may be a buyer for the rail line and how 

the two sides making the deal can most easily come to a 

successful conclusion. As the minister stated in his remarks, he 

said that “The Railway Amendment Act outlines the railway 

abandonment process, which requires railway owners to offer to 

sell their railway lines to interested parties before being allowed 

to permanently abandon their railway.” 

 

So it’s the recognition, Mr. Speaker, that in an instance where 

the railway is being abandoned in a particular area in the 

province, if because of the people living in the area and their 

attachment to the rail line and most importantly because of the 

economic activity in the area, Mr. Speaker, if they are in a 

position where they still need that rail line, it’s a requirement 



November 21, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2123 

of, Mr. Speaker, the current owner when they are about . . . 

before they abandon to provide that opportunity for others to 

take over the railway. And that is an important point. I’m not 

here to discuss the larger national picture with respect to rail 

lines. But here in Saskatchewan when we can take steps to 

ensure that service is provided in the best possible way and 

where service can continue based on the needs of a community, 

I think that’s a good thing. Because as I said, Mr. Speaker, it 

can facilitate and foster business in an area, but it can also 

prolong the life of our highways, reduce costs for our highways, 

and can also make our highways safer, which is a concern for 

anyone who regularly travels on our provincial roads. 

 

So what this piece of legislation here is doing, Mr. Speaker, as 

the minister said, that: 

 

In the government purchase phase, a municipal 

government is required to either decline or accept the offer 

to purchase the net salvage value within 60 days of 

receiving the offer, and they can only request a net salvage 

value after they have accepted the offer. As a result they 

are forced to make a critical decision without knowing 

what the exact purchase price will be.  

 

So the way that the legislation currently stands, Mr. Speaker, is 

problematic because what we’re asking individuals to do, as the 

minister points out, is to enter into an agreement for purchase 

without actually knowing the final dollar amount because of not 

knowing what the figure is for the salvage value. 

 

So this process, Mr. Speaker, would allow that information to 

be provided in advance and so that individuals could have all 

the cards on the table, know what the reality is for the situation, 

assess that compared to their own ability to pay, or to organize 

a group together to purchase a shortline and carry on with 

business. So I see, Mr. Speaker, you know, we often talk about 

the need as a provincial government to share information with 

individuals so that they can make informed decisions and, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that is a positive step. 

 

We also, Mr. Speaker, what this piece of legislation would do is 

in situations where there is a dispute, it establishes the Highway 

Traffic Board as the power to evaluate the dispute and as the 

minister said, “. . . if necessary, issue an order to the parties to 

enter an agreement that the Board believes is fair and 

reasonable.” So in a sense giving the Highway Traffic Board 

quasi-judicial powers to come to a solution if in fact there is an 

impasse and the two sides can’t agree on things. It allows the 

Highway Traffic Board to come to look at the facts, use their 

expertise, use their experience, and make a decision that would 

be agreeable to the parties. 

 

And as with any sort of negotiation, Mr. Speaker, from time to 

time there are instances where, despite two parties negotiating, 

where the solution is not arrived at quickly. And I could 

imagine when we’re dealing with an issue of railway 

abandonment and the possibility of a group of individuals 

buying that railway, Mr. Speaker, I could see how it could be a 

difficult matter to negotiate because there are many factors to 

consider. 

 

There is the sentimental attachment that individuals might have 

to the aspect or the notion of the railway, but on a practical 

level, Mr. Speaker, there’s the need for the economic activity 

and there’s the desire for communities to maintain their rail 

service because they understand how important rail service is to 

the industry in the area. And, Mr. Speaker, that in turn means 

that in many situations, can mean how . . . can determine the 

vitality of a community and whether or not there is enough 

economic activity in the area to support the population who 

wants to live there and therefore pay for the services that are 

present in the area. 

 

So it is necessary, Mr. Speaker, I think when we’re talking 

about negotiations that may occur, I think it’s important that if 

we can make that process to operate smoothly and in a more 

effective manner, I think that is a positive thing. But, Mr. 

Speaker, at the same time when we are making changes like 

this to facilitate the process and to make it a more smooth 

process, we have to ensure that the changes do not have 

unintended consequences, that it is not creating powers that the 

Highway Traffic Board perhaps should not have. That’s a fair 

and legitimate question that we should at least ask ourselves 

before we go down that path. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we should ensure that it allows the parties to 

have all the information they need when deciding whether or 

not a group could buy the rail line and whether or not a group 

could sell the rail line. But as I said, when we’re looking at 

issues of abandonment, we’re looking at issues of the 

well-being of a community from an economic perspective, it is 

necessary to have that full discussion. It’s necessary that both 

parties feel like they’re treated fairly, that both parties know 

there is a dispute resolution mechanism, which it would appear 

the Highways Traffic Board could provide in this instance if 

there was a dispute that was unresolved. I think those are 

positive steps. And I think those are steps that we owe to 

Saskatchewan people so that they can make the right and 

informed decisions. 

 

And it is a concern when railways are abandoned, Mr. Speaker, 

because we know how important they’ve been in a historical 

context, but we know how important they are in the present-day 

context in providing services to communities in order to ensure 

that the communities can carry on as strong as they want to be 

and as strong as they need to be. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to talk about railways 

because they are special, and Saskatchewan people do 

appreciate the railways in the historical sense but also in the 

everyday practical sense as it supports the economy and allows 

communities to do well. So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I would 

conclude my remarks and move to adjourn debate on this piece 

of legislation. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 61, The Railway Amendment Act, 2012. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 62 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 



2124 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2012 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 62 — The Parks 

Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Okay. David’s up. I’m leaving. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — No, stay. Stay. Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to 

rise and speak on Bill 62, An Act to Amend the Parks Act, and I 

hope everyone stays to listen to this because I think this is an 

important bill and it is one that we should be having some 

conversations about. 

 

I think that, you know, it is interesting. I believe it was in the 

2007 campaign. This government had promised at that point to 

put into place two new parks. One of course would be a 

wilderness park. They wanted to give the appearance of being 

closer to nature, and yet we have not seen that park. This is the 

first new one. 

 

So you know, Mr. Speaker, we have 34 provincial parks in our 

province, and they are a wonderful, wonderful part of who we 

are in Saskatchewan. They range from the Far North to the 

South, some of the older parks like Moose Mountain or Cypress 

Hills, heritage parks, recreation parks, wilderness parks. And I 

hope I have some time to review some of those other 34 parks 

because they are truly, truly beautiful. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, I remember in 2005 when we 

were celebrating our centennial that along with several regional 

parks, I had actually got to visit I think it was close to 30 — 

somewhere like 26, 28 — provincial parks over the course of 

that summer. It was truly an amazing experience because I 

think our parks are a wonderful, wonderful part of our province. 

 

And of course they go back a long history. Many were created 

prior to the 1930s. But I remember that we’ve just recently 

celebrated our 75th anniversary, so I would believe that we’re 

probably up to our 80th anniversary or pretty close to it, maybe 

our 78th anniversary. But at any rate, it is a beautiful thing, and 

it’s what makes us so special — our province and our 

provincial parks. 

 

And it isn’t surprising that so many people stay home, stay in 

the province to go to our provincial parks because they really 

do offer a wonderful experience not only in the summer, when 

we typically think of going to the beach and going camping and 

spending time at the lake, but also those parks in the winter 

where you can go cross-country skiing, snowmobiling, all those 

kinds of things. And they’re truly, truly a gem. And so it is 

good that we take time to reflect on our legislation that talks 

about our provincial parks and what we can do to better 

improve those parks. 

 

[16:15] 

 

But as I said, this government has promised two parks and 

we’re only reading about one today. Now if I’m missing 

something I’d sure like to hear about it, but their one that they 

are going to be talking about is one by Emma and Anglin Lake, 

and in fact it will be called Anglin-Emma Lakes Provincial 

Park as an interim name. And I understand that that’s because 

they’re holding a bit of a contest to get a better name. 

But it’s a beautiful part of the province too, and I know that 

people seem to like the idea. The minister talked about how 

they . . . He says over the last two years they’ve held two open 

houses, three trade show events, consulted with 25 various 

interest groups, five local First Nation/Métis groups and various 

other folks. They did an online survey. Now there were 5,500 

surveys were distributed; 721 came back that were specific to 

Anglin-Emma Lakes region, and the response was 87 per cent 

support from the general public. So it’s a very, very high 

support for this. And I think that speaks volumes about that this 

was a natural choice. And of course this will be a good addition 

to the park, and it’s interesting because of course it will result in 

an additional 12 821 hectares of Crown lands being protected in 

a park. 

 

Now it’s really interesting, of course, we know about the . . . 

We’ve had many debates about wildlife habitat areas and 

protecting environmentally sensitive areas, ecologically 

sensitive areas, and this will go up. I’m not sure if it was 

already environmentally protected lands but, you know, I think 

that we have, I think there’s seven different standards of 

protection in the province. And of course the lowest is if you’re 

on Crown land and really, essentially, there’s limited 

protection. 

 

The second highest is the provincial park being designated a 

provincial park land because clearly there should be very little, 

very little disturbance to that land. And of course the highest is 

we did a few years ago around the Great Sand Hills where it’s 

very specifically designated as ecologically sensitive areas. And 

that’s the highest level of protection where the only way to 

remove lands out of the Great Sand Hills is through legislation. 

And that’s very important. So I’m delighted to see that this will 

create in a sense a park that’s over 16 000 hectares because it 

will amalgamate or absorb the existing Anglin Lake and Emma 

Lake recreation sites. So this is a good, good thing. And I think 

that this is, as I said, it will be protecting land in the mid-boreal 

upland eco region of Saskatchewan, so that’s a very, very 

important area that’s of concern. 

 

Part of the Act that he talks about is removing 31 hectares of 

land from the Coteau Bay area in the Danielson Provincial 

Park. They’re going to do some cottage lot development. I hope 

we can see some maps about that when we go into committee, 

that we can actually see what we’re talking about. And 

hopefully that’s an appropriate thing. We hope that what’s 

happening with the cottage lot development is a transparent and 

fair process. I know that when you develop a . . . when you’re 

removing Crown land — and in fact we had those questions in 

question period today around the fairness and accountability 

processes — clearly that we need to make sure that that’s the 

case. 

 

Now the minister does go on to say that this will offset a 

reduction in Danielson Provincial Park, and the amendment 

also adds 65 hectares of other lands which contain native prairie 

grassland to the park. So it looks like again, from 31 going out 

to 65 coming in, a net gain of 34 hectares. This should be an 

appropriate thing. 

 

But you know, when we’re talking about those small gains, I 

just want to take a moment here to flag that we are deeply 

concerned about the track record of this government when it 



November 21, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2125 

comes to wildlife habitat and protected areas. And we’re having 

a discussion, an ongoing discussion about the community 

pastures and what does that mean, because they are a significant 

contributor to the RAN [representative area network] system or 

the wildlife habitat protected areas. And while we can celebrate 

34 hectares going in, we know there are thousands at risk, 

thousands of hectares at risk in the province as we speak. 

 

It also talks about improving visitor safety while they’re in the 

parks and reducing risks to wildlife. I did find this interesting 

that the minister did have some stats that dangerous wildlife 

attractants can include such items as improperly stored food, 

greasy pots left for cleaning later, or waste improperly disposed 

of. In 2011, Mr. Speaker, I understand they had close to 1,000 

calls regarding nuisance bears and 850 of these were occurring 

in the parks. So clearly we have to do something about that. 

 

The other one is some amendments regarding Steele Narrows 

Provincial Park, whereby the description of the park is being 

adjusted because of some mapping issues, and we always need 

to make sure we’re as accurate as can be. 

 

It’s interesting that Highway 699 carved off what they describe 

as a narrow, as a sliver of land separated from the main park. I 

hope it’s not too big of a piece of land. We’re not sure how 

much. Again it would be interesting to know the exact area, and 

it would be helpful to see maps regarding that. So this seems to 

be relatively straightforward, but as I said that we are looking 

anxiously for the other park. You know, it’s been five years and 

they need to keep their promise. 

 

You know, I’ve advocated, I would like to see a wilderness 

park actually in the south part. I know that one area that many 

people have talked about and have raised the area that’s around, 

actually just north of the Great Sand Hills on the Saskatchewan 

River, the South Saskatchewan River, where it comes into the 

province and it adjoins with the Red Deer River. And there’s an 

area called the Chesterfield flats. The forks there, it’s an 

amazing part where you’re seeing some hoodoos and just wild 

nature. It’s incredible. 

 

We went through a canoeing trip there one summer. We 

actually were able to, when we beached the canoes, we went up 

for a hike in the hills, came across a couple of rattlesnakes. 

Luckily we heard these rattlesnakes and we were able to watch 

them from just a couple of feet away. We actually kept a good 

distance away, but it was interesting to see rattlesnakes in the 

distance. It was in the fall and they weren’t moving too much. 

They were sunning themselves and just trying to get some extra 

energy for the winter ahead. 

 

But this is a beautiful part of the . . . You know, our province is 

so blessed with the wide range of the ecological regions that we 

have. And that part of the province, you know, it’s often 

referred to as the Saskatchewan breaks. Now many of us have 

heard of the Missouri Breaks. But the local folks apparently 

refer to it as the Saskatchewan breaks because you have the 

Saskatchewan prairie, that level, and you’re going up to the 

next level of the Alberta prairies, and it causes some interesting 

land formations. And if you’ve ever had a chance to visit it, it’s 

one that you will remember and it’s an amazing, an amazing 

place. And not far from there, of course, are the Great Sand 

Hills and how they’re protected. And it would be a very 

worthwhile area for us to develop, take some time as a province 

to take a look at the worth of a wilderness park. 

 

Often we think of wilderness parks of having to be in the Far 

North, in the forests, and they are wonderful as well. They’re 

absolutely wonderful. 

 

But clearly it would be . . . There is a lot to be said for southern 

Saskatchewan and the unique land features that the prairies and 

near desert conditions can bring, you know. In fact we had just 

some writing about this in terms of Candace Savage writing 

about how it’s a little south of there. But that whole area — the 

Cypress Hills, south Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan forks 

area, are just, you know, and the Grasslands Park, national park 

there — it’s an amazing part of our province. 

 

And I think that there should be much more done in terms of 

promoting ecological tourism, environmental tourism in that 

area. We don’t want to see it overdone. We don’t want to see, 

you know, cottages along in that area. But boy, we could do 

some neat tourism. 

 

And the heritage for the First Nations there is an amazing story 

to tell, you know. Candace Savage talked about the struggles, 

the First Nations and the Métis and the fur trading that 

happened in Eastend and in that area close to Cypress Hills, in 

the Nekaneet. But if you go further north, that’s even more 

interesting, I believe. But from what I’ve been able to 

understand and gather, that we should do something about that. 

And clearly I think if we were to do a survey across the 

province, so we all have our own local favourite parks. And so 

it’s interesting when we can add one more, and we have now 35 

provincial parks. But I think we could do better. I think that 

would be interesting. 

 

I recognize the challenges though, Mr. Speaker. And I did 

speak at length the other night about provincial interests, and 

again we have to look at this. And we hope that they have done 

the correct amount of consultations on this, because it’s clearly 

important that when you do a provincial park, you would think 

that everybody would be happy and supportive. But sometimes 

that’s not the case because there are the unintended 

consequences of creating provincial parks, taking significant 

land out of the normal marketplace, and in this case some 

16 000 hectares, I believe. 

 

So we have to be careful and we have to take some time and 

really think about the unintended consequences, make sure 

people have been consulted, and that it meets a niche in terms 

of what we want to have in terms of our family of provincial 

parks, you know, as I mentioned before, that there really are 

four categories: the wilderness parks, recreational parks, the 

natural environment, and historic parks. And if you go through 

the list, they are an amazing, amazing collection of provincial 

parks. And I’m sure this one, Emma-Anglin Lake Park, will do 

well, but it won’t be something that will be done overnight and 

will have to be done correctly. And it will be interesting to see 

how this plays out. 

 

In the past, provincial parks have played a key role in terms of 

the ecological protection of sensitive lands in the province and 

the interconnections of people. And that’s how people can learn 

more about those areas, whether they’re talking about the 



2126 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2012 

Cypress Hills or whether you’re talking about the northern 

parks — Crooked Lake or Moose Mountain Park; Narrow Hills 

Provincial Park, a beautiful park; or some of the historic parks. 

It’s a way for people for learn more about their natural 

environment. And it’s important that we do this right and 

people support them in just an amazing way. 

 

And so I think we have . . . We think this is a good idea, but as I 

said, I think that the government has one more part that they 

need to deliver. That was their campaign promise, and we’re 

looking forward to reading more about that. This seems 

relatively straightforward. It has been awhile in the coming 

because we know this was a 2007 campaign promise. And so 

we’re looking forward for the other ones, but I do understand it 

does take some time. 

 

I am concerned about some of the other implications federally, 

like Bill C-45 and the implication it has for some of the other 

river systems in Saskatchewan, about what it means for 

Cumberland House area, what it means for the Churchill River 

system, what it means for the Clearwater River system. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I know that many of us will have some 

things to say about this in a few minutes because I think this is 

an important bill and I know people will want to talk to this bill. 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I can go on about the different parks and 

some of my experiences. And I’ve said, Cypress Hills 

Interprovincial Park is an amazing park, and we really, really 

support that, but I think that . . . I know many of my colleagues 

will want to speak about these bills . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Yes. And so, Mr. Speaker, I can go on about these other 

ones, provincial parks that are of interest to us. And I think that 

we can take a look at what the minister has to say. And so with 

that, Mr. Speaker, I know that many of us will want to gather in 

on this, and so I would like to move adjournment now of Bill 

No. 62, An Act to amend The Parks Act. Thank you very much. 

 

[16:30] 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 62, The Parks Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2). 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 63 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 63 — The 

Regional Parks Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter into debate here today as it relates to the Act 

that governs our regional parks, specifically the changes that 

are being brought forward, Bill No. 63, The Regional Parks 

Act, 2012. 

 

And you know, it’s a pleasure to enter this discussion because 

in many ways these are some of the most treasured assets we 

have as a province, all across our province in every corner and 

so many communities, that truly do enrich the lives of 

communities, provide places for communities to come together, 

provide the opportunity for recreation, provide the opportunity 

for tourism, and do so in a way that often highlights some of 

our incredible natural assets. 

 

I was just leaving our caucus office and I said to one of our 

researchers there, Kyall Glennie, and I said, Kyall, I’m just 

going down to speak around, to discuss our regional parks. And 

immediately he started recounting stories about Saskin Beach 

and Leslie Beach in his neck of the woods where he grew up, 

Mr. Speaker, and talked about some of those stories and what 

they meant to his childhood, what they meant in rural 

Saskatchewan to provide some of the recreation infrastructure 

and some of the places to come together and have these 

phenomenal experiences. 

 

So our regional parks, for me to speak towards our regional 

parks is something that I’m very pleased to speak to. I know as 

I spend time all across this province and certainly as I grew up 

and our family, we certainly accessed both our provincial parks 

and our regional parks all across this province. And whether it 

was down north of Cabri, down on the South Saskatchewan 

River at one of those beautiful little regional parks that sits 

there on the hills along the South Saskatchewan River, or 

whether it’s been up in Govan regional park with its great little 

golf course and pool that serves the entire region by way of 

Raymore and by way of Semans and Strasbourg — all those 

different communities that utilize that park for some of the 

opportunities to access golf or swimming lessons or the lake 

itself — they’re really special places and I have such fond 

memories as well at that park as a child going in there, 

particularly in the spring of the year, Mr. Speaker, when the 

walleye were up at the north end of the lake in the shallows, 

and just tremendous fishing up at Govan’s regional park, Last 

Mountain Regional Park, and as well that important 

infrastructure that still exists to this day. 

 

Now the nice thing about these regional parks is that they’re 

infrastructure that we have enjoyed ourselves. They highlight 

some of our natural assets. But they’re also parks that we’re 

able to share with the next generation. And I’ve had the 

privilege of not only remembering back as being a young guy 

about this tall, Mr. Speaker, catching jackfish probably about 

the same length as myself up at Last Mountain Regional Park, 

but I also get to share that now with my nephews, Mr. Speaker. 

And it’s a place I regularly take my nephews and am able to 

share some of those opportunities as well, whether it’s fishing 

or the great pool that they have there. 

 

And I know that when I go up there, there’s this aspect of 

tourism. Families from all over the province have come 

together to camp or set up for the summer at that regional park, 

bringing dollars and bringing commerce to the nearby 

communities and the park itself. But also it’s a real gathering 

point for nearby communities. And when I again speak of Last 

Mountain Regional Park, I think of how it draws together those 

communities of Strasbourg and of Raymore and of Semans, of 

Nokomis and all these different communities who really access 

it. 

 



November 21, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2127 

And the interesting thing is when you spend a little bit of time 

around the park, you end up having these incredible 

conversations with these communities that have come together, 

and the fact being that in fact in rural Saskatchewan, of course, 

even though your community is close to another community 

doesn’t mean that you’re necessarily always close as 

communities. In fact some of the best rivalries, whether it’s 

through hockey or sports or activities or between schools, exist 

between some of those nearby neighbouring communities. But 

that seems to all change, Mr. Speaker, at the regional park in 

the summer where it is just that. And these communities all of a 

sudden that are 20 kilometres from one another are all of a 

sudden all brought together as a region. And these families are 

able to come together, intermingle, kids and students are able to 

connect with kids from other communities, and it’s a pretty 

special place. 

 

So I’ve got a pretty special place in my heart towards our 

regional parks, our provincial parks certainly in this province, 

and of course our incredible natural assets that we have as a 

province. In many ways I suggest that we’re unrivalled. And 

that’s a pretty bold statement, Mr. Speaker, if we think about 

the entire globe and whether you’re thinking of . . . And I know 

you’ve travelled to Africa before, Mr. Speaker, and have had 

wonderful experiences there. And I know some of the 

landscapes there are certainly remarkable, and it’s certainly 

something that I look forward to seeing as well at some point, 

Mr. Speaker. But in many ways, I’d put our province up against 

the landscapes of Africa any day of the week. And the reason I 

say that . . . Or just the same, we can think about the mountains 

and the special regions, the Rockies that we’re so proud of that 

many seek and flock to and drive tourism towards. Well yes, 

that’s a special region, but it’s also a little bit more 

homogeneous than we are here in the province with our vast 

wonderlands and our incredible natural assets. 

 

We might think around the world and all the different 

incredible terrain and landscapes and special regions that exist. 

And there are many, Mr. Speaker, which is pretty special, but 

there’s few that could parallel or rival what we have as a 

province. And if you just think about it, Mr. Speaker, from 

down in the corner of your neck of the woods, down in 

southeast Saskatchewan, down almost on the American border, 

on that often barren land but beautiful land, that landscape that 

has a bounty of pheasant and deer and in many cases now even 

moose, Mr. Speaker, that have found habitat all the way across 

this province. The hills, the rolling hills throughout the South 

and in through the Big Muddy that this remarkable land with 

this incredible history . . . And that’s so much of what’s so 

special to our province is we have this great history that’s also 

told, and the role of the Big Muddy as we formed as a country 

and as a province but also well before that. 

 

I often think back, when I’m in some of these remarkable 

landscapes, what it must have been like 400 or 1,000 years ago 

in some of these landscapes with those that were here first, our 

First Nations and the traditional life that they were leading, in 

many ways a life not without challenge but a life that also had 

its own element of peace and sustainability to it, Mr. Speaker. 

And often when I’m sitting at the top of a hill in Big Muddy 

and hiking down, I often picture what an encampment or what a 

camp may have looked like 300, 400, 500 years ago. And it also 

connects us directly back to that experience in recognizing who 

our First Peoples are and who our First Nations are to this 

province. 

 

And moving kind of across the province here, starting down in 

the southeast corner and coming across through the south 

central there with Big Muddy and then of course up into 

Cypress Hills and this changed geography, and here you are on 

the same parallel really, Mr. Speaker, to your neck of the 

woods, your area. But over on the southwest corner of the 

province — so just directly west — we’re in this region that is 

so much different, where we have in fact a forest and hills and 

lakes that are incredibly, incredibly special, and all the 

bountiful wildlife and animals that habitat in through the region 

as well. 

 

What I can say, Mr. Speaker, is that . . . And I’m going to walk 

through our province a little bit because I’ve just given a taste 

of what our southern Saskatchewan is. And then as you think as 

you stretch all the way up our province, whether it’s in through 

the central parts of Saskatchewan or further north, up through 

Moose Mountain for you, Mr. Speaker, and then as we head 

further north, in through that parkland, and our geography 

changes. But the lakes — Last Mountain and Diefenbaker and 

our Qu’Appelle chain — all those incredible assets that we 

have, and certainly intermixed with regional parks that have 

done such an incredible job of providing places of recreation 

for communities, for our province, but also a way of 

highlighting our natural assets and driving tourism in this 

province. 

 

Moving further up through our province, picture getting into 

our boreal forest and that beautiful smell that emerges. I know 

my friend from Cumberland, the MLA for Cumberland 

suggests that when you’re up there, you’re into God’s country 

and that it’s sort of the best part of the province. But as you 

move a little bit further north, you emerge out of these beautiful 

Gem Lakes type country and boreal forest up into the Far North 

where we’re into the Canadian Shield and our vast waterways 

of the Churchill River and these gem-like lakes and really a 

land that if you’re ever flying across it is just bespeckled with 

beautiful crystal lakes and waterways all through the North. 

 

And I guess what connects this province from the Cypress Hills 

— or in through my friend, the MLA for Weyburn’s region 

there — down through the Big Muddy and in that incredible 

region or across through your region down on the American 

border up through the Moose Mountain hills or further north to 

us through Last Mountain and the Qu’Appelle chain, and then 

connecting north up to the boreal forest and into the Canadian 

Shield and of course up beyond it, Mr. Speaker, what connects 

our province and provides opportunities for us to come together 

and appreciate these regions in many ways are certainly the 

people, certainly the communities, but also our regional parks, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And they are places that allow individuals from around the 

world, when visiting our province, to come together and to 

share in our special regions. They also allow us as individuals 

to travel within our own province and to find these beautiful 

places to connect. But it also allows communities, as I say, to 

connect and to bring together a region. 

 

And far too often in this province we do have a culture of 



2128 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2012 

distinctness between communities. And I maybe shouldn’t say 

far too often. It’s just a reality of our rural communities that if 

you’re 15 kilometres over from the community opposite, there 

is in fact in many ways a separation and a rivalry between those 

communities. And in many ways, our regional park allows 

those regions to come together as they are and for families to 

get to know one another and something that we should . . . and 

provides a level of recreation that is in many ways has been 

unsurpassed for many communities. 

 

Now a lot of this infrastructure that was put together in our 

regional parks network was put together in a different era, an 

investment that was made by communities, by that co-operative 

common sense sort of work together spirit of communities 

coming together and finding solutions. It was also brought 

together by partnership with governments and have made some 

really impressive assets throughout this province. But we also 

have some strain and pressure on some of those parks, and it’s 

important when we’re looking at it through this lens that those 

parks not only serve this generation prior coming together but 

the generation ahead. 

 

And I think of my good friend opposite, the MLA for Weyburn. 

I suspect he’s spent some time around Nickle Lake, Mr. 

Speaker, over the years. In fact I think he sails out at Nickle 

Lake, Mr. Speaker. I suspect he’s maybe got a rider sail out 

there on Nickle Lake in a special place. And in fact I’ve spent 

some time down in Nickel Lake in his riding there as well. As a 

kid I remember catching some walleye off the shore where the 

creek comes into Nickle Lake and some great fishing. And I 

know what that regional park provides for that region and 

brings together a place for those from Weyburn to come and to 

have recreation and these opportunities but also neighbouring 

communities. Whether you’re from whether you’re from 

Oungre, from wherever in the region, it’s a great spot. 

 

And it really does highlight the importance of these provincial 

or these regional parks to our province. And what I would 

suggest is that we need to make sure we’re doing all we can to 

be enabling the success of those regional parks and not 

impeding their success, making sure that they’re able to 

improve their infrastructure and serve the next generation, the 

children of the next generation. And in many ways this is where 

these parks will be so historic moving forward because they’ve 

been planned by those before us, whether it was 40 years ago or 

100 years ago in some cases, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And my big belief around the importance of regional parks and 

the importance of fishing or hiking or hunting, provincial parks, 

all that connect that we have. Even those I think that have 

grown up on the farm, Mr. Speaker, have a close connect to 

this, that there’s a certain sensibility that’s gained, an 

appreciation towards a level of environmentalism, a protection, 

being stewards of our land and protecting ourselves for a future 

generation. I believe very much that it’s through these pursuits, 

through these parks, through a connection to the land that 

fosters a care for that land. And I believe that just the same as 

many children that have been raised on the farm and have had 

that connect to the land understand the importance of protecting 

our land, air, and water for generations forward, I believe that’s 

also been provided by way of some of our sporting pursuits and 

recreational opportunities facilitated and fostered through our 

regional park network. 

[16:45] 

 

Our regional parks represent something very important to this 

province, represent a connect for people and communities, 

represent a connection to our natural environment and what 

makes . . . building out that appreciation for our natural 

environment and making sure we’re taking the protections and 

the actions now for the next generation quite frankly, Mr. 

Speaker. And when we’re talking about the importance of that 

natural environment and those protections, quite frankly it’s not 

simply to protect the quality of life in the province — certainly 

it is, certainly it supports that — but it’s about protecting life 

itself, Mr. Speaker. When we look at the pressures and realities 

of climate change and science that we simply have to be dealing 

with and looking at the legitimate evidence and providing the 

protections, as I say, now, for future generations. 

 

But our regional parks reflect something else as a province. 

They respect the same sort of way we came together as 

communities. They reflect how we form things such as the 

Wheat Pool, Mr. Speaker, or how we formed the Wheat Board, 

Mr. Speaker, how we came together with Crown corporations. 

And these were communities coming together and saying, hey, 

listen. We have some problems. We have some challenges. 

How do we bring some solutions to bear? And it was a matter 

of working together, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I believe it’s that same sort of common sense, co-operative 

approach that was taken then to deal with the challenges and 

opportunities of that generation, that we have to take that same 

sort of approach now. Not saying the mechanisms or the tools 

or the solutions are the same, Mr. Speaker — quite the opposite 

— but to draw upon those values that run deep as a common 

thread across diverse communities in this province, and that’s a 

care for one’s community, a desire to make improvements, and 

a co-operative approach to doing so as a preferred approach, a 

common sense approach to doing so, understanding that we can 

do more together than we can do alone. 

 

And that’s the reason that regional parks are so important. It’s 

the reason that we otherwise, Mr. Speaker, we’d all simply 

acquire and build out all the recreational assets in our own 

backyards or on our own farms, Mr. Speaker. But that’s not 

realistic, and it’s not the best way to go about it. The best way 

to build out quality of life and these opportunities, and the most 

effective way to do it is to come together in a co-operative way 

and a common sense way and to make some decisions, make 

some investments, and provide these exceptional quality-of-life 

opportunities for communities. 

 

The reason I speak to setting out how important these regional 

parks are to the province — both to our history and shaping 

who we are and reflective of our values and important to our 

sense of environmental stewardship and the importance of 

action — is that we are very concerned with legislative changes 

being pushed forward by a government that’s been on the hunt 

for cash, Mr. Speaker. And I think of very much we have 

communities that are growing and infrastructure that’s strained, 

and they’re looking certainly for solutions. And it’s a time 

actually for government to be very active in meeting with 

communities and listening with communities and looking for 

the solutions to the challenges and pressures they’re facing to 

make sure that we’re making the right decisions now that will 



November 21, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2129 

serve us best 10 and 20 and 30 years from now. 

 

And I think of a recent example, Mr. Speaker, where in the 

community of LeRoy, or just outside the community of LeRoy, 

there’s a beautiful regional park with all sorts of recreational 

infrastructure, with campsites, with a pool, Mr. Speaker. And I 

understand that there was some pressures around the 

infrastructure for that regional park. There was questions 

around how do we, how do we manage some of these resources 

to make sure they’re on a solid footing for the next generation. 

 

So that’s where some of the questions of community . . . As 

I’ve been up there, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had meetings. I’ve 

listened to community members on it, Mr. Speaker. There was a 

lot of questions. What was certainly crystal clear to me is the 

conviction of every single one of those residents of the 

importance of that park, the importance of the infrastructure, 

the importance of that recreational component that’s offered 

back to residents. What was unclear and uncertain was how can 

they can ensure that that was going to be in place moving 

forward. 

 

And I believe what was, what would have been appreciated, 

Mr. Speaker, was a government that was willing to come and 

work with the region — with people who care very much about 

their community, care about their region, and care about their 

park — to listen and to hear some of the concerns and pressures 

that they were facing as it related to maintenance of 

infrastructure and ensuring it’s on the solid footing that was 

required for the next generation. But that never happened, Mr. 

Speaker. We have had a government that’s been absent from 

that responsibility. 

 

So you’ve got community people then that are left with making 

some very, very difficult decisions, ones that were only made in 

the absence of an active government to come out and listen and 

work together with the community. But now what it’s resulted 

in is the sell-off of a regional park, a regional park, Mr. 

Speaker, that has been built by the community, that has 

included public money going into it, Mr. Speaker, that has been 

a vital part of the memories of the families and residents and 

farming community that I was speaking with in and around 

LeRoy, and something that was very clear to me is very 

important for the residents to ensure was maintained and 

provided and enhanced for their children and their children’s 

children within that region. 

 

Now my concern, Mr. Speaker, and shared by many, is that this 

planned sell-off that was forced basically by a government that 

wasn’t willing to come together and work together and to hear 

the concerns of community may not be the best choice for the 

community. Taking these public assets that we have some 

certainty and control over, that we can make sure are there in 25 

years and 50 years, Mr. Speaker, now that’s in many ways been 

lost and compromised. 

 

And I think of some of the examples of the other sell-offs of 

this government at a time where, in many ways, we are hearing 

about our economy that’s growing. And that certainly has some 

strength to it. But on another hand, we continue to see a 

government that’s failing to make the investments back into 

some of the infrastructure that makes a meaningful difference in 

the lives of Saskatchewan people, a government that’s actively, 

actively selling off assets that are important to us as a province, 

important to Saskatchewan people, and not providing the sorts 

of solutions that draw upon the values of Saskatchewan people, 

which is to lay the facts on the table, look at the evidence, face 

up to our challenges, dream towards our opportunities and then 

work together to achieve it. 

 

And in the case of the LeRoy Regional Park sell-off, Mr. 

Speaker, that was made in absence of a willing partner in 

government. And I know the concerns that Saskatchewan 

people and those in the region now have is that they’re not 

certain, it’s unclear about how that infrastructure will be 

maintained and whether it’ll be available to the community. 

 

And I think of when we have . . . When we look at some of the 

other sell-offs of this government, this week they sold off a 

Crown corporation: ISC, Mr. Speaker. They’ve been privatizing 

all sorts of portions of our Crown corporations. But I think of 

when they came before us and pretended that they had a great 

deal in selling off SCN [Saskatchewan Communications 

Network], Mr. Speaker. SCN played a very vital role in 

supporting the film industry in this province. It played an 

important role from an educational content perspective from 

telling the Saskatchewan story, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this government just a couple years ago came before us 

and said, well we’ve sold SCN. But they were pretending it was 

now going to be the best of both worlds, that the private sector 

will take on the commitment, will maintain the risk, and 

provide the benefits to Saskatchewan people. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this one became abundantly clear, Mr. 

Speaker. The folly in these sorts of sell-offs and privatizations 

is that those sorts of . . . that their contract wasn’t worth the 

paper it was written on, Mr. Speaker. And just shortly 

thereafter, the company itself which had purchased it had made 

some commitments to Saskatchewan people around content and 

a relationship to the film industry. That was something that was 

lost by way of a profitable sell-off of that company to another 

company who now no longer has the commitments that were 

pretended to be had by the government opposite in selling it off. 

 

So just like SCN, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the community of 

LeRoy is very worried about losing its control and its 

co-operative management of that park and now leaving that in 

the hands of some other entity that they only hope now can 

fulfill what they wanted to do for the community. It’s about 

presenting risk for communities when what they’d like to have 

is certainty and control over their futures. And that’s something 

that they should be granted. And it’s too bad that we’ve had a 

government that’s pushed ahead with allowing that sell-off to 

occur, not actively working with the community to seek out if 

there were some other solutions, and chatting with residents 

there — I understand that there were many solutions that could 

have been there, Mr. Speaker — and recognizing as well what 

these parks mean to communities. 

 

There’s also of course this important link back to tourism, Mr. 

Speaker, in this province by way of our parks. And I think as 

well of the government takeover that occurred of Tourism 

Saskatchewan, something that was driven at arm’s-length 

independently by the entrepreneurs who were highlighting and 

making investments in our province, highlighting our natural 



2130 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2012 

assets and bringing many people from around the world to 

Saskatchewan to share in our impressive and special province, 

now a government that, with its heavy hand, has taken over that 

arm’s-length independent entity. 

 

And the risk and control that many Saskatchewan people feel is 

that it seems that it’s a government who will do anything it can 

to get its hands on communications dollars, get its hands so that 

it can . . . it’s sort of message management to the extreme, Mr. 

Speaker, to take control of that $8 million budget to possibly 

tell a story that is somehow intermixed or supportive of the 

narrative of government, Mr. Speaker. And that’s not what 

Saskatchewan people appreciate. And that’s the concerns they 

have about the takeover on that front that’s been taken away 

from those that have skin in the game who were investing in 

our province, who are highlighting and showcasing our 

impressive regions, now being taken over by government — 

but another example of the folly of this current government’s 

approach. 

 

But the two things are different. One was a takeover and taking 

away from those that were working together co-operatively. 

The other one is a sell-off of an asset that was built together 

co-operatively, Mr. Speaker. But they shouldn’t . . . There is a 

connection between the two. 

 

So when I look at this legislation before us I see that many new 

powers have been placed directly in the hands of the minister. 

That concerns me, Mr. Speaker, because it’s the same minister 

who wouldn’t play an active role in working with LeRoy, the 

community of LeRoy, that allowed this to occur in secrecy, Mr. 

Speaker, the sell-off of this public asset that has now threatened 

the certainty of that community in having the recreational 

infrastructure it requires. 

 

There’s other aspects of this bill that we going to continue to be 

consulting on. There’s some refinement in language. Certainly 

that’s probably something we can support. There’s a new role 

for the Regional Parks Association. That’s something that’s 

likely more than reasonable. I know we’ve got such good 

people and provincial leaders engaged within our Regional 

Parks Association. 

 

But where I have real concern is basically looking at this 

legislation that it’s enabling legislation that could allow further 

sell-offs of regional parks all across this province, Mr. Speaker. 

And that’s something I’ll oppose, Mr. Speaker, the sell-off of 

our regional parks for all the reasons that I’ve stated — the 

important role they’ve played to our history; the values that 

they reflect that are common threads throughout communities 

across this province; that co-operative, common sense spirit of 

coming together; what they serve to a region as a place to come 

together, a hub for communities to come together, then bring 

together communities together that might be 15 or 20 or 30 or 

40 or 100 kilometres apart and bringing them together for 

special opportunities to connect at a regional park and allow a 

really special opportunity for our incredible province. 

 

Our landscapes are natural assets to be showcased in such a 

proud way that really are unrivalled anywhere else in the world, 

Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, from the Southeast to the Southwest 

to central Saskatchewan, in through our beautiful and rich 

North, Mr. Speaker. 

What I know is that our regional parks play a very important 

role to showcasing our province, bringing people together, 

connecting them to the environment. And I’m very concerned 

by the sell-off approach of this government, not just on all their 

Crown corporations that they’re engaged in this sell-off 

approach and selling out approach, but also our regional parks 

that are so vital to the heart of communities and reflective of 

who we are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this point in time I have many more concerns to 

put on the record on this bill, many questions to add, a lot more 

consultation to provide, but at this point in time, I will adjourn 

debate of Bill No. 63, The Regional Parks Act, 2012. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 63, The Regional Parks Act, 2012. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. It now being at the hour of 5 o’clock, 

this House stands adjourned to 10 a.m. tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2101 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2101 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2101 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2102 

  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2102 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2102 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2102 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2102 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2102 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2116 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2103 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2103 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatonian Wins B’nai Brith Award 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2103 

 New Football Teams in La Ronge Area 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2103 

 Moose Jaw Health Foundation’s Festival of Trees 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2104 

 Canadian Western Agribition 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2104 

 Research Chair Established at University of Regina 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2104 

 Saskatchewan’s Economic Growth 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2104 

 Video of New Democratic Party Debate 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2105 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Information Services Corporation 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2105 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2105 

 Health Care for Refugees 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2106 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2106 

 Land Transaction 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2107 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2108 

 Business Location and Global Transportation Hub 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2108 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2109 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 72 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2012 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2109 

 Bill No. 73 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2110 

 Bill No. 74 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2012 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2110 

 Bill No. 75 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2110 

 Bill No. 76 — The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 2012 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2110 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2111 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 70 — The Education Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

 Loi n
o
 2 de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2111 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2112 



 

 Bill No. 71 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 

 Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2116 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2118 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 60 — The Animal Products Amendment Act, 2012 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2120 

 Bill No. 61 — The Railway Amendment Act, 2012 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2121 

 Bill No. 62 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2124 

 Bill No. 63 — The Regional Parks Act, 2012 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2126 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 




