




















































Hansard: November 08, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 10A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 8, 2012, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1839 

 November 8, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all the members of the Assembly, it gives me a 

great deal of pleasure to introduce 14 young students from the 

University of Regina’s Johnson-Shoyama school of business. 

These are first-year students in the Master of Public 

Administration program, and they are accompanied by 

Adrienne Billings, the social events coordinator for the 

Johnson-Shoyama student association. She has organized the 

students’ visit to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s always a pleasure, a very special pleasure 

when we can welcome Saskatchewan students to the 

Saskatchewan legislature, and I look forward to having a short 

discussion with them later. I’d like all members to join me in 

welcoming these students to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming the students from Johnson-Shoyama. 

That’s a great program, a great example of co-operation 

between the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] and the U of 

R [University of Regina]. And I know it’s attracting students 

from near and far, students who will make a great contribution 

to life here in Saskatchewan and a life within Canada and 

around the world. So I’d join with the minister in welcoming 

these bright individuals to the Assembly. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition on cellphone coverage. And the 

prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel delivers 

cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nations, along with 

the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans Bay; 

Buffalo River First Nation, also known as Dillon, and the 

neighbouring communities of Michel Village and St. 

George’s Hill; English River First Nation, also known as 

Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch Narrows 

First Nation along with the community of Turnor Lake, 

including all the neighbouring communities in each of 

those areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have primarily signed the petition 

are from Canoe Lake, from Dillon, from Patuanak. And I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from 

across Saskatchewan as it relates to education in our province. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to make education a top priority by 

establishing a long-term vision and plan, with resources, 

that is responsive to the opportunities and challenges in 

providing the best quality education and that reflects 

Saskatchewan’s demographic and population changes, 

that is based on proven educational best practices, that is 

developed through consultation with the education sector, 

and that recognizes the importance of educational 

excellence to the social and economic well-being of our 

province and students for today and for our future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents from 

Pennant and Swift Current. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am presenting the 

petition today concerning the need for a publicly accessible 

asbestos registry: 

 

Whereas the Government of Saskatchewan has lists 

respecting public buildings that contain asbestos; whereas 

these lists must be accessed individually through the 

freedom of information requests pursuant to The Freedom 

of Information and Protection of Privacy Act; whereas 

asbestos that is not properly encapsulated poses a public 

health risk; whereas the availability of information about 

asbestos allows individuals to make informed decisions 

regarding their health and safety. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take immediate action to increase protection of workers, 

patients, students, and the public by passing Bill 604, the 

asbestos right-to-know Act, which will make a list of 

public buildings containing asbestos available to the 

public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

Melfort Comets in Provincial Final 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to rise today to speak about the Melfort Comets high 

school football team. The Comet record is 9 and 0 this season 



1840 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2012 

so far, with the potent offence racking up some 427 points and a 

stingy defence that has only allowed 91 points. For fast 

figuring, that’s an average score of 47 to 10. 

 

After going six and oh in the regular season, the Comets started 

their march towards the provincial championship with the 

Nipawin Bears. Next game was a very tough one with the 

Lumsden Devil team. Melfort won that quarter-final game 

35-13. 

 

Just last weekend, the Comets travelled to Delisle to play the 

defending provincial champions. This Delisle Rebel team was 

the same team that knocked them out of provincial play last 

year, so the Comets were looking to extract a certain amount of 

revenge. The game was billed as a battle of the undefeated, and 

the Comets did prevail with a 42-12 victory. 

 

By the figures I’ve just mentioned, Mr. Speaker, the Comets 

should be favoured team in this week’s provincial 

championship in Melfort against the Warman Wolverines, and 

maybe they are, but the Comets set their goal this year based on 

their last loss last year. They’ve reached the game by focusing 

on one play at a time, game in and game out. And I expect them 

to play with a great deal of talent and a great deal of heart. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on Saturday, we hope for decent weather, an 

injury-free game, good sportsmanship. And from this member, 

go Comets. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Saskatoon Organization Develops HIV/AIDS Website 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

commend the Saskatchewan community youth art program, 

better known as SCYAP [Saskatoon Community Youth Arts 

Programming Inc.], for the excellent work that they do in 

Saskatoon. Recently they’ve created a website to educate youth 

on AIDS [acquired immune deficiency syndrome] awareness 

and prevention. SCYAP is an organization that works with 

youth at risk in Saskatoon through art and creates working 

relationships with government, organizations, and businesses 

throughout Saskatoon. Most recently they’ve partnered with the 

Saskatoon Health Region and Saskatchewan HIV [human 

immunodeficiency virus] provincial leadership team. Together 

they’ve developed a website where artists have created online 

graphic art and comic books that share real life experiences of 

people directly affected by HIV/AIDS [human 

immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune deficiency 

syndrome]. After scrolling through each portion of the story, 

the reader is confronted with a choice: continue down the 

current path or pick another route. The reader then makes the 

choice. 

 

Organizers are hoping the website will be an effective tool in 

raising awareness and prevention. Dr. John Mark Opondo, 

deputy medical health officer for the Saskatoon Health Region, 

is one of the partners involved with the project and he confirms 

that “The website gives us some real powerful insights into 

youth in Saskatoon.” 

 

As it currently stands, Saskatchewan has the highest HIV/AIDS 

rate in Canada. In 2002, rates were at approximately 10 new 

cases per year and as of 2010, they were at 174. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon is so very fortunate to have this 

wonderful partnership that provides a very necessary and 

hopefully life-saving service to Saskatoon youth. I thank them 

for all their hard work and dedication. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Survey Shows Support for Open Market 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 

new poll of wheat farmers in Alberta, Manitoba, and 

Saskatchewan conducted by Ipsos Reid revealed that 85 per 

cent of Western wheat farmers believe that the new marketing 

system will be beneficial to their business, and less than 2 in 10, 

Mr. Speaker, believe that the new wheat marketing system will 

be harmful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after nearly 75 years of the Canadian Wheat 

Board monopoly, producers now have the freedom to sell their 

crops in an open market without fear of repercussion or 

breaking the law. The new grain marketing system removes the 

Canadian Wheat Board’s monopoly to set grain prices for other 

markets, thereby allowing producers to set their own prices. Mr. 

Speaker, according to the poll, 9 in 10 Western producers 

believe that determining commodity prices levels is an 

opportunity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for decades Western producers have been vocal in 

their desire to do away with the single-desk marketing system 

and to be allowed to sell their grain when, how, and whomever 

they choose to sell it to. Well, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 

producers can now celebrate an open market with optimism and 

opportunity. Another great day in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Constituent’s Shop Selected as Best Vintage Store 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a real pleasure to ask the 

House to join me today in recognizing the accomplishments of 

Nicola Tabb, a long-time Massey Place resident who was 

recently recognized for her commitment to our community as 

an entrepreneur. 

 

Not much more than a year ago, Nikki was one of the large 

number of people who were downsized when her former 

employer restructured its operations across the country. Like 

the community in which she lives though, Nikki is resilient and 

determined, and so she did the research and work necessary to 

become Massey Place’s newest entrepreneur. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they say that when one door closes, another 

opens. And in this case, the doors that Nikki opened were the 

doors to Better Off Duds, a second-source style shop at 510 

33rd Street West in the heart of my constituency. The store bills 

itself as size and gender inclusive and carries high-quality 

classic and retro clothing. Earlier this month, Mr. Speaker, 

Nikki’s efforts were recognized by the readers of Planet S 



November 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1841 

magazine who selected Better Off Duds as the best vintage 

store in Saskatoon less than six months after its doors opened. 

That’s quite an accomplishment. 

 

I ask the House to join me in congratulating Nicola Tabb on 

this impressive achievement and to thank her for sharing her 

energy and her vision with the people of Saskatoon Massey 

Place. We look forward to your continued success in our 

community and to many more awards in your future. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Regina Nursing Campus Opens 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

nursing students hoping to attend the University of 

Saskatchewan can now do so in Regina. Yesterday the 

University of Saskatchewan’s stand-alone Regina campus 

officially opened. Located on the 4400 block of 4th Avenue, the 

school will feature a lecture theatre, two classrooms, break 

rooms, learning commons, offices, a boardroom, and a clinical 

simulation lab. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the campus will be equipped with 

forward-thinking technology that will allow students attending 

nursing classes in La Ronge, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Prince Albert, and 

Saskatoon to be connected to those attending classes here in 

Regina. Lynn Jansen, acting dean, associate dean of the college, 

Regina campus, called it a new era for the University of 

Saskatchewan College of Nursing, and that it offers students a 

chance to learn where you live. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to training and 

retaining a full complement of nurses for our health care 

system. There are over 900 more nurses practising in 

Saskatchewan than there were in 2007, and a recent survey of 

nursing students showed that 90 per cent intended to stay on in 

Saskatchewan for their first job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 

hard work of all those who made Regina campus a possibility 

and to join me in wishing all the undergrads admitted through 

this program this year good luck in their studies. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

New Arena Opens in Spiritwood 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On November 2nd I had 

the opportunity to attend, along with many community 

members and schoolchildren, the grand opening of the new 

arena in Spiritwood. Funding from the regional infrastructure 

Canada program or the RInC [Recreational Infrastructure 

Canada] program was provided to construct a new skating 

arena, and it is connected to the existing curling facility. This 

project had an estimated $3 million cost with $750,000 being 

provided by the Government of Saskatchewan. As with many 

local infrastructure projects, people of the community showed 

up in traditional fashion, providing time, finances, and 

resources, including a major sponsorship from HJR Asphalt. 

 

Investing in recreation infrastructure is about more than just a 

new building. It’s about giving residents a place to learn and 

play; it’s about facilitating healthy and active lifestyles; and it’s 

about building and strengthening our communities. And that is 

certainly something that is worth investing in. 

 

To the many people that call Spiritwood home, they can be 

proud of their new arena. Recreational infrastructure is a vital 

part of any community, and I am proud of the investments 

made province-wide by this government. Recreation centres are 

often the hub of local activity and they provide a place for 

people to come together. Projects like this improve the quality 

of life for Saskatchewan people and allow our communities to 

continue to be a great place to live, to work, and to play. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 

 

[10:15] 

 

Lest We Forget 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

during the early days of the second Battle of Ypres in World 

War I, a young Canadian artillery officer, Lieutenant Alexis 

Helmer, was killed. The young officer was serving in the same 

Canadian artillery unit as a friend of his, Canadian military 

doctor and artillery commander Major John McCrae. 

 

It is believed that the death of his friend Alexis inspired Major 

John McCrae to write the iconic poem “In Flanders Fields.” We 

are touched and inspired by the women and men who have 

sacrificed so much for our freedom. As a community and a 

country, we show that we remember each year by wearing the 

symbolic red poppy close to our hearts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d now like to read the poem: 

 

In Flanders fields the poppies blow 

Between the crosses, row on row, 

That mark our place; and in the sky 

The larks, still bravely singing, fly 

Scarce heard amid the guns below. 

 

We are the Dead. Short days ago 

We lived, felt dawn, saw sunset glow, 

Loved, and were loved, and now we lie 

In Flanders fields. 

 

Take up our quarrel with the foe: 

To you from failing hands we throw 

The torch; be yours to hold it high. 

If ye break faith with us who die 

We shall not sleep, though poppies grow 

In Flanders fields. 

 

Lest we forget. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 



1842 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2012 

Massey Place. 

 

Registry of Asbestos in Public Buildings 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A week ago I 

introduced an amendment to The Public Health Act which 

would require the provincial government to create an online 

registry of all public buildings that contain asbestos. The 

government already has this information but chooses to keep it 

from the public. Making the registry available to Saskatchewan 

families, workers, patients is a common sense approach. 

 

Last week the Sask Party government said it would have its 

officials review this piece of legislation. It’s now been a week. 

My question to the Health minister: will the Sask Party 

government support this important piece of health and safety 

legislation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

And I want to thank the member for his question. And I also 

want to thank the member for providing members opposite, 

myself, on the day that he introduced his bill, notice of that bill. 

 

Certainly we are considering the contents of the bill which I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, would provide a public registry of public 

buildings that contain asbestos, Mr. Speaker. But we are 

certainly looking forward, I believe the member is going to do 

second reading of the bill later this day, and we look forward to 

hearing what he has to say. And we will be providing him an 

answer sometime following that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the day that the 

bill was introduced, the comments that a different minister 

made about the piece of legislation is that he worried that it 

would create fear. Well, Mr. Speaker, it really isn’t about 

fearmongering. It is about sharing information. In this day and 

age, it’s appropriate for government to share information with 

its citizens so that families, patients, students can make 

informed decisions. 

 

My question to the minister: does he agree that in this day and 

age it’s appropriate to be open, transparent and provide all 

information available to citizens so that they can make 

informed decisions about their health and safety? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I believe if I could just 

maybe correct the member opposite, I don’t believe that the 

Minister of Labour indicated that our worry, the government’s 

worry is that the bill would create fear. I believe what he was 

stating is that it would create the potential to create a false sense 

of security if a public building wasn’t listed, knowing that 

asbestos has been used for a number of decades in Canada in 

building material, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But as I said in my previous answer, we are certainly 

considering the content of the member from Massey Place’s 

bill, Mr. Speaker. And we will be very interested in hearing his 

arguments during his second reading, and be making a decision 

on the government’s position following that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A champion of this 

type of legislation that is proposed is Howard Willems. And 

Howard lives in Saskatoon. He was a federal civil servant who 

was exposed to asbestos while working on the job, and he is 

now battling cancer. As Howard powerfully said last week to 

the media, Mr. Speaker, he said: 

 

If you were enrolling your child in a school that was built 

in 1960, or if you were introducing your parents or 

grandparents to a seniors’ care home built in the same 

era, wouldn’t you like to know what is the potential for 

asbestos? Knowing that it’s there and contained would 

make you rest a lot easier than not knowing at all. 

 

Howard is asking for the Sask Party government to take a 

common sense approach and make this information available to 

Saskatchewan residents. My question to the minister: will he 

heed Howard’s warning? Will he do the right thing today, and 

will the Sask Party government support this important piece of 

legislation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

And we certainly thank Mr. Willems for his work on this very 

important issue. Certainly government has a great deal of 

sympathy for Mr. Willems and the health battle that he faces 

now and all people that face this very serious form of cancer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we thank Mr. Willems for his dedicated work, not 

just in lobbying this government but also lobbying the previous 

government to put a registry in place. As I said, Mr. Speaker, 

we will take under consideration the bill that the member 

opposite has put forward. We look forward to hearing his 

remarks on this. And we will of course look at this bill, look at 

what other provinces are doing, look at what is best practices, 

and make a decision going forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Funding for Education 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the latest list of education 

capital projects is out. Parents, educators, communities, school 

divisions are confused by this plan and are left questioning 

whether or not the Sask Party government really understands 

the realities of today’s classrooms in today’s communities. 

 

The ministry said, in a letter to school divisions, the whole 

process is being revamped. But in the meantime, classrooms 

and schools are overcrowded, and parents are worried and 

wondering what it will take for the Sask Party to take this 

problem seriously. 

 

On November 6th, The StarPhoenix editorial titled, “School 



November 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1843 

policy badly outdated,” highlights the disarray, the frustration, 

the confusion as it relates to these cramped schools and 

inconsistent policies of that government. To the minister: why 

has there been such a lack of clarity, so much confusion, and so 

little action in building the schools this province needs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I 

acknowledge the member opposite for the question. Mr. 

Speaker, as I’ve said before, education in our province is a high 

priority, is clearly articulated in the Throne Speech, clearly 

articulated in the growth plan. Mr. Speaker, experiencing 

unprecedented growth in this province is an understatement. 

We’ve not seen this kind of growth for a very long time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re working with our partners, all of our sector 

partners to mitigate a situation that is emergent. Having said 

that, we realize that the current process does not meet today’s 

reality, and we’ll continue to work with our sector partners to 

alleviate the pressures. We’re working on that process. We’re 

consulting with our partners to address these enrolment 

pressures, and we will continue in that regard. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, Hampton Village in 

Saskatoon is but one example of a lost priority. Students from 

the neighbourhood in both school systems need access to new 

schools. Mr. Speaker, a 10-year-old request — and in fact, 

Saskatoon Public School Division’s top priority, number one 

priority — is still down on the Sask Party government’s lowest 

priority list. One of the strongest critics, Mr. Speaker, served as 

the business manager and constituency assistant for the member 

for Fairview. She was quoted in The StarPhoenix, “The people 

want a school out here so bad, it’s pathetic.” 

 

To the minister: how has the Sask Party government misplaced 

their educational priorities so badly that even their own party 

organizers and constituency staff are calling their plans 

pathetic? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I 

acknowledge the question from the member opposite. Mr. 

Speaker, since 2007 we have allocated over $116 million in 

school capital in the Saskatoon area. We have contributed to 

and committed funding to 10 major school capital projects in 

the area. They include $14.1 million for the new Willowgrove 

School, $12.6 million to the new Holy Family School, $4.2 

million to the E.D. Feehan School renovations, $7.5 million to 

the Georges Vanier School addition, $13.2 million to the Holy 

Cross renovation, $8.6 million to St. Matthew’s addition, $8 

million to Nutana school addition, $12 million to the new St. 

Mary School addition — Mr. Speaker, $500 million in total that 

we’ve invested in education in our province over the course of 

our governance. 

 

Again, priorities, Mr. Speaker — liquor stores, schools; liquor 

stores, hospitals. We’re going to move forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that’s reckless rhetoric 

from that minister, Mr. Speaker. And the fact of the matter is, 

the fact of the matter is that the number one goal of government 

should be meeting the needs of people in this growing province. 

And clearly, that’s not happening. There are kindergarten 

classrooms that are bursting at the seams. Staff rooms are 

doubling as teaching spaces. Parents are worried as their kids 

cross busy highways to access schools that are far away. 

Clearly action is needed. 

 

As the November 6th StarPhoenix editorial stated, “There 

needs to be a great deal more leadership from the government 

for actual policies to cope with growth [rather] than merely 

setting lofty goals or bragging about the latest statistics.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is needed is clarity from that government, a 

plan that makes sense, and an investment in our schools. When 

will the Sask Party put forward a real plan to address these 

challenges and properly support students in our growing 

province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again I 

recognize the member opposite for the question. Mr. Speaker, 

we have a plan. It’s called a growth plan. And we’re going to 

continue with that growth plan as we move forward. Again, Mr. 

Speaker, I’ll acknowledge the fact that the process for 

allocating capital funding is a process that’s lacking. We’ve 

committed to address those shortfalls with our sector partners. 

We’re going to continue in that vein. And as we speak, we’re 

going to move forward with that direction. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been raising 

specific concerns for months and proposing action. As raised in 

the November 6th StarPhoenix editorial, there’s a host of 

issues: funding lags, population growth, creating a funding 

shortfall. English as an additional language supports are grossly 

inadequate, impacting all students. Divisions were forced to cut 

full-day kindergarten and that simply doesn’t lay a foundation 

for learning. And then there’s the capital needs, the bricks and 

mortar, the classrooms, the schools themselves that are missing 

from their agenda. 

 

This is a government that is clearly not supporting education to 

meet the demands of growth, the growth it touts. Its policies 

defy common sense and deny us our full potential. When will 

that government’s actions meet up with its rhetoric and make 

education a real priority in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thanks again, Mr. Speaker. You 

know, it wasn’t so long ago that I sat around a board table 

deliberating with my colleagues about how much we were 

going to charge the citizens of Regina in terms of raised taxes 

to mitigate the shortfalls that were coming our way in education 



1844 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2012 

as a result of underfunding and declining enrolments year upon 

year upon year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me just mention a hard reality. And I’d like to 

quote from Prince Albert, Wayne Steen: 

 

We desperately needed this gymnasium for Carlton’s 

programming. This is just wonderful news for the school 

division to get approval on this and be able to move 

ahead on the project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a plan. It’s called growth. From Warman, 

and I quote: 

 

On behalf of the Prairie Spirit School board of education, 

I would like to extend our sincere appreciation to the 

Ministry of Education for the announcement of a new 

facility in Warman. As a division we were thrilled to see 

Warman middle years school project move to the 

approval in principle stage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a growth plan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Affordable Housing Plans 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the Sask Party announced this week that they are 

selling off land in Regina in order to potentially start affordable 

housing construction. The announcement was light on details, 

Mr. Speaker, about exactly how the government will ensure 

more affordable housing will actually get built. There was no 

price tag for the sale and no indication if the money would be 

used for the construction of affordable housing under Sask 

Housing or any other public housing body. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party says that they want affordable 

housing built on this land but there’s no information about what 

tools they will use to ensure these are affordable housing 

homes. To the minister: how many affordable housing units 

will be created by this week’s sale of provincial land in Regina? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

[10:30] 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m real delighted that the 

member opposite is recognizing that land availability is one of 

the issues we have with housing in the province. It may be one 

of the biggest challenges. And I know the member opposite 

doesn’t acknowledge that 80,000 more people in the province 

of Saskatchewan creates a housing challenge. That’s why we 

worked with the city of Regina to ensure that this piece of land, 

336 acres within the boundaries of Regina, will be available for 

land, for sale at this time. 

 

We haven’t put a price value on it because it’s an RFO [request 

for offers]. We’re getting a request for offers to determine how 

much money we’ll use. We’re going to sell this land to allow 

the city of Regina to move it forward for development, and we 

have said that the money will go for affordable housing in 

Regina. 

Mr. Speaker, we have a plan. And I think the plan that we’ve 

been talking about all morning is the growth plan for this 

province, and housing’s an important part of it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister said in 

her news release, and I quote: “By selling this land, we can 

work with the city of Regina to significantly impact housing 

availability while also generating funds for safe, quality 

affordable housing.” But the Sask Party hasn’t previously told 

the people the accounts are so empty they need to sell 

provincial assets to generate funds for their projects. And they 

haven’t told the public what these funds are going to when they 

say they’re going to build affordable housing. 

 

To the minister: is the Sask Party using this land sale to build 

social housing and if so, where are these social housing units 

going to be located? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I do 

acknowledge the question from the member opposite. And we 

do have 336 acres of land, and there will be houses built on it. 

The type of places that we will, the money will be used is on 

affordable houses across the province, across the city. It doesn’t 

mean they’ll all be right on that piece of land. But across the 

city of Regina, that money will be spent on affordable housing, 

just as we’ve been doing for the last five years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’m really pleased that we have an opportunity to build 2,000 

units so far. With our growth plan, we have another $344 

million going to be spent on housing, Mr. Speaker. We’re going 

to have 12,600 new, more units across the province, and there’ll 

be a whole lot of them in Regina. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s plan is to 

sell off the assets of this province rather than build affordable 

housing that our province so desperately needs. Their plan is 

selling the housing the province already has rather than 

improving and upgrading this housing. Perhaps they haven’t 

seen the cost increases in constructing new homes, Mr. 

Speaker. But it’s common sense that it’s cheaper to repair a 

house than tear it down and build a new one.  

 

The Sask Party has sat for five years — five years — as the 

stock of affordable housing for Saskatchewan people has 

dwindled, and now their only action is to sell their assets. To 

the minister: will the proceeds of the social housing sell-offs go 

directly to build new affordable homes? Yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — The proceeds from the sale of this land 

will go to build affordable housing, Mr. Speaker. We would 

rather have houses than a piece of land. We have 336 acres of 

land that’s got nothing on it. We want affordable housing right 

across this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have built 2,000 affordable units since we 



November 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1845 

became government five years ago. In the last year, those 

people across the floor have built 58 units of housing, Mr. 

Speaker. We have a goal to build 12,400 units in the next five 

years. Mr. Speaker, a piece of land is worth nothing if there 

isn’t a house on it. We need some homes. We don’t need land 

with nothing on it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

Saskatchewan Party government has completely ignored 

Saskatchewan’s people’s real concerns about climate change. 

This week the minister introduced a short bill about greenhouse 

gas that has no teeth. 

 

The minister restated the Sask Party target and said, “Under 

provincial regulation, greenhouse gas emissions in 

Saskatchewan will be reduced by 20 per cent by 2020 from 

2006 levels . . .” Now Environment Canada looked at the Sask 

Party’s plans, and in August they say that the Sask Party will 

miss its target completely because their reduction plans are so 

weak. Why has the Sask Party planning to miss its own 

greenhouse gas emission targets? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much for the 

question from the member opposite. Happy to talk about the 

environmental record of this government. Very recently, 

yesterday, we passed The Environmental Assessment Act, 

something that was long overdue in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

What we’re doing is looking at what’s happening across the 

country and indeed leading the way, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

leading the way in many respects, and other provinces are 

coming to us to ask how we’re going forward with 

results-based regulatory options and things like that, Mr. 

Speaker. We have a very proud record of ensuring that we have 

growth and environmental responsibility, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party are 

happy to talk about their environmental record, Mr. Speaker, 

but the people of Saskatchewan want action. 

 

From our position, Mr. Speaker, on every possible occasion 

they have cut programs that help the environment. They have 

slashed the Go Green program. They’ve cancelled the Climate 

Change Secretariat, and green energy is simply not on their 

agenda. What’s worse, Mr. Speaker, is that in the Sask Party’s 

own internal document, they can’t identify a single program 

they have introduced to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, their document highlights actions taken by 

the NDP [New Democratic Party]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why has the Sask Party failed so miserably to 

introduce a smart growth, green agenda for the province, and 

why are they completely incapable of showcasing a single 

program that they’ve implemented to reduce emissions, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to take that 

question seriously. We are leading the province, we are leading 

the country, we are leading in worldwide technology with 

carbon capture and sequestration, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we are doing? We are using a good relationship that we 

have with the federal government, with Minister Peter Kent. He 

came and made coal-fire regulations. He announced them here 

in Saskatoon in our province, Mr. Speaker. He congratulated us 

for leading the way, for being innovative, for offering 

suggestions that were adopted by the federal government, Mr. 

Speaker. We are operating in a very responsible way, ensuring 

that SaskPower gets credit for the leading-edge work that 

they’re doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite a couple of days ago asked 

me to introduce a program or commit to a program that was 

committed to two years ago by this government, Mr. Speaker. 

He better get his facts straight. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. That 

kind of rhetoric is exactly what The StarPhoenix says is 

poisonous language that doesn’t help our province develop good 

ideas for improving the environment, Mr. Speaker. Our province 

needs real action and real solutions to address climate change and 

to reduce our greenhouse gas emissions, which are the highest per 

capita in the country. 

 

The Sask Party ran on a platform in 2007 to reduce these 

emissions by 32 per cent. They’ve failed miserably to meet that 

target, so they reduced it to 20 per cent. Now, in Environment 

Canada’s view of the Sask Party’s plans, which includes carbon 

capture, show that they will completely miss their targets by half. 

 

Why does the Sask Party want more pollution and less solution for 

the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, we do indeed have a 

plan — provincial target of 20 per cent reduction by 2020 for the 

levels from the 2006 level. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re not afraid on this side of the House to 

establish targets, whether it’s education capital where we just 

heard about the $500 million that has been put forward, whether 

it’s health care when we heard about the 900 new nurses that 

are here in Saskatchewan now, or if it’s to do with climate 

change or environmental responsibility, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government takes it very serious that we ensure that we 

have a growth agenda as well as environmental stewardship. 

That’s what we’re doing. That’s what we’ll continue to do. 

That’s what the people of Saskatchewan have put us here to do, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 



1846 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2012 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the facts. The 

Saskatchewan Party slashed the province’s targets for 

greenhouse gas emissions by 33 per cent when they took office 

— 33 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Their own internal studies show 

that their plan solely relies on carbon capture technology, and 

even then they won’t meet those targets. And that is verified by 

the same federal government who set the 20 per cent targets 

that the Sask Party says it’s following, Mr. Speaker. In fact, the 

emissions are still increasing under the Sask Party government, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Once again, when it comes to the protection of our 

environment, Mr. Speaker, why is the Sask Party so full of hot 

air and short on action? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — You want to hear something that’s 

full of hot air. Let’s talk about the members opposite and their 

record in government, Mr. Speaker. Greenhouse gas emissions 

under the NDP government rose by 70 per cent under their 

watch, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what’s this government doing? We’re putting 

forward a new environmental code. It’s got great flexibility. It’s 

results-based regulation, and it’s a model that’s serving for 

Manitoba and for Nova Scotia and other provinces in the 

country, Mr. Speaker. Once again, we’re leading the way. 

 

What are we doing with water, Mr. Speaker? We have a 

25-year water plan to ensure that we treasure that resource, but 

we have a growth plan that will ensure that we have growth and 

environmental sustainability, Mr. Speaker. We continue to take 

a leading position in this, Mr. Speaker. And as I talk to my 

colleagues in the country, they’re somewhat surprised that 

Saskatchewan is taking a leadership position because for 16 

years we had records like this 70 per cent increase in 

greenhouse gas. Shame, Mr. Speaker, shame on the members 

opposite. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Saskatchewan Plan for Growth 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for the 

opportunity to initiate this 75-minute debate. The focus, which I 

will offer formally through a motion at the end of my remarks, 

will focus on our government’s plan for growth and, most 

importantly, the purpose of this growth to help enhance the 

quality of life for people right across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I thought what I’d do is begin with some initial 

remarks from a document that we’ve recently announced and 

released, and that is The Saskatchewan Plan for Growth: Vision 

2020 and Beyond. 

 

Mr. Speaker, within this document there are some important 

guideposts. These guideposts help to ensure that the people of 

this province understand the direction that we plan not simply 

to sustain but also to gain momentum towards. I quote: 

 

The Saskatchewan Plan for Growth sets out the 

Government of Saskatchewan’s vision for a province of 

1.2 million people by 2020. 

 

The Plan identifies principles, goals and actions to ensure 

Saskatchewan is capturing the opportunities and meeting 

the challenges of a growing province. 

 

The Purpose and Principles of Growth 

[Mr. Speaker, we know that] Too often, 

enterprise-oriented governments appear to see growth for 

the sake of growth. This . . . [can be] a mistake — one 

that can cause governments to lose focus and discipline. 

 

What is clear in this document? That is the question: what is the 

purpose of our prosperity? The purpose of growth is to secure a 

better quality of life for people right across our province. 

 

The six core growth activities the Government of 

Saskatchewan can undertake to foster economic growth 

and address the challenges of growth have been and 

always will be: 

 

[First] Investing in the infrastructure required for growth. 

Educating, training and developing a skilled workforce. 

Ensuring the ongoing competitiveness of Saskatchewan’s 

economy. 

Supporting increased trade, investment and exports 

through international engagement. 

Advancing Saskatchewan’s natural resource strengths, 

particularly through innovation, to build the next 

economy [which I’ll return to in a few minutes, Mr. 

Speaker; and] 

Ensuring the fiscal responsibility [continues] through 

balanced budgets, lower debt and smaller, more effective 

government. 

 

Just as importantly, the Government of Saskatchewan 

will not directly intervene in the economy or undertake 

direct investment in businesses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this document then goes on to highlight some key 

specific goals. 

 

Key Goals and Actions 

Some of the key targets and actions in the Saskatchewan 

Plan for Growth include: [And I’m going to spend a little 

bit of time on the first bullet.] 

 

1.2 million people living in Saskatchewan by 2020.  

 

Mr. Speaker, this is vitally important for us to set out this clear 

indicator of what success is going to look like in the years to 

come. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll turn as a reference point to Tony Blair, to his 

recent memoirs on page 16. And I want to start with this former 

British prime minister’s memoirs because I’d assume that the 



November 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1847 

members opposite as well as others across the province would 

see that his framework provides an empirical reference point, 

not an ideological one, to facilitate the debate and deliberation 

that we’re going to have today. Because, Mr. Speaker, we know 

that we’re dealing with someone on the other side, Mr. Speaker, 

that is the person who is the interim leader of the NDP who has 

recently indicated that he thinks the growth that’s under way is 

mythical. In fact, the term “myth” he used in a quote in The 

Globe and Mail on October 16, 2012. Mr. Speaker, this is 

vitally important for us to ensure that we address this head-on. 

 

So what do we have? Mr. Speaker, from July 2007 to July 

2012, Saskatchewan’s population has increased by almost 

80,000 people, Mr. Speaker, 80,000 people. In the last year 

alone, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan grew by more than 22,000 

people, the most growth in any given year since 1921. Mr. 

Speaker, we have people that are arriving in this province from 

more than 130 different countries and settling in more than 300 

communities. In fact every Saskatchewan city and nearly 80 per 

cent of Saskatchewan towns saw their population increase 

during the most recent census period. 

 

This stands in stark contrast . . . And we can do a little bit of 

compare and contrast here. In the previous census period which 

the NDP oversaw, over half of Saskatchewan cities and more 

than 85 per cent of our towns decreased in population. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, we see that there is a close connection between 

some of their regional economic development activities or plans 

and the out-migration of people. 

 

They put forward about a dozen plans for growth. For example, 

the NDP presented one in 2000. Subsequently the population 

dropped by more than 7,600 people. They weren’t satisfied, Mr. 

Speaker, so they came back in 2001 with another plan, and the 

population dropped another 2,800. Mr. Speaker, in 2002, try 

again and Saskatchewan’s population went down by 2,400. And 

they announced yet another booklet in 2005, and the population 

went down by more than 3,700 people. Mr. Speaker, these 

aren’t abstract numbers. 

 

At the time I was working at the University of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. And what was heartbreaking is that a lot of the 

graduates, when you would ask them what is it that they were 

looking to do with their education and with their dreams and 

aspirations, many, Mr. Speaker, would simply say, the car’s 

already packed. And they were on their way. Mr. Speaker. 

These are important reference points for us to think about. 

 

When we think about the correction that’s occurred since 2007, 

more than 80,000 people now call Saskatchewan home — an 

increase of more than 80,000 people, Mr. Speaker. These are 

important benchmarks for us to recognize, not ideologically, 

Mr. Speaker, but empirically. And we go back to the quote 

from the British prime minister, and that is, “There is always 

one, more prosaic, test of a nation’s [or in this case a 

jurisdiction’s] position: Are more people trying to get into it, or 

[trying] to get out of it?” Mr. Speaker, that’s a simple test that 

the British, the former British prime minister has put forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the significance of this is that we see more people 

are coming to Saskatchewan from across the country and 

around the world. The importance of this, Mr. Speaker, is it 

provides us with an important benchmark. We know that there 

are challenges associated with growth but these challenges are 

welcome. These challenges offer us the opportunity, all of us, to 

look to the future and see growing communities, growing 

schools, and growing neighbourhoods. 

 

Over the weekend I had an opportunity to speak with a 

developer in Saskatoon. I ran into him informally, and I asked 

how business was. He said, business is just great, Rob, but you 

know what’s really important? He said, and I quote, “My kids 

have moved back and they brought our grandkids.” That, Mr. 

Speaker, is one of the key indicators of the significance of 

growth that’s under way. And so when we look at that 

benchmark, are more people trying to get in or get out of 

Saskatchewan, we understand, Mr. Speaker, that the answer is 

clear. More people are coming to Saskatchewan, the new 

Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan focused on growth. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know the member opposite, one of the 

aspirants from Regina, is offering some annoying alliteration, 

and that’s okay. We’ve heard from him in question period 

today. But what we want to do is make sure that, Mr. Speaker 

— and I’ve tried to do this very purposefully — we’re actually 

speaking about empirical progress that can be measured on each 

side of the House. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of our key areas that we’ve been able to 

put forward — and that is six core growth activities — is 

advancing Saskatchewan’s natural resource strengths, 

particularly through innovation, to build the next economy. 

This stands in very stark contrast to a notion that we still have 

not had clarification over from the leader of the federal NDP, 

that is the federal Leader of the Official Opposition. He has put 

some specific focus on notions that Canadians are paying a 

price for the prosperity enjoyed by natural resources sectors in 

Western Canada. 

 

And members opposite, especially those seeking leadership 

positions, have yet to clarify what their position is. Do they 

endorse that view, that is from the federal NDP, that natural 

resources are hampering Canada’s growth? Or do they see that 

actually they’re fuelling Canada’s growth, especially growth 

under way in this province? 

 

What we’re working to do, Mr. Speaker, and this is again 

identified in the vision 2020, is to see that we not only 

maximize opportunities for natural resource production and 

prosperity today, but we actually move forward on these in 

sustainable patterns. What’s important is written down here, 

some context of how we see natural resources and innovation 

coming together. And I quote on page 25: 

 

In a roundtable hosted by the Canada West Foundation on 

the subject of western Canadian diversification, it was 

noted that the general consensus about what 

diversification meant in the early 1980s and its purpose, 

“namely, the creation of provincial economies resembling 

that of Ontario,” has changed in recent years. As 

participants commented: “Western Canada’s reliance on 

resource based production has gone from a perceived 

weakness to an acknowledged strength.” 

 

The report contains two observations on diversification. 

First, while some viewed growth as a more important 



1848 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2012 

objective than diversification: “There was widespread 

consensus that the focus in either case must be on 

expanding and developing industries that are grounded in 

the region’s resource base, or on cultivating new streams 

of products and services that have their origins in 

resource-based economic activity.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we go on within this document to speak about 

making sure that we are connecting our innovation agenda to 

our natural resource strengths. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday the member from Saskatoon Nutana 

asked some questions, some very curious questions, that it was 

news to her that we were moving forward as a province on key 

areas of innovation, especially as it related to value-added 

uranium. Mr. Speaker, what’s curious is that she may have 

missed some of the early indicators that we were making some 

progress and taking actual real steps. 

 

For example she may have overlooked page 20 of the 

SaskPower annual report on long-term — that is 2025 and 

beyond — supply requirements. Mr. Speaker, here, maybe it’s a 

subtle bullet: 

 

Evaluating numerous supply options, including: biomass, 

carbon capture and storage, cogeneration, compliant coal, 

hydro, imports, natural gas, nuclear, small nuclear, solar, 

heat recovery, polygeneration, wind and the repowering 

of existing units. 

 

Perhaps overlooked that. Perhaps overlooked a news release 

from the Canadian Light Source synchrotron on January 24th, 

2011, Mr. Speaker, where Mark deJong, the CLS [Canadian 

Light Source] director of accelerators and the project’s 

principal investigator for a team that’s looking to produce 

medical isotopes says, “We are grateful to the Government of 

Canada and the province of Saskatchewan for their leadership 

and support on our project.” 

 

Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, overlooking the $17 million 

announcement on March 4th, 2011, on the PET [positron 

emission tomography] CT [computerized tomography] scan 

made by the then minister of Health regarding the significance 

of nuclear investment. 

 

The list goes on. The participation at the Canadian Nuclear 

Society annual conference, which was offering an invitation, an 

invitation, Mr. Speaker, not only to participate there, but the 

next conference was held in Saskatoon. 

 

August 25th, 2011: “Saskatchewan and Hitachi sign nuclear R 

& D agreements.” Mr. Speaker, in fact her former leader was 

asked — and perhaps she was even present at the University of 

Saskatchewan — that is, in a copy of The Sheaf on September 

16th, 2011, the former leader was asked specifically about his 

position on the nuclear agenda. And of course the Canadian 

Centre for Nuclear Innovation was recently renamed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to at this time move a motion: 

 

That this Assembly commend the government for 

delivering the Saskatchewan plan for growth which sets 

out a road map for population growth and an improved 

quality of life in this province. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It has moved by the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone: 

 

That this Assembly commend the government for 

delivering the Saskatchewan plan for growth which sets 

out a road map for population growth and improved 

quality of life in this province. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to weigh in in debate here today and in discussion in 

75-minute debate. The motion that’s been put forward speaks to 

the growth that’s going on in the province. Now it then goes to 

great lengths and the speaker opposite went to great lengths to 

sort of back-pat themselves on the back to sort of suggest 

somehow that they’re the agents of creating that growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to remind the members opposite that it’s 

by way of our blessed circumstance of resources, by way of the 

ingenuity and hard work of Saskatchewan entrepreneurs, the 

hard work and rolled-up-the-sleeves attitude of our workers 

across this province that have generated the kind of growth that 

we see in the province, not the members opposite. And I’d urge 

them not to take credit for something that’s not theirs, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But if we’re going to get down to the actual growth itself, I 

think that growth is something and development is something 

that’s important to Saskatchewan people. And when we look at 

population growth, for one . . . This is something for which we 

all share some rightful pride in, but as we see that population 

grow, for one, Mr. Speaker, we then need to make sure we’re 

properly supporting our people, our communities all across 

Saskatchewan to make sure that that growth itself is equating 

what has to be our end goal, and that’s to make gains in the 

quality of life of Saskatchewan people. 

 

And quite simply, that’s where the very narrow-minded focus 

of this government misses the mark. This is very much a 

government that takes growth for the sake of growth alone 

approach, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a wrong-headed approach, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s one that denies the interdisciplinary approach we 

must take in making sure that growth itself must equal progress 

and improvements in well-being. 

 

And you know, I’m being heckled across in a silly way by the 

Minister of Culture, Mr. Speaker, which I find interesting. 

Because in a growing Saskatchewan, in the growing 

Saskatchewan that I believe in, Mr. Speaker, we should also 

have a thriving film industry, Mr. Speaker, a thriving film 

industry with entrepreneurs making investments here in 

Saskatchewan, building their lives here in Saskatchewan and 

not being shown the door as they are by that minister, by that 

Premier, and that government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:00] 

 



November 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1849 

So I would urge the member who shouts from his seat, the 

minister, Mr. Speaker, to sit. Either engage in a meaningful 

debate and do some important work for the film industry and 

those workers in this province, or certainly, Mr. Speaker, I’d 

urge him to remain quiet here in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What I see before us is a special opportunity here in this 

province by way of our resources, by way of our people, by 

way of our population, by way of the entrepreneurs. And we 

have a precious opportunity to fully capture a generational 

opportunity for the people of this province. And it’s something 

that’s slipping through the fingers of this government with their 

wrong-headed approach. We need to make sure that growth is 

equating into better lives for Saskatchewan people. And we 

need to do so by making sure that we’re . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I would remind the member not to question 

the decisions of the Speaker. I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — And just to record, it was the member 

opposite that was making that question. 

 

So what we need to do at this time, to make sure we fully 

capture this opportunity, is not take the narrow-minded 

approach and back-patting that we see of government opposite 

touting their statistics on this front. What we need to do is make 

sure we’re putting forward policies that are actually bettering 

people’s lives, making the investments, as we said, back into 

where it counts — into housing, into health, into education — 

because quite simply when we’re growing as a province, these 

are areas that there’s strain placed upon and where we need to 

be able to step up to the plate and support. 

 

We spoke specifically about education here today and the 

failure to support education properly in this province. The 

policies of this government have been highlighted by The 

StarPhoenix editorial, and I quote the title, “Schools policy 

badly outdated.” That’s the title. And then the editorial goes on 

to highlight in all the different ways how this government is so 

out of step with what’s going on with Saskatchewan people, 

communities, and in fact, missing the opportunity that our 

economy is providing us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It talks about the fact that the actual funding formula, if you can 

imagine, Mr. Speaker, at a time where we’re promoting 

immigration and supporting the many new people to build and 

better their lives here in Saskatchewan — which is a wonderful 

thing — but the funding formula does not support that, and in 

fact it lags population growth and leaves funding shortfalls for 

so many school divisions and classrooms across this province. 

And of course the impacts are felt directly by students, by 

teachers, by families, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It also goes on to talk about how misguided this government’s 

approach is, where it’s certainly welcoming many new people 

to this province, as it should be, but then it’s failing to provide 

the supports in the classroom by way of English as an 

additional language supports to make sure that we’re providing 

that enriched education for those newcomers and new 

Canadians that are building their lives here, but also for all, Mr. 

Speaker. And it’s jeopardizing the education for all of those 

students. 

And then we get to the important issues of school capital, and 

this government’s failure to . . . As I say, they like to spend 

time touting the population growth that’s going on but then are 

really dismissive or absent in putting it forward, any sort of 

real, concrete plan that steps up to the plate to meet the needs of 

communities to provide the schools that are required for those 

students. And we can look all across this province, whether 

we’re in the Southeast, whether we’re in Regina, whether up 

through Saskatoon, whether it’s in Warman, whether it’s in 

Martensville. The pressures are there, and we have to do a 

better job. 

 

I’ll quote the article, The StarPhoenix editorial: 

 

A government that’s eager to take credit each time 

Statistics Canada reports an increase to Saskatchewan’s 

population has to address the reality that with such rapid 

growth comes a responsibility to provide in a timely 

manner the services required by newcomers, particularly 

young families. 

 

It moves on: 

 

At a time when Premier Brad Wall’s government is 

lobbying Ottawa to increase Saskatchewan’s immigrant 

nominee program by 2,000 to meet the province’s labour 

market needs, what’s frustrating to families who’ve 

already flocked here from around the globe is the 

seeming unpreparedness of the province to provide the 

support services they need to get established. 

 

And it goes on further: 

 

There needs to be a great deal more leadership from the 

government for actual policies to cope with growth 

[rather] than merely setting lofty goals or bragging about 

the latest statistics. 

 

This motion put forward before us, Mr. Speaker, is nothing 

more than bragging about statistics and patting themselves on 

the back for work that’s been achieved by Saskatchewan people 

and entrepreneurs. And what we expect from this government is 

something better. 

 

We have a special opportunity in this province to work across 

communities in a co-operative, community-minded, common 

sense approach, Mr. Speaker, and truly make sure we’re 

advancing the well-being and quality of life of Saskatchewan 

people. Quite simply, Saskatchewan people deserve nothing 

less. If we’re looking at the inadequate investments and support 

for housing, if we could look at the pressures in health care that 

are going unsupported by this government, if we look at the 

strain that’s in the classroom, these are just some examples. 

 

We also see the deliberate actions of selling off some of the 

control and assets and certainty that we have of our future by 

way of some of our assets in ISC [Information Services 

Corporation of Saskatchewan] or some of our land, letting 

assets such as our pastures, Mr. Speaker, our community 

pastures and our tree nursery be sold, privatized, Mr. Speaker, 

without any leadership from government. These are important 

institutions that play a role in Saskatchewan, not just in 

Saskatchewan’s history but well into Saskatchewan’s future. 



1850 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2012 

We see, as I say, a film industry that’s been killed by this 

government, that has a direct impact in driving out 

entrepreneurs and workers. It has a direct impact on the cultural 

well-being of who we are as a province, Mr. Speaker. That also 

has a direct connect back to us economically. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can be more than we are right now. Our goal 

should be to capture the generational opportunity provided to us 

by our resource prosperity, and this government’s failing to do 

that with its single-minded growth for the sake of growth 

approach. 

 

We saw a notion, finally, of maybe supporting a Heritage Fund 

— something we’ve been calling for — making sure our 

resource revenues leave a lasting legacy for future generations. 

Well we see their plan, and it won’t start until after 2060, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s more of a joke than anything to the government 

opposite than leaving a lasting legacy for future generations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a better way forward, and Saskatchewan 

people deserve better. We need to work with all across this 

province. Saskatchewan people deserve a government that will 

work together to ensure and build a better, fair, more 

prosperous Saskatchewan for all, and clearly that’s not the goal 

of this government. We see a government that continues to 

pursue, as I say, a very single-minded approach to its goals, 

both for the sake of growth alone, and spends relentless energy 

on patting itself on the back, Mr. Speaker, instead of working 

with Saskatchewan people who know best, Mr. Speaker, and 

serving their best interests. 

 

When I look at this motion, which is all about back-patting 

itself, Mr. Speaker, about not recognizing the realities and 

pressures and putting forward a real plan, Mr. Speaker, 

certainly I won’t be supporting the motion put forward by 

government here today and certainly will be continuing to work 

and to speak, to be calling for a better way forward, one that 

makes sure that as we advance development, as we grow, we’re 

bettering the lives of Saskatchewan people in every community 

all across Saskatchewan. Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

That’s the member for Cut Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member from The 

Battlefords is much shorter and no hair. So we’ll carry on. 

 

I’m proud to stand today and give facts on the Saskatchewan 

plan for growth. Mr. Speaker, on October 16th, our government 

released The Saskatchewan Plan for Growth — Vision 2020 

and Beyond. The Saskatchewan Plan for Growth outlines a plan 

for responsible and sustainable growth that will continue to 

move our province forward and ensure and improve quality of 

life for Saskatchewan residents. Our plan for growth outlines 

some ambitious goals and targets that our government has to 

ensure that Saskatchewan continues to be one of Canada’s best 

performing provinces economically. Our government has set a 

target of 1.2 million people living in the province by 2020. 

 

There are six core activities in the Saskatchewan plan for 

growth that our government will undertake to foster continued 

growth in Saskatchewan. They are: invest in infrastructure, 

developing a skilled workforce, ensuring competitiveness, 

increase export trade, advance the province’s natural resource 

strengths through innovation, and maintaining sound physical 

management. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in order to ensure that Saskatchewan’s growth is 

sustainable and responsible, significant investments in 

infrastructure are needed. Saskatchewan is experiencing three 

infrastructure challenges that must be addressed. The first 

challenge involves addressing the infrastructure deficit from the 

past. The second challenge is to address the infrastructure that 

is needed for our growing population and economy, and the 

third infrastructure challenge is to prepare for future growth in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is why our government has committed to 

investing $2.5 billion over the next three provincial budgets for 

improved highways, overpasses, and bridges as well as water 

treatment facilities and water supply systems. Our government 

will also invest in the social infrastructure that is needed to 

support our growing population, such as schools and hospitals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when our government meets its goal of 1.2 million 

people living in Saskatchewan by 2020, we will need 60,000 

more people working in Saskatchewan. This will require 

aggressive development of Saskatchewan’s skilled workforce. 

Mr. Speaker, the levels of First Nations unemployment in 

Saskatchewan is an issue that needs immediate attention. It has 

been proven that the first step in increasing employment of First 

Nations and Métis people in Saskatchewan is improving their 

education outcomes. In the Saskatchewan plan for growth, our 

government has set a target of reducing the difference in 

graduation rates between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal 

students by 50 per cent by 2020, and we will continue to build 

on the report and recommendations of the joint task force on 

Aboriginal education and employment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, educational attainment is paramount in the 

growing economy. If Saskatchewan is to continue to be one of 

the nation’s leaders, our province will also need to lead the 

country in education. In the Saskatchewan plan for growth, our 

government has set a goal of leading the country in high school 

graduation rates by 2020. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if Saskatchewan is to continue leading the nation 

economically, we will have to ensure that our province’s 

business climate is competitive since Saskatchewan continues 

to rate as one of the most competitive places to do business in 

Canada. KPMG’s 2012 edition of the Competitive Alternatives, 

a guide to international business locations, ranked the cost of 

doing business in 133 cities in 14 countries. Four Saskatchewan 

cities were included in the survey, with Moose Jaw, Regina, 

and Prince Albert placing in the top third and Saskatoon placing 

in the top half of competitive locations. 

 

Our government will continue to ensure that Saskatchewan’s 

business environment is competitive with other provinces. 

Saskatchewan’s incorporated business tax at 12 per cent is two 

points higher than the rate in Alberta and British Columbia. We 

will reduce this rate to 10 per cent by 2015. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is on pace to surpass British 

Columbia as Canada’s fourth largest exporting province. In 

order to ensure that Saskatchewan’s economy continues to 



November 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1851 

grow, we will need to increase the province’s export capacity. 

In the plan for growth, our government has set a target of 

doubling the value of Saskatchewan exports by 2020. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thanks to hard work of our farm and ranch 

families, Saskatchewan is now Canada’s top agri-food 

exporting province with more than $10 billion worth of exports 

in 2011, up 60 per cent since 2007. Our government will 

continue to build on the great work of our agricultural sector, 

and in our plan for growth we have set a target of increasing 

Saskatchewan’s agricultural exports from $10 billion to $15 

billion by 2020 and increasing our province’s crop production 

by 10 million tonnes by 2020. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our province’s natural resources are one of our 

greatest assets. Saskatchewan is a safe and stable supplier of 

food, potash, and energy to emerging economies around the 

globe. Our government will continue to engage these countries 

through partnerships and international trade missions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our province cannot rely solely on the value of 

natural resources to grow Saskatchewan’s economy. We must 

be able to mitigate the repressions of fluctuating commodity 

prices. Mitigating the effects of commodity swings is not a 

matter of diversifying away from resource-based industries, 

rather it is the development of emerging industries that support 

our agricultural and natural resource sectors through expanded 

value-chain development and value-added processes. This will 

continue to be the increased diversification of Saskatchewan’s 

economy and continued future growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan plan for growth is a statement 

that outlines targets and goals our government has set forth for 

our province, goals that would help our province continue to 

lead the nation economically. Mr. Speaker, our government is 

not afraid to set goals or put numbers on targets, unlike the 

members opposite who stated while in government, even if we 

put a number on it, there’s no guarantee that we’d be able to 

meet the number in any case. That was said by the former 

Health minister, Len Taylor, 2006. Sad, sad, statement. Sad. 

 

[11:15] 

 

The members on this side of the House set targets. We outline 

our goals. And, Mr. Speaker, we keep our promises. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan plan for growth has received 

praise from across the province. The StarPhoenix editorial board 

stated, “The document he [the Premier] presented is stuffed with 

pragmatic, if not visionary, ideas.” 

 

Esteemed columnist Murray Mandryk wrote: 

 

. . . it’s actually the document’s pragmatism that’s most 

inspirational . . . He did not deliver inspiration through 

pie-in-the-sky pronouncements, but there may be inspiration 

in gathering a whole bunch of [good] ideas that have been 

ignored for years and putting [them] together . . . [to plan 

them]. 

 

That was an article in October 17, 2012. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no myth and there is no disease in this 

growth plan. It is reality. Mr. Speaker, our government is going 

to move forward with the Saskatchewan plan for growth with 

thoughtful, visionary, and pragmatic planning. Our government 

will continue to move Saskatchewan forward. I support the 

motion made by the member from Saskatoon Greystone. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

enter the debate on the government’s self-congratulatory 

motion that reads as follows: 

 

That this Assembly commend the government for 

delivering the Saskatchewan Plan for Growth, which sets 

out a road map for population growth and an improved 

quality of life in this province. 

 

Unfortunately there are some serious potholes on the Sask Party 

road to growth that I cannot speak in favour of this motion. 

 

Let’s talk about population growth, Mr. Speaker. This is a 

government who continues to boast about population growth 

which, contrary to popular belief on that side of the House, did 

not start to increase on November 7th, 2007. No, there actually 

weren’t hordes of people waiting at the border for a Sask Party 

victory, Mr. Speaker. For the record, for all those on the 

government benches who have not taken the time to actually 

look at the numbers and instead are content to listen to the 

rhetoric and spin, we began to see net population increases in 

October of 2006, a year before the Sask Party came to power. 

And we crossed the magic million mark on July 1st, 2007, 

again before this party was elected. The strong foundation for 

population growth had been laid out and was starting to reap 

benefits before the Sask Party sat on that side of the House. I 

am willing to concede that yes, the population has continued to 

increase under this government. 

 

That is a fact, but yesterday in this House I had 90 seconds to 

deliver a very sad member’s statement that only mentioned a 

small sampling of the folks in the film and television industry 

who have had to leave this province in the last six to eight 

months to earn a living. Why? Because this government, 

without consultation, cut the film employment tax credit, a key 

program for an entire industry. This decision to cut the tax 

credit has sent talented people and their families packing. 

Instead of attracting investment opportunity and new people in 

the film industry to Saskatchewan, this government is chasing 

all this away with short-sighted decision to kill this important 

program. 

 

I honestly don’t know what’s worse, thinking the government 

did not understand the industry and how the tax credit actually 

worked to leverage new dollars, new dollars into our province, 

Mr. Speaker, or that the government knew what the 

ramifications of the cut would be to the industry and did it 

anyway. Neither of these scenarios are very pleasant and don’t 

fit with the government whose mantra is all about attracting and 

retaining young people. 

 

What worries me though, Mr. Speaker, is I had a chance this 

morning to listen to the Premier’s scrum yesterday, months 



1852 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2012 

after the tax credit was cut. After all the public outrage, you’d 

think that this Premier would be well briefed on the ins and outs 

of the tax credit. But you know what he said yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker? He said, “It’s a cheque you get whether you spend the 

money or not.” This could not be more false. I’m worried that a 

Premier and a government are embarking upon creative 

consultations and still have no idea what they’re talking about. 

 

The Sask Party booklet, which it chose to first release at a 

$100-a-plate luncheon rather then directly to the people of 

Saskatchewan through the legislature, had this to say: “My 

government is committed to ensuring this growth continues 

because growth has been good for our province. It means a 

strong economy and more opportunities for our young people.” 

Well some of the people in the film industry who have managed 

to hang on in the hopes that the government will recognize its 

error and do something to correct it happened to be here for that 

Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. They found it hard not to laugh 

out loud at this line, more opportunities for young people — not 

in their industry. 

 

We have a wonderful media production and studies program at 

the University of Regina. The U of R is the only university 

between Vancouver and Toronto to offer a B.F.A. [Bachelor of 

Fine Arts] in film and video production and a B.A. [Bachelor of 

Arts] and a B.A. Honours in film study, as well as a M.F.A. 

[Master of Fine Arts] and M.A. [Master of Arts] degree 

programs. It is awful that instead of keeping these graduates 

here, they will have to leave Saskatchewan to earn a living in 

their chosen profession. How has this government created 

opportunities for these young people? Not at all. The recent 

chamber of commerce-SaskFilm study on the net cost of the tax 

credit discusses return on investment. One of the benefits of the 

tax credit, according to the study, was youth engagement and 

retention. Derek Murray Consulting and Associates had this to 

say: 

 

On average, employees in the media sector are younger 

than other sectors such as mining and agriculture. As 

well, having a film industry boosts the attraction to youth 

outside of the film industry as it adds to the cosmopolitan 

image of the city directly through film industry activity as 

well as indirectly through support to the broader cultural 

sector. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately the words in this booklet do not 

match the recent actions of this government. This is not a 

government working to create opportunities for young people 

who want to work in the creative industries. I know the minister 

has spoken about the supposed injustice of film and television 

receiving a benefit that none of the other creative industries do. 

But I can tell you, I’ve heard from people across these 

industries who feel that the film tax credit worked for them. I 

spoke to a musician two weeks ago who told me obviously she 

didn’t derive benefit directly from the film tax credit but she 

certainly benefited from a thriving film industry. 

 

I have a letter signed by a ceramic artist who has this to say: 

“We in the other creative industries are not asking for a subsidy 

which would be comparable to the film tax credit. We support 

the film tax credits.” 

 

She goes on to write: 

Because film is the most interdisciplinary of the arts, 

many artists are needed to make a film — filmmakers, 

actors, writers, musicians, artists, graphic designers, 

costume makers, makeup artists, and more. Many artists 

work in the film industry to subsidize their own art 

practice, thus reducing the need for grants, but the added 

benefit is that we create a distinctive Saskatchewan film. 

 

The chamber of commerce study agrees with the musician and 

the ceramic artist I mentioned. Again, speaking of return on 

investment, the study has this to say: 

 

Film and video is a significant economic force within the 

cultural economy. The employment created in the 

cross-pollination of creative content within sectors makes 

the film and video sector critical to the cultural economy. 

As well, film and video demands a significant amount of 

goods and services from other cultural sectors injecting 

capital into sectors such as sound recording. Without the 

film and video sector government grants to the remaining 

cultural sectors would have to be higher in order to 

maintain the same level of cultural activity. 

 

The reality is, Mr. Speaker, a film industry is good for our 

economy and a good way to create opportunities for our young 

people. I am hopeful that with a new minister who says he is 

committed to a plan that works for the creative industries that 

this government will come to its senses sooner than later and fix 

the mess that it has created in the film industry for all our sakes, 

but especially for our young people. 

 

I also want to talk about this motion arguing that this 

government has a road map to an improved quality of life in the 

province. The ability to put food on your table and a roof over 

your head are so obviously important, Mr. Speaker. But we 

believe on this side of the House that arts and culture enhance 

our quality of life too. But don’t take my word for it. There is 

research that illustrates that employment is not all that we want 

out of life, and it is certainly not all that attracts people to a 

town, a city, or a province. 

 

Richard Florida, in his book Cities and the Creative Class, 

points out that economic and lifestyle considerations both 

matter, and so do the mix of the two factors. Florida argues the 

highly skilled and educated people we want to attract to a 

province focused on innovation are looking for communities 

with “abundant high-quality experiences, an openness to 

diversity of all kinds and above all else, the opportunity to 

validate their identities as creative people.” 

 

The CEO [chief executive officer] of the chamber of commerce 

puts the quality of life argument best, especially when quality 

of life and the opportunity serve to attract and retain educated 

and skilled people who help build our economy here, when he 

said: 

 

I’m arguing that for us to be successful in the corporate 

world, we need to have a strong creative economy. We 

need to have people who are artists and musicians. We 

need to have actors here. We need to have a vibrancy in 

our communities. Otherwise, the accountants, the 

lawyers, and the engineers don’t want to move here. They 

don’t want to stay here. It makes for a better 



November 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1853 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I would contend this decision to cut the film employment tax 

credit has ripple effects throughout the creative industries and 

will lessen our opportunities for an improved quality of life. 

 

But aside from the film tax credit, this government’s no-plan 

plan for growth also happens to mention funding for the arts in 

general — again, something that impacts our quality of life. I 

need to point out the blatantly misleading information in this 

plan when it comes to culture. I would like to quote one 

particular line where the truth has been stretched far beyond 

recognition: 

 

My government will continue to support arts and culture. 

From 2007 to 2011, funding for arts and culture increased 

35 per cent, compared to the previous four years. 

 

This would leave the reader with the impression that this 

government has increased arts and culture funding 

tremendously. This is not the case. Between ’04-05 budget and 

’07-08 budget, all NDP budgets, the government increased 

funding to the Arts Board by 26.1 per cent. But over the Sask 

Party’s first four budgets, the increase to the Arts Board was 5.6 

per cent. 

 

The reality is though, the Saskatchewan Arts Board is not the 

only place where the ministry spends money on arts and 

culture. Actual spending taken from public accounts in ’04-05 

budget, the provincial NDP government spent on arts and 

culture $18.76 million, which happens to be more than the 

$16.183 million that the Sask Party spent in this last budget. So 

there is this government’s record on arts and culture, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There are many things I could have discussed today, Mr. 

Speaker, but I’ve chosen to focus on arts and culture because 

this government hasn’t. I will not be supporting the motion. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I 

start this talk on the growth plan for Saskatchewan, I want to 

quote a line from the Speech from the Throne that says, “The 

challenges of growth are preferable to the challenges of decline 

. . . faced just a few short years ago.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing more true than that. The 

challenges of growth are much more preferred than the 

challenges of decline that we saw through the 16 years of NDP 

government. And I challenge the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale who was just talking, talking about going into the 

’07 election. And I think the real question is, we went into the 

election and we could see the growth was starting, but the 

question to the people of Saskatchewan was, who was best able 

to manage the growth? And I think the people of Saskatchewan 

said it very plainly that it was the Premier, the current Premier 

now, and the Saskatchewan Party government who would be 

best in a position to manage the growth, as we’ve seen. 

 

And she also talked about the film tax credit and how people 

were leaving the province. Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that there 

was a lot more people left the province than what we see from 

the film tax industry over the 16 years of NDP government. 

Myself, I come from a family of eight. Half of my siblings 

found it necessary to leave the province. And that’s not 

uncommon in the time that the NDP were in power, that the 

population decline in this province was worse than anywhere in 

North America. That was their record, and yet they’re trying to 

justify it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we talk about growth, growth is good. We 

like growth. Growth gives a better standard of living to all of 

the people in the province of Saskatchewan. It assists the less 

fortunate and those with disabilities. Growth is good for 

workers and employers and labourers. Growth is good because 

we have lower taxes and higher wages. It’s good for businesses, 

both the small businesses and larger businesses. Mr. Speaker, 

growth is good and we’re pleasantly pleased to have that kind 

of growth in this great province. 

 

Yes, Saskatchewan has experienced significant growth over the 

last five years. Well, where does it start? Well first of all, Mr. 

Speaker, it starts with an understanding of the value of this 

province that was never seen by the opposition when they were 

in power, the value of this province, when you think of the 

natural resources: the coal, the oil and the gas, uranium. 

 

[11:30] 

 

When you think of the agricultural aspects of this province, 

we’ve got almost half of the agricultural land in Canada is in 

our province, and it’s some of the best agricultural land in the 

world, Mr. Speaker. That, coupled with the vast amount of 

potash we have, gives us two aces in our hand just because we 

are blessed with those kind of amenities in Saskatchewan. 

 

When you think of a world population that’s ever-expanding 

and the need for eating, Mr. Speaker, our agricultural aspect in 

this province is so great that we can expand the agriculture 

sector and market it for the good of the benefit of the people 

throughout the world as well as building growth in our 

province. That, with potash which is the fertilizer aspect that 

can be marketed throughout the world to grow the grains for 

other markets, again gives us an opportunity in this world. 

 

We have to understand that those amenities belong to us, 

understand all the amenities of our great province. With that 

understanding, we can form a vision, a vision of what we could 

be and what we could achieve in this province. The vision was 

never there before. This is the vision that we have for this 

province now and a belief, a belief that growth is good — 

growth is positive and growth is good for the people of our 

province — and then bring it into action, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The action started with a proposal. And probably one of the 

first plans for growth in this province was the Saskatchewan 

Party policy before the ’07 election. It was filled with 

opportunities, and through that first mandate there was over 140 

promises that this government fulfilled, lived up to, as all part 

of the growth. 

 

And then in the 2011 election, just a year ago yesterday, that 

was substantiated by the people of the province that said, yes, 

we understand what this province has. We see the vision. We 



1854 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2012 

have the belief, and we believe in the action of the 

Saskatchewan Party government to keep on improving the life 

and the quality of life for Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, 

growth is good. 

 

The Saskatchewan plan for growth is an ambitious plan — 1.2 

million people by the year 2020 for this province. At one time it 

was said that wouldn’t be possible. They said we wouldn’t keep 

up to the national average and population growth. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s been far surpassed. Between July 2007 and in 

July 2012, this past July, our province grew by over 80,000 

people. In fact last year alone, the Saskatchewan population 

grew by 22,000 people, the biggest population growth since 

1921. 

 

It was mentioned by my colleague that every, every 

Saskatchewan city and most towns in the last census that came 

out last year saw an increase in their population in the last 

census period. Now if you compare that with the census period 

prior, when the NDP were in power, half of the Saskatchewan 

cities saw a decline, as well as most of the towns in our 

province saw a decline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, growth is good. People are working. There’s more 

people in the province and people are working. In August, the 

number of people employed in Saskatchewan hit an all-time 

high; over a half a million people were working in the province. 

And in September, we had an increase of 10,600 jobs over the 

same period compared to last year. So we’ve got more people 

and we’ve got them working. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over and above that, the take-home pay continues 

to rise. For five years prior to the Saskatchewan Party 

government . . . Five years ago, the average weekly wage in 

Saskatchewan was $744, well below the national average. Well 

I’m happy to report that today the average weekly wage is 

$938. That’s a 26 per cent increase and well above the national 

average. 

 

Mr. Speaker, growth is good. However, growth will require 

more workers. At least 60,000 more workers will be required 

by 2020 to meet the objectives set in our growth plan, and this 

will be achieved. The emphasis . . . Of course, Mr. Speaker, one 

of the emphases will be on infrastructure, another one will be 

on education. 

 

Our growth plan includes a provision that will lead the country 

in high school graduation rates by 2020. Also a fair amount of 

investment will be required into post-secondary education. But 

since 2007, Mr. Speaker, $3.5 billion has been invested in 

post-secondary education. 

 

The growth plan includes the right workers, the right price, and 

the right time. Mr. Speaker, growth is good. 

 

An additional 300 more apprenticeship spaces will be 

developed with additional apprentice training opportunities in 

high schools. We will work with the federal government on 

immigration nomination program, hopefully to increase it by 50 

per cent, from 4,000 to 6,000. And, Mr. Speaker, a big issue 

will be to work, a big opportunity will be to work with the First 

Nations and Métis organization on ways to improve the 

educational outcomes and increase the employment. 

Mr. Speaker, the plan for growth is a good plan. It’s a positive 

plan for Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan plan for growth includes 

investment in infrastructure. In the past five years, over $5 

billion has been invested in improving and expanding highways 

and schools and health care facilities and municipal 

infrastructure. That total doubles the amount spent in the 

previous five years with the NDP. The plan for growth includes 

a commitment of funding a minimum of $2.5 million of 

infrastructure growth over the next three years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, growth is very good. The growth plan includes 

our government’s initiative, will help add 12,600 new homes 

between 2011 and 2016. It’s a positive plan for growth, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s something this province needs. It’s something this 

government has worked on for the past five years and will 

continue to work on. It’s a growth plan going forward into the 

year 2020 and beyond because growth is good in this province. 

Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to enter 

into this debate today to talk about the Premier’s booklet that he 

released in Saskatoon to a $1,000-a-table dinner, and then he 

gave us the plain version a little while later here in Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the interesting things about the Sask Party 

documents, whether it’s the platforms or some of their 

government documents, is that it’s not what’s in these 

pamphlets or in these booklets that makes a difference to the 

people of Saskatchewan. What the real issue for everybody is, 

is what are the surprises that we’re going to find out about that 

aren’t in their platform or that aren’t in some of these growth 

plan documents or others that are there. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s only been a year since last election, and I 

think it’s important that we put on the record all of the surprises 

that we’ve had in the last year. Now I think it’s because people 

in Saskatchewan are getting fed up with that. Mr. Speaker, in 

their platform in the election, there was never a mention of 

adding three more politicians to this legislature at a cost of 

millions of dollars. But guess what? That came within weeks 

after the election. 

 

There was also no discussion, no information about the fact that 

they were going to eliminate the counting of people under 18 

years of age when they were going to draw up the boundaries 

for the province. These are changes to our democratic 

institution — no consultation, no public discussion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the platform they had, it very clearly stated out 

that they were going to support the film industry and the film 

employment tax credit. But within months, they had cut the 

film tax credit. They’ve wrecked an industry. And we know 

that they didn’t do their homework on that one. The Chamber 

of Commerce has quite clearly shown that with the information 

that’s there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was no mention in the platform that they 

were going to be reviewing and rewriting all the workplace and 

employment laws without holding public meetings in 

Saskatchewan. 



November 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1855 

There’s been no information in these kind of documents that 

they are going to sell our personal information Crown, 

Information Services Corporation. There was no forewarning. 

 

It was a surprise that they turned Tourism Saskatchewan into a 

Crown corporation and fired its CEO, Lynda Haverstock. That 

was a surprise. A lot of people are having a great deal of 

difficulty with that one. Mr. Speaker, there was no notice, no 

warning. 

 

It was a surprise when they changed the Saskatchewan 

immigrant nominee program, preventing people who had come 

to Saskatchewan as our new neighbours and friends, preventing 

them from bringing their families to Saskatchewan like our 

ancestors did. You talk to anybody in this room whose 

ancestors transferred or moved to Saskatchewan. They came in 

big groups with their families and that was encouraged. For 

them to change this is a fundamental betrayal to those people 

who have come in the last 10 years. 

 

They had no premonition that they were going to be charging 

more money for seniors for their drug prescriptions, or for $25 

extra for ambulance rides, or an extra 240 for their hygiene 

supplies for people living in care facilities. 

 

They had no indication that they were going to be scrapping the 

successful green vehicle rebate program. 

 

The municipalities had no notice that they were going to be 

passing on the costs of RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police] policing by increasing the cost to them. 

 

The big piece of their 2007 platform was to create Enterprise 

Saskatchewan and enterprise regions. There was no indication 

that that whole process which had been stumbling along for 

four years was going to be eliminated. And it was eliminated, 

leaving municipalities once again to pick up costs and forcing a 

number of enterprise regions to have to totally redo what 

they’ve been working on for a number of years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they have decided to resurrect their P3 

[public-private partnership] secretariat which was failed the 

first time, and now they’ve rebranded it as SaskBuilds. 

 

They were abandoning rural Internet users by taking away the 

rural wireless Internet service system. No notice of that, another 

surprise. Industry Canada stepped in and said, you can’t do that. 

And you end up having to work on that particular issue, but we 

continue to get some letters from people who have been 

betrayed on that particular issue. 

 

There’s been a whole change in attitude about who can come to 

this building and present their views. And that’s in the process 

of being dealt with, and we hope that there’s some changes 

there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s also they cancelled the innovations fund 

for literacy. They’ve broken the promise to the University of 

Saskatchewan to pay for the College of Medicine buildings, the 

Academic Health Sciences Building. And they’ve also forced 

the university to borrow more money, so they’ve maxed out 

their credit amounts. And, Mr. Speaker, they have diverted 

money from public schools to private, independent schools. 

Mr. Speaker, they cancelled the rent purchase option in the 

North which allowed some of the northern renters to become 

homeowners, and this has caused a lot of difficulty for housing 

in the North. 

 

All of these things are surprises. They didn’t have them in their 

plans. That’s why we look at these plans with much skepticism. 

 

They’ve ended up negotiating massive cuts to AgriStability and 

AgriInvest programs. That wasn’t part of what we were 

expecting this year. They forced the Saskatchewan Archives, 

the Western Development Museum, and other cultural 

institutions to cut hours and staff. And they’re spending more 

money on some office space, despite the fact that they’re 

cutting, making cuts to the public service. 

 

We heard from the realtors yesterday that they’re very 

frustrated with the amount of staff that’s available in the 

planning area to help municipalities across the province to do 

the work that’s necessary. They’ve deregulated lifeguards and 

eliminated the minimum swimmer to lifeguard ratios at public 

pools. There was no sort of indication, are we going to do that. 

They secretly negotiated selling LeRoy Leisureland Regional 

Park, and now it’s obvious they didn’t have the power to do 

what they were doing, so they’re going to change the 

legislation. We’ll have some further discussion on that one. 

 

[11:45] 

 

They’re introducing a new weak and deregulated 

Environmental Code. So some of these . . . All these things are 

surprises. Now, Mr. Speaker, there was no indication anywhere 

that they were going to be slashing the northern economic 

development budget by 30 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2008 the amount of money that was in the rainy 

day fund was $1.6 billion, and we all remember there was a 

very good year, that 2007-2008 year, where there was 

substantial revenues. But what’s happened is, Mr. Speaker, and 

this is where the Premier has a responsibility to the province of 

Saskatchewan, $1.1 billion of the rainy day fund has been spent 

at a time when the economy is doing very well. What’s the 

explanation for that, Mr. Speaker? I think that this Premier has 

a lot of explaining to do around the . . . [inaudible] . . . what’s 

going on in this particular province. Mr. Speaker, when you set 

up a rainy day fund or you set aside money, let’s make sure that 

we’re using it appropriately.  

 

We know over the last three years that the government starts off 

with high hopes of balanced budgets, but by the end of the year, 

the last three years have been negative numbers. That’s not the 

way that this province should be managed. There’s a trust 

responsibility that’s on the Premier and the executive of this 

government and, Mr. Speaker, the people are asking many, 

many questions about the role that they are taking. We want to 

have smart growth in this province that allows for all people to 

participate and, Mr. Speaker, we’re not getting that in the 

information from the Premier and the government. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know 

my time is short, but I am pleased to enter the debate on this 



1856 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2012 

motion brought forward by the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone. The Saskatchewan plan for growth, 2020 and 

beyond . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time for debate has expired. 

Questions. I recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. It 

was a rare opportunity to hear the member from Moose Jaw 

North speak here today in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and what 

he said when he got to his feet, he touted the government’s 

message and back-patted himself and themselves, Mr. Speaker. 

He didn’t say much about Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. He didn’t 

talk about the housing pressures that he’s failing to respond to 

nor did he put forward a plan or speak to the hundreds of jobs 

that are being lost in his community by direct actions of his 

government. And I speak specifically to Valley View. I speak 

to SaskPower. I speak to SaskWater. Hundreds of jobs, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the member from Moose Jaw 

North: why won’t you stand up for your community? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

welcome the question, and I thank the member for offering it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple of things I would like to say, and 

I’ve only got a very short time to say it. But a speaker on the 

weekend at our convention made mention of the vast exodus 

out of Saskatchewan. He mentioned Moose Jaw as one of the 

places that really hurt because, he said, Moose Jaw could have 

been the Calgary of today. 

 

If the member wants to talk about what’s going on in Moose 

Jaw, I’d be happy to because K+S is moving back after they 

were kicked out by that government. And they’re moving back 

into this province to invest. The other thing is the hospital is 

growing, and planning is in place for the Moose Jaw Hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s lots of opportunities in Moose Jaw. It’s a 

growing community. I’m very proud of it. I’ll stand up here 

until you tell me to sit down because there’s lots to say about 

Moose Jaw and I’m happy to do it. Things are very . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. I 

recognize the member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government put 

forward a growth plan formed by the ideas and priorities 

assembled from the people of the province. Our MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] consulted with 

constituents across the province, and one thing we heard over 

and over was our natural resources belong to all people of our 

province. 

 

To the member from Regina Rosemont: where do you stand on 

the NDP policy of First Nations receiving a portion of our 

province’s resources? I’m sure you won’t answer this question 

because you couldn’t in your first leadership scrum, but I’d like 

to hear an answer now. 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 

for that question to the member opposite. 

 

The booklet that was put forward, for growth, that was achieved 

through, I think, some polling by the government opposite. It 

certainly wasn’t built out of true consultation with 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. Because I think what they 

might have recognized, Mr. Speaker, had they gone out and 

truly consulted, was that there’s a lack of fairness in many areas 

across this province . . . [inaudible] . . . First Nations 

Saskatchewan as it relates to underfunding of education and the 

housing pressures that exist and in fact pressures that need to be 

supported better in communities all across Saskatchewan, 

whether it’s in Estevan, whether it’s in First Nations 

Saskatchewan, or urban Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  

 

We need to do a better job of fully capturing the generational 

opportunity provided to us by our resources and investing in 

bettering the lives of Saskatchewan people on grounds of 

equality and on grounds of fairness. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — To the member from Moose Jaw North, Mr. 

Speaker, how can that member say with a straight face and talk 

about creating opportunities for young people while forcing so 

many who work in the once-thriving film and television sector 

away? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, you know, if the member had 

been listening when I was talking, I addressed a lot of that in 

there, that it was the NDP government that kept the decline of 

this province going for 16 years. Mr. Speaker, this province has 

moved forward more in the last five years than it has in the 16 

years prior to them . . . [inaudible]. 

 

I’ll reiterate that there’s lots of opportunities for people in 

Moose Jaw and Saskatchewan because of the growing 

economy, the growth plan, Mr. Speaker. When I look at K+S, 

and they’ve got a big one-page advertising in the local paper 

saying that they’re open for business. They want applications 

because they need people, lots of people, to grow a mine that 

was closed down 30 years ago by that government, Mr. 

Speaker. When they were in power, they kicked out the potash 

industry, took it over and kicked these people out of there. 

They’re back here. They’re going to stay in Saskatchewan. 

They believe in Saskatchewan like the people on this side of the 

House. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This year 

capital investments in Saskatchewan will surpass $20 billion, a 

record amount, and nearly double the 2007 total. The potash 

industry is in the midst of a $13 billion expansion that will 



November 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1857 

create thousands of jobs and generate millions of dollars in 

economic activity and provincial revenues. Yet the leader of the 

federal NDP believes that the growth in Saskatchewan’s 

economy is “a disease.” 

 

To the member from Regina Rosemont: do you still agree with 

your leader and the front-runner in your leadership race 

provincially that the Saskatchewan growing economy is “a 

disease?” 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to take that 

question about our resource economy. And I’m proud to point 

to our record of strong support of development for our resource 

sector in Saskatchewan, doing so balancing off the 

environmental obligations we have to future generations and 

making sure that we’re bettering the lives of Saskatchewan 

people, which gets me to my point: at a time of pressure and 

growth and opportunity in this province, we’re failing to make 

the investments that we must to improve the lives and quality of 

life of Saskatchewan people. Schools are just one example that 

were highlighted here today, Mr. Speaker. We need to do a 

better job of taking the growth of today and translating that into 

meaningful improvements in the lives of Saskatchewan people 

for tomorrow. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the member 

from Cut Knife-Turtleford. In the growth plan and in the 

Throne Speech, there appears to be money available in this 

government to give tax cuts to very large corporations. Why are 

there no arrangements for small business which I know are a 

very important part of his constituency? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to the member, I 

thank you for the question. Just for a little bit of clarity, I’m a 

survivor. I’m a survivor of the 16-year reign of terror by that 

government. I was a businessman during that period, and 

believe me it made me a better man for it. To carry on with that, 

small-business tax has been cut almost in half since we took 

over.  

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that this past summer, going to 

communities like Edam and Cut Knife with their 100th 

anniversary, 800, 600 people, there was no talk of a disease or a 

myth of any kind. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 

River Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the month of 

October there were 541,600 people working in Saskatchewan, 

an increase of 12,500 from October of 2011. Full-time 

employment reached a record high of 452,800 for the month of 

October for more than 12 months of consecutive monthly highs, 

and Saskatchewan maintains one of the best unemployment 

rates in the country. Yet the Leader of the Opposition believes 

that Saskatchewan’s economy is simply a myth. To the member 

from Regina Lakeview: given these economic facts, exactly 

what part of Saskatchewan’s successful economy is a “myth?” 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, that question goes right to the 

heart of the problem with this government and with this 

Premier and the leadership that’s being shown in this province 

because there are so many people in the province who aren’t 

sharing in the benefits of what’s happening in the economy. 

You talk to people who can’t afford to live in the community 

they have lived in their whole life. They live in Regina or 

Saskatoon and the housing, the rental housing has gone to the 

point where they can’t live there anymore. You talk to people in 

other places; they can’t live there. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the issue is, how are all the people in this 

province benefiting? And I think there’s a major failure on 

behalf of this government. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The leader of the 

federal NDP believes that our natural resources are a disease in 

Canada. Now I know the member from Rosemont stickhandled 

around it. I’d like to hear his real answer this time. What part of 

Saskatchewan’s resource economy is a disease? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, our resource economy is 

something pretty special. It’s something that’s important to this 

entire province. It’s something that should equate to 

improvements in the lives of communities and the lives of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

We have a proud record and a proud history of developing that 

resource economy here in Saskatchewan. And it’s something 

that we’re going to continue to work towards in the future, 

making sure that we’re translating that resource economy into 

improvements in the lives of Saskatchewan people — 

something the current government is failing to do, Mr. Speaker. 

Thank you so much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the member 

from Cut Knife-Turtleford: in his remarks he . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time for the 75-minute debate 

has expired. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 



1858 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2012 

Bill No. 604 — The Public Health (Asbestos right-to-know) 

Amendment Act 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. After that 

75-minute debate, I am happy to have the opportunity to enter 

in on the discussion of Bill No. 604, An Act to amend The 

Public Health Act, 1994 to provide for access to information 

relating to Asbestos in Public Buildings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll be making some remarks for the remainder of 

our session here this morning and then into the early afternoon 

as we’re almost at the noon hour. And at the conclusion of my 

remarks, Mr. Speaker, I will be moving the second reading of 

this piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, of course everything that we do in this Assembly 

is important. And I think sometimes when we get caught up in 

the daily routine, when we get caught up in one particular issue, 

at times I think all of us can fall victim to the error of not 

recognizing the significance of a piece of work or a piece of 

legislation that we can be working on. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are times I believe when both sides of 

the Assembly can come together and agree that there is 

something that is in the best interest of Saskatchewan people, 

something that can truly improve the lives of Saskatchewan 

people, whether that be in an economic or a health sense, 

something that can be a positive change that actually does not 

require that much work, something that does not require that 

much money, if any at all, but can make an important change in 

the lives and the situations of many Saskatchewan people. 

 

[12:00] 

 

I think back just to yesterday, Mr. Speaker, when both sides 

came together on an important piece of legislation that was 

spearheaded by the member from Saskatoon Centre originally, 

it was a piece of legislation, and how there was some back and 

forth with government and that some of the changes that the 

member for Saskatoon Centre was promoting and calling for 

were able to come into being through co-operation with 

members on the government side. And in that situation, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m speaking of Jimmy’s law, a piece of legislation to 

do with safety for nighttime shift workers in places like 

convenience stores or gas stations, a piece of legislation that 

increased the safety. 

 

And it was through, sadly through a tragic incident, the passing 

of a worker and a resident in the city of Yorkton, how this issue 

really came to top of mind for many people. And through the 

work of Jimmy’s family, through the work of advocates for 

workplace safety, and through the work of legislators and the 

general public, Mr. Speaker, we were able to see some positive 

and constructive changes where both sides could agree that yes, 

in fact, this type of change makes sense. This type of change is 

a positive change for Saskatchewan workers. And the minister 

took a good amount of the work that had been done by a good 

number of people, especially the member from Saskatoon 

Centre, and was able to incorporate those ideas into some 

improved regulations for safety for nighttime workers. 

So I start off my remarks, Mr. Speaker, talking about that 

situation because it’s a good reminder to us I think as MLAs, 

whether we’re on the government side or the opposition side, 

that there are issues, thankfully, where we can come together. 

And even though we may disagree on many other pieces of 

policy, many other pieces of legislation, though we may have 

our differences across the floor through question period, there 

are issues, Mr. Speaker, where we can find agreement and 

where we can improve the lot of life for many Saskatchewan 

people. And in my opinion, the work that was done around 

Jimmy’s law is one example of that. 

 

I think it’s an important lesson for us to think of and to reflect 

upon, having just happened recently, because in my view 

there’s another piece of legislation that’s before the House, Bill 

No. 604, An Act to amend The Public Health Act, 1994 to 

provide for access to information relating to Asbestos in Public 

Buildings, and I think, Mr. Speaker, that this too is a piece of 

legislation where we can agree on both sides that we could take 

some positive steps here that would improve safety, would 

improve the public health for many Saskatchewan people. 

 

And we’ve had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker. I introduced this 

piece of legislation a week ago on private members’ day and 

it’s had some time for the minister to, and the ministry — 

ministries perhaps — to review the piece of the legislation and 

see how in fact this could be a constructive piece of legislation 

that would improve the public’s health. And I was encouraged, 

Mr. Speaker, by the minister’s remarks today in question period 

that they are looking at this closely and that they are examining 

ways that it may play a constructive role in making some 

changes. And I look forward to the ongoing discussion that 

we’ll have in the coming weeks on this piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t have to take the coming weeks. It could 

be done sooner. I know certainly on the opposition side there’s 

a willingness to have this piece of legislation moved forward, 

and we’d be prepared to do that in short order if members were 

agreeable to that. But I do understand that due process needs to 

occur within the ministry by the ministers, and I respect that 

process that is taking place. And I thank the minister, the Health 

minister for stating that they will be reviewing this and taking it 

seriously. 

 

I’m also encouraged, Mr. Speaker, before I get into the details 

of the bill, I’m encouraged by some remarks that the Minister 

of Labour said earlier on, well a few days ago. It was actually, I 

believe it was in a scrum coming out of the SFL [Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour] convention. The article that the comment 

is provided in has to do with a number of comments that the 

Labour minister made with respect to labour legislation here in 

the province. 

 

But the article talked about how the piece of legislation that we 

brought forward a week ago requiring a registry for buildings 

containing asbestos, how that was discussed by individuals. 

And the minister had this to say following, according to the 

Leader-Post article that’s posted online . . . And the name of the 

article, for the Hansard record, is “New Sask. labour legislation 

is not ‘an attack on unions.’” But as I said, the content of the 

interview and the content of the article was beyond the specific 

labour legislation. But quoting from the article, which can be 

found online through theleaderpost.com, the line states: 



November 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1859 

Morgan replied that the issue would be revisited and there 

would be discussions with school boards [quote by 

Morgan] “because they do a good . . .  

 

Excuse me, a quote by the Minister of Labour: 

 

. . . “because they do a good job of monitoring where 

asbestos is in their buildings.” 

 

And that’s a true statement. The article goes on to read: 

 

Afterwards, Morgan told reporters that he has asked 

officials to “find out whether there is information that we 

can provide because it’s certainly not information that 

should be hidden or concealed.” 

 

So I was encouraged when I read those remarks, Mr. Speaker, 

that the minister recognizes that this type of information isn’t 

something that should be concealed. I think that is an important 

recognition. I think it’s consistent with remarks that the 

Minister of Health has made with respect to how the legislation 

could be reviewed and, hopefully, eventually accepted by this 

legislature. But it’s an important statement to say that it’s not 

appropriate to conceal legislation. And I think in this modern 

day that is, as a general rule, the approach the government 

should take in sharing information with our constituents 

throughout the province so that they can make informed 

decisions. 

 

Now as I’ll get into my comments, Mr. Speaker, shortly, there 

is a difference, however, from providing information through a 

freedom of information request and then also having that 

information accessible in a very easy manner that any 

Saskatchewan person or non-Saskatchewan resident would be 

able to access. And that’s the further step here that we are 

requiring and requesting that the government be prepared to do. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 604, An Act to amend The Public 

Health Act, 1994 to provide for access to information relating 

to Asbestos in Public Buildings. For listeners at home who are 

just tuning in to this issue and haven’t had the chance to review 

this specific piece of legislation, I would like to highlight some 

of the components of this bill and explain it in my own words 

so that individuals would have an understanding of what 

exactly we are talking about here and asking the government to 

accept. The preamble to the bill states: 

 

WHEREAS the Government of Saskatchewan has lists 

respecting public buildings that contain asbestos; 

 

WHEREAS these lists must be accessed individually 

through freedom of information requests pursuant to The 

Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act; 

 

WHEREAS asbestos that is not properly encapsulated 

poses a public health risk; 

 

WHEREAS the availability of information about asbestos 

allows individuals to make informed decisions regarding 

their health and safety: 

 

THEREFORE . . . 

 

I’ll pause for a second there, make some remarks. So those are 

the whereases to the piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. And I 

think they are statements that most people would agree to and 

see as the, well, as the reality but also as the proper foundation 

for why we may want to take action, why we need to take 

action, as I would argue. I would highlight, Mr. Speaker, that 

these whereases are actually part of a petition that I’ve been 

presenting in the legislature over the course of the last few days 

underscoring the need for this type of registry. We know, Mr. 

Speaker, that there are many buildings that the government has, 

that it owns, and we can expand that not only to direct 

ministries, but we know of course through Crown corporations 

and then also through different agencies whether that be a 

regional health authority, or whether that be through a school 

division, another order of government with a degree of 

autonomy. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, that many buildings have been built 

over the decades that we’ve been a province. And we know, 

Mr. Speaker, that our knowledge, our awareness of safe 

practices and safe materials has changed over the years as well. 

 

So the first statement of reality here, Mr. Speaker, is that we 

know that there are many buildings that the government has and 

that many of them contain asbestos. That is the history of using 

the substance. And we can argue about when government 

should have known better perhaps, when the general public and 

the scientific community should have known better. But the 

reality is we have these buildings now with asbestos, and there 

are many of them. 

 

The second whereas, these lists must be accessed individually 

through a freedom of information request pursuant to The 

Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act. Mr. 

Speaker, this makes reference to the fact that thankfully we do 

have legislation in the province, as do other jurisdictions, where 

members of the public who are concerned about an issue are 

able to put in what we call an FOI [freedom of information] 

request, are able to put in this information and receive 

information back. There are conditions to what information can 

be shared, and at times we’ve seen members opposite become a 

little too eager with the Sharpie marker and redact or black out 

too much information, and that does occur from time to time. 

But thankfully we do have this type of legislation which allows 

individuals to access information when it is appropriate. 

 

So as I will also get into my remarks further on in this 

afternoon, Mr. Speaker, and talk a bit about the FOI process 

and the information that was obtained by a number of advocates 

who are calling for this type of legislation, we know that at least 

some of the information that we’re requesting can be accessed 

through FOI requests. And that’s good. That’s appropriate, and 

I’m glad that that process is there. But as I will remark in my 

comments coming up, Mr. Speaker, I think we can do a better 

job and require people to jump through fewer hoops and have 

that information openly available and transparent to 

Saskatchewan people, and expand the information that is 

available as well. 

 

Whereas asbestos that is not properly encapsulated poses a 

public health risk, Mr. Speaker, that speaks for itself. There is 

general awareness and acceptance now by all levels of 

government and international organizations as well that 



1860 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2012 

asbestos is not a healthy substance, that when not handled 

properly it poses a significant health risk. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

illnesses that it can cause, we would not wish upon anyone 

under any circumstances, Mr. Speaker. They’re absolutely 

horrible. So we know this is an important subject. It’s a 

meaningful subject, and it’s a subject that deserves our 

attention, our respect, and I would argue it deserves our action 

as well. 

 

“Whereas the availability of information about asbestos allows 

individuals to make informed decisions regarding their health 

and safety.” This is an interesting whereas statement in my 

view, Mr. Speaker, because it highlights two things. I think one, 

it highlights the collective responsibility we have as a province, 

as a legislature in providing information to our citizens, the 

collective work we can do as a group, through the power that 

the government has, to allow individuals to make good 

decisions. And this applies, Mr. Speaker, to a number of 

aspects. 

 

I mean in this instance we’re talking about asbestos. But as a 

general rule, whatever the ministry, whatever the issue, we 

want to be able to provide the appropriate information, the 

appropriate background to citizens so that they can act as 

individuals, and it’s that balance between the collective as well 

as the individual. There’s most certainly a huge role that we 

have as a provincial government to ensure that our citizens can 

make the right decisions they need to. And this applies to things 

like personal finances, but it most certainly also applies to 

things like personal health. 

 

And in this issue, Mr. Speaker, when we want individuals to be 

safe, there is most certainly a collective responsibility that our 

workplaces, our care facilities, our schools are safe. But we also 

want to allow an individual person as well as individual 

families to be able to make wise decisions. And the more 

information that families and individuals have at their disposal 

to make decisions, whatever the topic may be, for those of us 

that believe you arrive at the best decision by looking at the 

facts, knowing the parameters of a program or knowing the 

reality of a particular situation, knowing the specifics as best as 

they can, it’s that kind of knowledge that allows an individual 

to make the best decision given the information that they have. 

And it allows individuals to act in a way that they can act in the 

best interest in what they see as the immediate, the short term, 

and the long term. And we know, Mr. Speaker, that that hasn’t 

always been the case. 

 

And I think this issue of asbestos is one such example, where 

the shortage or the limited information that people had about 

the harm of a substance and then about its presence in certain 

locations has caused a lot of pain and suffering for a lot of 

people. Well, Mr. Speaker, I would say today we have an 

opportunity to improve that. We have an opportunity to get it 

right. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Looking at the legislation that is proposed, Mr. Speaker, what I 

suggested here is that . . . why I proposed an amendment to The 

Public Health Act, calling it the name in parentheses, “the 

Asbestos right-to-know,” based on that view that families have 

a right to know what is in their environment and then they can 

act accordingly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Public Health Act, 1994 would be amended in 

the manner set forth in the Act that I am presenting. It talks, Mr. 

Speaker . . . Some definitions are provided, which is 

appropriate so that individuals know the scope of the proposed 

legislation. And when we’re dealing with the talk of asbestos in 

this piece of legislation as it said in section 19.1 it would be . . . 

well in this section and section 19.2: 

 

(a) “asbestos” means ‘asbestos’ as defined in The 

Occupational Health and Safety Regulations, 1996. 

 

So in this situation here, the amendment that I’m proposing, it 

makes reference to The Occupational Health and Safety 

Regulations, 1996 so there’s a clear definition, a clear 

understanding of what we mean when we’re talking about 

asbestos. And so if individuals want to know the fine detail of 

that point, they can refer to that other piece of legislation and 

receive the content. 

 

What I’m proposing in this amendment also, Mr. Speaker, to 

The Public Health Act is an electronic registry, and as defined 

in this piece of legislation, “means a website or other electronic 

means where information regarding public buildings that 

contain asbestos and the detail of its encapsulation is 

maintained.” So I believe, Mr. Speaker, most people in the 

province are now familiar with what a website is, and so I 

believe that section speaks for itself. But I’m calling for one 

centralized spot — that’s an important point though — one 

centralized spot where someone who is concerned, someone 

who wants to know the status of a building or whether or not 

asbestos is present and whether or not it is encapsulated, that 

they are able to receive, have a reliable location, a reliable 

website where they know that they can have this information. 

 

Public buildings, Mr. Speaker, as I’m talking about in this piece 

of legislation, it’s important to identify what the scope here is. 

So under this section, section (i) states that a public building 

may be “owned or operated by the Government of 

Saskatchewan including Crown Corporations,” so a building 

directly owned by the ministry, Mr. Speaker, or some of its 

Crowns. And we know, we’ve had many discussions in the 

House about what the Crowns are, and most people would . . . 

Many names would spring to mind when they think of the 

locations. 

 

It also includes though, Mr. Speaker, point (ii) which is, 

“owned or operated by a regional health authority as defined by 

The Regional Health Services Act.” So the legislation, the 

amendment that I am proposing, Mr. Speaker, would also 

incorporate whether or not . . . it would also incorporate 

buildings located through regional health authorities. And we 

think of hospitals, care homes, anything that would be under a 

regional health authority. 

 

And a third component, Mr. Speaker, when we think of public 

buildings, section (iii) “that house a school or educational 

institution that comes within the ambit of The Education Act, 

1995.” So we’re also talking school divisions here. 

 

So to sum up, Mr. Speaker, in a less wordy manner, public 

buildings would include ministry buildings, Crown buildings. 



November 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1861 

And it would include regional health authorities, and it would 

include school divisions also. So, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — With leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont has asked 

for leave to introduce guests. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, seated in your gallery, it’s with great honour that I 

introduce Corporal Rick Shanks with the Third Battalion, Princess 

Patricia’s Canadian Light Infantry in Edmonton, who’s home for a 

visit with mom and with dad and with family here. 

 

Corporal, it’s a pleasure to have you here today. We’ve gotten to 

know each other through some time, and I know your family’s 

very proud to see you here today. Corporal Shanks has served one 

tour in Afghanistan. He’s trained in New Brunswick, Wainwright, 

and did his basic training out in Quebec. I know mom and dad, 

who have joined him here today, certainly have had a lot of care 

and concern your way, and we thank you for your service. 

 

I’d like to also introduce mom and dad that are here today, 

Richard Shanks and Jannet Shanks. Jannet works in our caucus 

office, and it’s a pleasure to have both these two join us here 

today. I know they’re looking forward to a weekend, a special 

weekend together as a family here for Remembrance Day. 

 

So I ask all members of this Assembly to join with me in 

recognizing this special family and this young corporal who 

serves his nation so proudly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member for Yorkton on his feet? 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — I would like to ask leave to welcome the 

guests as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Yorkton has asked for leave to 

introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 

the members of the House. On behalf of the government side of 

the House, I’d also like to welcome the parents, but of course 

the corporal to your Assembly. And thank you so much for 

your dedicated service to our country. God bless. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 604 — The Public Health (Asbestos right-to-know) 

Amendment Act 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I would join in 

welcoming and thanking the important guests to our Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Carrying on in my remarks, I was just providing a bit of an 

overview of Bill 604, An Act to amend The Public Health Act, 

1994 to provide for access to information relating to Asbestos 

in Public Buildings. And so, Mr. Speaker, we know this is an 

important piece of legislation, at least I believe it is. And my 

introductory comments so far have been talking about the basis 

for this bill, the past practices that we’ve had in the Assembly 

in coming together and agreeing on pieces of legislation where 

it is about the common good, and it’s not about partisanship. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I was spelling out in some detail the aspects 

of the bill so that individuals know what we’re debating and 

discussing, and hopefully we’ll be continuing to talk about in 

the days ahead. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the public buildings include Government of 

Saskatchewan, Crown corporations, regional health authorities, 

as well as school divisions. It’s important also, Mr. Speaker, 

this amendment to The Public Health Act was introduced by 

myself as a private member’s bill. And as the Speaker would 

know very well and members of the House, private member’s 

bills can’t spend money. They have to be revenue neutral or 

can’t have any cost on the ministry. I’m not able to present a 

bill of that nature. So I would also like to just clearly state and 

highlight for everyone, that included in this amendment to The 

Public Health Act is, on the second page of it, no. 3, “The 

minister may charge a fee on a cost recovery basis for access to 

the electronic registry.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think it’s actually, actually would be 

appropriate to provide or require a charge for accessing this 

information. I think the best thing to do and the proper thing to 

do would be to have no cost for this information. But if cost 

became a barrier for having this type of legislation present, Mr. 

Speaker, it is proposed in the amendment to The Public Health 

Act that the minister may charge a fee on a cost recovery basis. 

I hope that this decision would be made that there wouldn’t 

have to be a charge because I don’t actually think it would be a 

tremendous amount of work to assemble this registry, based on 

the information that is already gathered and the information that 

is already available and the means by which it can be 

communicated to the broader public. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, this Act comes into force on 

proclamation, not assent. So there is some time, Mr. Speaker, 

that was built into it intentionally so that if it does require a bit 

of time for the online registry to be put together, there’s a bit of 

flexibility there for the ministry and for the minister to ensure 

that it happens in a timely manner. Now I would hope that it 

could happen very quickly, but there is the provision within the 

amendment that it could wait until proclamation in order that 

there would be enough time to make sure that it is done 

correctly and done right. 

 



1862 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2012 

The issue of asbestos, Mr. Speaker, and the issue of reducing 

people’s risk and exposure to cancer is an important one, and 

it’s one we talk about actually quite often in the Assembly. And 

I think that is a positive step that we talk about illnesses, we 

talk about things that perhaps in the past individuals weren’t as 

comfortable discussing because we’ve seen through awareness, 

through a variety of initiatives and activities, that as we increase 

awareness, as we make information available to Saskatchewan 

residents, people can make informed decisions. 

 

Movember, Mr. Speaker, is one example. Through a fun means, 

through something that some people wouldn’t normally do 

perhaps — I know some people choose to have a moustache 

and that’s again a personal decision and a fine one — but 

through a time when individuals are able to, through 

Movember, raise awareness about cancer. And it encourages 

more individuals, more men, to get the checkups that they need 

to be safe. 

 

So by providing a registry, Mr. Speaker, that would be 

available, would be public, would be online through the ability 

that advocacy groups, the ability of individuals would have to 

promote, to advertise the online registry, that too, Mr. Speaker, 

is raising awareness. That too is improving the knowledge that 

individuals have, and I would hope, Mr. Speaker, would cause 

them to make smart decisions about their own personal health 

and their own personal safety or that of their family. 

 

It is important, Mr. Speaker, to also note that the amendment 

that I’m proposing is within The Public Health Act, and that 

was a deliberate decision as well. Because while there is most 

certainly a very large occupational health and safety component 

to this legislation, and the work that many advocates for 

improved occupational health and safety have been doing, very 

much complements and drives this piece of legislation, I think 

it’s important to have that broader view. 

 

It’s important to recognize that, while workers most certainly 

need to be safe and need to have the information, all of the 

information at their fingertips when they’re entering a building 

or doing work on a building or living through renovations or 

doing the renovations, Mr. Speaker, to a building. It’s not only 

about workers, but the buildings that we provide and that we 

have public ownership of are there to serve the public. So we 

know that many people have contact with these buildings. We 

can think of hospitals. We can think of care homes. We can 

think of schools, many instances where there are individuals 

coming in contact with public buildings. And I think it’s 

appropriate for that reason that the amendment is made to The 

Public Health Act and not within different legislation that 

would be more directly tied to occupational health and safety. 

 

I know we want to divorce those two topics because I think that 

they do go hand in glove, but in my view, and the reason that I 

proposed this legislation as an amendment to The Public Health 

Act and why my questions have been directed to the Health 

minister, is because I think this is not simply about workplace 

safety. It’s about having a safer environment for all of the 

public, whether they be a worker, a student, or a patient for that 

matter. That’s an important point to make. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there has also been . . . Well I had the opportunity 

to present this last week and we’ve had some discussion. We’ve 

addressed it through two question periods, and also we’ve 

addressed it through an ongoing petition that I’ve been 

presenting. And the minister has had the opportunity through 

scrums to make comment on this piece of legislation. I’m happy 

about the discussion and the dialogue that we’ve been having so 

far. 

 

The initial remarks to date though, Mr. Speaker, have indicated 

a real reluctance by the ministry and the minister to provide the 

information, based on a rationale that he provided. And as the 

Health minister pointed out in question period today, with 

respect to remarks that were made by the Labour minister, one 

of the areas of concern — not the only one, but one of the areas 

of concern that the Labour minister made — was that there 

would hate to be an error in the public registry providing people 

with a false sense of security. A point not without some merit, 

Mr. Speaker, but I don’t think it’s enough of a . . . I don’t think 

the point has enough merit to cancel out the good work that this 

bill would do and the good information that this bill would 

provide. 

 

As I have said through scrums and in question period and in 

different opportunities, we know that we should always conduct 

ourselves and conduct our business with the assumption that 

asbestos is present in public buildings. We know that is the 

underlying orientation that individuals should have when they 

are coming in contact with buildings. So if they’re going 

through a construction zone, if they are doing renovations 

themselves on a building, if they are a patient in a wing of a 

hospital where something’s going on, we know, Mr. Speaker, 

that the assumption should be that asbestos is present. I agree 

with that, and that should be the general orientation. 

 

[12:30] 

 

But we know, Mr. Speaker, that if individuals have more 

information, more detail, if they know the specifics, if they 

know that the issue, the presence of asbestos is known by the 

authorities, is being monitored, is determined to be 

encapsulated in a safe state, then individuals can have the 

information available to them to make even better decisions. 

 

It might mean that if a child was in a school where some work 

is being done, it allows the parent just to ask that extra question 

to the principal. Hey, I know that there’s asbestos in this 

building, the parent could say. Could you just please, just for 

my own assurance, my own peace of mind, could you let me 

know what steps are being taken to ensure that the dust from 

this portable is not going into the main wing of the school — or 

those types of questions, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s appropriate. 

 

I know that individuals should operate on that assumption, but 

if individuals have specific information about a particular 

school, a particular place, then they can even ask better 

questions. They can say, I know on the registry that there’s 

asbestos in this building. I know it’s encapsulated and I’m 

happy about that. But you know, as I was walking down the 

hallway I saw that there was a change in the building, and I’m 

wondering if that’s affecting how well it is encapsulated. 

 

So it allows individuals to make better decisions. It allows 

individuals to ask better questions. And that’s what we want as 

a society. We want more individuals taking ownership of their 



November 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1863 

own health. Most certainly there’s a collective job that we have 

to do as a ministry, but also when push comes to shove, a lot of 

the decisions that we make are done on an individual basis. And 

we need to ensure, as individuals, that we have the information 

available at our fingertips to make good and smart decisions. I 

think that is appropriate. I think that is wise. 

 

The other argument, Mr. Speaker, or perhaps the same 

argument, just a different aspect to it, the issue raised by the 

minister that, well what if there was a mistake in the registry? 

Mr. Speaker, I’m not a lawyer and I do not draft legislation on a 

regular basis, and there are people that do that well. However, I 

would think that there could be a way, Mr. Speaker, on the 

website, perhaps through the regulations, perhaps even in the 

bill itself, I don’t know, but there ought to be some sort of way 

where there could be some type of disclaimer made. 

 

And I don’t know what the exact wording would be or the exact 

nature of it. Perhaps this is something that both sides could 

have a discussion about. But it could say that we are the 

Government of Saskatchewan; we know that there’s asbestos in 

our buildings; we are doing our best to have it encapsulated and 

to have safe environments for everyone. This list, this 

information is, to the best of our knowledge, accurate and 

complete. It states where asbestos is encapsulated and it states 

where asbestos is not present. The disclaimer could go on to 

say, we believe this is to be correct but if there is an error, 

individuals should always, always, always operate and conduct 

their business with the understanding that asbestos is present in 

the buildings. 

 

Of course, that is not the exact wording that should be there. It 

should be, it should be fine-tuned much better than what I just 

stated. But I think there is a way, Mr. Speaker, that the 

information could still be provided to the public so they had a 

full understanding of what information, what the state of 

buildings are and could also state that, to the best of our 

knowledge, this list is accurate. There could be a mistake. After 

all, it is affecting many, many buildings and, for that reason, 

individuals should always operate on the assumption that 

asbestos is present. In a sense, Mr. Speaker, that’s the status 

quo position that the government currently has, that individuals 

should just operate on the assumption that asbestos is present. 

 

So I don’t really see, Mr. Speaker, this risk of fear as so great 

that, this fear of making a mistake on the list . . . I don’t think 

that one issue, Mr. Speaker, cancels out all the good work that 

the availability of the registry could provide to Saskatchewan 

families. 

 

So I’m most certainly open to having discussions with the 

minister about how we could incorporate that type of language 

or how we could have some sort of disclaimer on a website or 

have it through regulations. I don’t know exactly what that 

would look like. But certainly by coming together, by agreeing 

that this is an important step that we need to take, I think we 

could find a solution there that would balance those things out, 

would balance the liability that the government is concerned 

about perhaps, but at the same time provide the information 

available to Saskatchewan people that they most certainly want. 

 

The aim and the goal of this registry is not about creating fear 

and it’s not about a desire to give a false sense of security. 

What it is about, Mr. Speaker, is providing all the information 

available to people that they need. I’ve used the example of a 

parent sending their child to a school and how they may in fact, 

Mr. Speaker, want to know whether or not construction is 

occurring in their building and whether or not there is asbestos 

there. I think that’s a fair request. I can think, Mr. Speaker, to 

other situations of actual workers in the building and, like any 

worker . . . I mean this is the whole point of the safety 

initiatives that have been done through the WCB [Workers’ 

Compensation Board] and through the Ministry of Labour over 

many years. It’s to have that culture and that philosophy of 

safety at all times among workers and among employers most, 

very importantly. 

 

Having this information available, Mr. Speaker, allows for a 

proper reminder to individuals that asbestos is present and that 

on this particular insulation around a pipe in this classroom 

with the ceiling tiles, in this room with insulation in the attic, 

Mr. Speaker, that they need to take proper steps, and that if 

there is a change in the state of encapsulation, if there is 

deterioration, if there is damage through some other type of 

accident and the fibres become airborne, Mr. Speaker, it is 

necessary and it is appropriate that the workers who are 

working in there clearly know that there is asbestos there. They 

shouldn’t just operate on the assumption that it could be there. I 

think it increases the weightiness and the importance of the 

issue if individuals can know most certainly, beyond a shadow 

of a doubt, that there is asbestos in a building and they should 

be taking the necessary safety precautions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there have been a number of people calling for 

this type of registry, a public registry that is accessible online 

and available to many people. And the work, Mr. Speaker, has 

been happening at a number of levels. It’s been happening at 

the international stage, the national stage, the provincial stage 

which is occurring now and has been going on over the past 

little while. And also, Mr. Speaker, at the municipal level 

there’s also important steps being taken. There’s an increase in 

awareness that asbestos is present and that we need to take the 

precautionary steps that need to be there in order to ensure that 

our families are safe, that the public health is the most 

important thing that we’re working towards. 

 

I’ll start, Mr. Speaker, with some comments made at the 

international level. And the World Health Organization has 

done a fair amount of work in providing information and 

working to have a safer environment as it relates to asbestos. 

And there is a real north-south divide, Mr. Speaker — and I’m 

speaking globally, not provincially here — between the safety 

levels in some jurisdictions to others. And the World Health 

Organization has done a lot of very important work in 

increasing awareness and trying to get national governments to 

work towards safer standards as it relates to asbestos. 

 

While we are one country where there might be higher levels of 

safety compared to other nations around the world, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s still important to take note of the work that the 

WHO [World Health Organization] is doing because it directly 

relates to the private member’s bill, the amendment to The 

Public Health Act that is before the Assembly today. 

 

In looking at the work and the position that the WHO has on 

asbestos-related diseases, reading from information that they 



1864 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2012 

have available, Mr. Speaker, through their website, the quote 

from the information on the website says: 

 

WHO, in collaboration with the International Labour 

Organization and with other intergovernmental 

organizations and civil society, works with countries 

towards elimination of asbestos-related diseases in the 

following strategic directions. 

 

First bullet: 

 

by recognizing that the most efficient way to eliminate 

asbestos-related diseases is to stop the use of all types of 

asbestos; 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we in Canada, we’ve made positive steps 

towards that objective. Next bullet: 

 

by providing information about solutions for replacing 

asbestos with safer substitutes and developing economic 

and technological mechanisms to stimulate its 

replacement; 

 

So again about eliminating the unsafe use and finding proper 

replacements. The next bullet: 

 

by taking measures to prevent exposure to asbestos in 

place and during asbestos removal . . . 

 

I’ll read that again. I paused in an awkward spot. 

 

by taking measures to prevent exposure to asbestos in 

place and during asbestos removal (abatement); and 

 

The last point, Mr. Speaker: 

 

by improving early diagnosis, treatment, social and 

medical rehabilitation of asbestos-related diseases and to 

establish registries of people with past and/or current 

exposure to asbestos. 

 

So it’s that second last point, Mr. Speaker, that I would like to 

highlight, that the WHO is encouraging national governments 

to do in co-operation with the work of the International Labour 

Organization. And it’s by taking measures to prevent exposure 

to asbestos in place and during asbestos removal. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the legislation that is proposed here 

would work towards that goal that the WHO and the ILO 

[International Labour Organization] says that we should be 

working towards and improving upon. And it’s by taking 

measures to prevent exposure to asbestos in place and during 

asbestos removal or abatement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the provision and the availability of this public 

registry would in fact, I believe, be taking a measure to prevent 

exposure to asbestos. And as I’ve already made the argument, 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that by having the information public, by 

having the information easily accessible, that it does allow 

individuals to take measures to prevent exposure. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, as we first look at the international 

work being done, that’s an important point to make. It’s 

important to identify that there’s a great amount of work that 

needs to happen. 

 

On the national stage within Canada, Mr. Speaker, before I get 

into the work that community-based organizations or advocacy 

groups are doing, there is a fair amount of talk when it comes to 

asbestos safety that is conducted by the federal government. It 

does not directly encourage or go down the path right now of a 

registry, but it most certainly highlights the importance of 

having this type of information, and the importance of having 

individuals making smart and informed decisions. 

 

From a Health Canada website, Mr. Speaker, entitled It’s Your 

Health, specifically talking about asbestos, it says, “Minimizing 

Your Risk.” It says: 

 

Construction and maintenance workers should avoid 

creating asbestos dust from scraping, brushing, rubbing or 

cutting damaged insulation. Insulation damage should be 

reported to the appropriate authority, such as the 

Occupational Health and Safety Manager. If you work in 

this area, determine whether asbestos is present before 

beginning work and take appropriate precautionary 

measures. 

 

Public and commercial building owners should keep an 

inventory of asbestos-containing materials to inform 

users, authorities and contractors. 

 

So here we are from Health Canada, Mr. Speaker, prescribing 

action that workers should take. And it’s to clearly identify, 

before any work begins, whether or not asbestos is present. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what better way to have that information 

available and accessible to workers, whether they be an 

employee of a health region or whether they be a contractor that 

has been hired to do specific work on a building, what better 

way than to have an online registry that anyone can pull up on a 

smart phone or on a computer, check whether or not there’s 

asbestos present in the building, Mr. Speaker, and then take the 

actions that they need to take. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we see from the federal government a 

recognition that it’s important to take these kinds of steps. It’s 

important to be as safe as possible when we’re talking about 

asbestos issues and when we’re talking about exposure to 

asbestos. Also through CMHC [Canada Mortgage and Housing 

Corporation], Mr. Speaker, recognition that this is important 

with fact sheets provided through the CMHC. What has 

asbestos been used for? How has the use of asbestos changed? 

What health problems are associated with exposure to asbestos? 

And then it talks about how it may be in a home. I know that, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s talking about particular private residences, but 

it underscores the importance and the need that we need to take 

when talking about hazardous substances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also of particular interest I believe when we’re 

talking about the national perspective, on October 18th, 2012, 

the Canadian Cancer Society put out a press release about a 

joint initiative that it did with the Canadian Medical 

Association. And of course the CMA [Canadian Medical 

Association] represents physicians throughout Canada and then 

has provincial divisions in every province and territory. So in 

conjunction, the CMA and then the Canadian Cancer Society 



November 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1865 

put out a news release on October 18th, 2012, and it said, “The 

majority of Canadians — 82% — are sending a clear message 

that a public registry of buildings containing asbestos, including 

private homes, is important and 78% say it’s the responsibility 

of the federal government to create one, according to poll 

results released today by the Canadian Cancer Society.” The 

news release goes on to say that “The registry should be free, 

easily accessible and include privately owned buildings, 

buildings on aboriginal lands and government-owned 

structures.” 

 

[12:45] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this position that the Canadian Cancer 

Society and the CMA is putting forward is actually more 

extensive than what we’re proposing in this provincial 

legislation. It’s not including private buildings. It’s simply 

including the public buildings that are within the control, within 

the overview, I would suggest, of the provincial government. 

So there’s a recognition here again that information is power 

for people. Information allows individuals, allows families to 

make smart decisions and the best decisions for the safety of 

their families. 

 

There’s a quote from the CMA president, Dr. Anna Reid: 

 

“Asbestos, when inhaled, can cause lung cancer and other 

painful, fatal diseases that may not appear until years 

after exposure,” says Dr. Anna Reid. [Goes on to say 

that] “This is why the CMA fully supports the creation of 

a public registry of asbestos-containing buildings and 

further measures to increase awareness of the impact of 

this dangerous substance. We owe Canadians at least this 

much.” 

 

I want to read that again because I think it’s a good point that 

the CMA president makes: 

 

This is why the CMA fully supports the creation of a 

public registry of asbestos-containing buildings and 

further measures to increase awareness of the impact of 

this dangerous substance. We owe Canadians at least this 

much. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the news release here that was released by the 

Canadian Cancer Society along with the CMA was directed to 

the national government, but the message is just as applicable to 

the provincial realm. It’s about doing the best for our citizens, 

doing the best for the residents of Saskatchewan. It’s about 

allowing individuals to make smart, informed decisions, 

decisions to protect their families as they need to. 

 

We know that there is work going on at the provincial front, 

Mr. Speaker, and a lot of that good work . . . I do want to praise 

the good work that Howard Willems has been doing, and he’s 

been doing it through the Saskatchewan Asbestos Disease 

Awareness Organization, S-A-D-A-O. It was founded, Mr. 

Speaker, this organization, by Bob Sass as well as Howard 

Willems. And they have a very informative website with a lot 

of good information, Mr. Speaker, on the website that is 

provided to people. But they are working for advocacy on how 

we can in fact have a public registry and improve the 

knowledge that citizens have. 

A number of weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Saskatoon Centre and I sat down with Mr. Willems and heard 

first-hand about his desire to have this registry and how, in his 

view, this could help many people, how in his view this is a 

positive step for improving the safety of not only workers but 

also students; of patients in our health facilities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Saskatchewan Asbestos Disease Awareness Organization 

in 2012 is doing a number of initiatives to do with awareness, 

to do with the promotion of better safety standards. But they are 

one of the main groups, Mr. Speaker, that has been calling for 

this public registry. Nationally we see that the Canadian Cancer 

Society, along with the CMA, is supportive. But from the 

website of the awareness organization, Mr. Speaker, here in 

Saskatchewan, it says that according to SADAO, this registry 

should also be made available to firefighters, police officers, 

paramedics, as well as those engaged in renovations and 

demolition of buildings. Before that it said, Mr. Speaker, that 

they support the work done by the WHO with the 

recommendation to establish a public registry reporting the 

condition of asbestos in schools, public and commercial 

buildings, especially where there are children’s programs. 

 

So it’s about our children, Mr. Speaker. It’s about patients. And 

it’s also about the first responders, Mr. Speaker, that go to 

many spots where there is an emergency, where they put their 

own health and safety on the line. And we know this is closely 

tied to OHS [occupational health and safety] issues. I recognize 

that, but it is all about public health. It’s about something much 

greater. 

 

And I know first responders have high levels of training. That’s 

good and appropriate, and we need to ensure that they have the 

best training. We also need to ensure they have the best 

information, and knowing whether or not asbestos is present, in 

what form, is very important. 

 

The city of Saskatoon has taken some steps. So I’ve talked 

about the international situation, some of the national advocacy 

work that’s being done, some of the provincial work that’s 

being done. Municipally in Saskatoon there is also some good 

work being done. And on May 1st, 2012, there was a motion 

put before city council by Pat Lorje, a city councillor, and the 

motion read this: 

 

Will the Administration please report on measures the 

city currently has in place to provide a publicly accessible 

registry of all civic owned and leased buildings that 

contain asbestos, and further, report on what controls are 

in place to prevent contamination by asbestos to 

individuals. Further, can Administration report on the 

possibility of establishing a public registry of all 

buildings in Saskatoon that contain asbestos? Finally, will 

the administration provide comments on the training and 

safety equipment the civic workers, in particular 

firefighters and police officers, have available to them 

when dealing with situations where asbestos exposure 

may pose a hazard? 

 

This inquiry will be formally documented in the Minutes, 

which will be printed in the May 14th Council agenda 

and available online. 

 



1866 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2012 

So this issue obviously comes out of some of the good 

advocacy work that I think Howard and his organization have 

been doing. There was a reply, Mr. Speaker, given in 

September 2012 to Mr. Howard, and this information is 

available on the advocacy organization’s website as well. And 

the response says: 

 

Hi Howard, 

 

Our efforts to date is that we have gathered historical 

information on the past management of the asbestos 

containing materials (ACM) in our buildings, developed a 

budget for 2013 for hiring an asbestos management 

consultant, and have engaged with Project Services to 

assemble an RFP to solicit for asbestos management 

services that will include: 

 

Thorough inventory and registry of ACM in our civic 

facilities 

 

Assessment of condition of existing ACM 

 

Priority management and removal roster 

 

Identification and recognition system. 

 

Our safety team has developed an information and 

awareness program for our staff, and going forward we 

will introduce the results of the Asbestos Management 

program in our Tool Box talks with our staff. 

 

Timelines are that we hope to have the assessment, 

inventory and registry completed in early 2014. 

 

So an important step here, Mr. Speaker, that the city of 

Saskatoon is doing to improve safety for workers and all city 

residents. 

 

So we know there’s good advocacy being done on the national 

stage, on the international stage. We know that there’s 

advocacy and good steps being taken at the municipal level, one 

example being in Saskatoon. I think we have an opportunity 

here, Mr. Speaker, to take some important steps at the 

provincial level as well, some steps to make things safer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my possession I have the FOI request that 

Howard Willems gave to the ministry, calling on the 

information to be made available. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 

lengthy document. It has a number of pages and the document 

states the ministry properties and whether or not they have 

asbestos and if it’s encapsulated. 

 

This shows, Mr. Speaker, that the information is there. The 

information is already gathered for many of the buildings that 

we’re requesting it to be public for and go online. And it’s good 

information, Mr. Speaker. It lists the building. For example, 

Regina, Regina Court House at 2425 Victoria Avenue, built in 

1961. The main tenant is Justice. And there’s asbestos, but it is 

encapsulated. That’s good information for the workers and the 

staff to know, Mr. Speaker. I think the people work in that 

building deserve to know that asbestos is there, but it’s 

encapsulated, and allows them to ask questions about whether 

or not it’s being monitored properly. 

Another example here, Mr. Speaker. Regina sound stage, 1831 

College Avenue, built in 1913, main tenant Tourism for now, 

and, Mr. Speaker, it says that there is no asbestos present. 

There’s one building where individuals . . . It says there’s no 

asbestos. That’s good information for individuals to know. That 

doesn’t mean that they don’t conduct their business with the 

awareness that asbestos may be present. They still meet the 

highest levels of safety. But I think that is good information for 

people to know. Let’s provide information to Saskatchewan 

residents so they can make informed decisions. 

 

I’m nearing the top of the hour, Mr. Speaker, and I do have to 

move second reading of the bill, but I think it’s appropriate to 

listen to a couple of remarks made by Howard. He said: 

 

“After all the treatments and surgeries, the chemo has 

failed to keep things in control. We’re off chemo now and 

just working with homeopathic medicines and prayers, 

but my strength, especially in the last three months, has 

deteriorated quite drastically,” he said. 

 

And this was in a Canadian Press article, Mr. Speaker, that he 

provided. He went on to say: 

 

“Everyone has the right to know if a building they’re 

going into has the potential for short- or long-term harm,” 

Willems said in a phone interview Thursday, his 

shortness of breath obvious. “I have seen the pain and 

suffering my family has gone through and it’s been very 

hard on them this last two years and I don’t want anyone 

to go through what I’ve gone through.” 

 

And the quote I read earlier: 

 

“If you were enrolling your child in a school that was 

built in 1960, or if you were introducing your parents or 

grandparents to a seniors’ care home built in the same 

era, wouldn’t you like to know what is the potential for 

asbestos?” Willem said. “Knowing that it’s there and 

contained would make you rest a lot easier than not 

knowing at all.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this piece of legislation is the right thing 

for us to do. I think we can take some positive steps. The 

opposition is very willing to work with the government to make 

this a reality. 

 

Having made my comments on the bill, why I think it’s a good 

idea and ways that it could be effective, I would now at this 

time move second reading of Bill No. 604, The Public Health 

(Asbestos right-to-know) Amendment Act. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 

Saskatoon Massey Place that Bill No. 604, The Public Health 

(Asbestos right-to-know) Amendment Act be read a second time. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Oh, sorry. We have a member to 

speak. I recognize the member from Prince Albert Carlton. 

 



November 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1867 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to stand 

up today and take part in this debate. The member from Massey 

Place has done a very good job, a great job actually, talking 

about some necessity to the bill and why it would be, in his 

opinion, necessary to bring forward. 

 

So just to add to the comments that the member has said, Mr. 

Speaker, is that in general the focus of the ministry is in fact on 

education and enforcement as it pertains to asbestos to prevent 

workplace exposure. The thing that the ministry, after having 

time to look at the bill in its preliminary stages put forth by the 

member from Massey Place, is that it lacks specificity as to 

what’s required in the registry that he’s asking for. Specificity.  

That’s a tough one. I tried. I tried. It’s not easy to do 

sometimes. 

 

So we need to look at what other jurisdictions are doing. In fact 

the ministry has said Australia has a particular registry that . . . 

And other places internationally have looked at this issue as 

well, Mr. Speaker. And it’s one of those things where the 

government has a responsibility for good due diligence to move 

forward. And on that note, the ministry is more than willing to 

and will be doing that to ensure that they get the best practices, 

as we see internationally. 

 

There’s also some interesting information available when it 

comes to the protection of workers, Mr. Speaker. You know, an 

asbestos inventory inspection form is kept on site in 

government buildings and is updated at least annually when it 

comes to the actual level of asbestos-containing material that 

we see. It’s also inspected at least annually by a competent 

person. We see in this province, we know right now with the 

amount of work being done to renovate old buildings, to 

repurpose them, retool them for the needs of other industries, 

that there is a particular group of industry workers that are now 

doing asbestos cleanup work. They’re available to do that kind 

of work. So that’s a positive if it should be needed, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This practice though of having a competent person inspecting 

buildings and being available on this list of asbestos-containing 

material and buildings that have, especially government 

buildings to be more specific, Mr. Speaker, that have asbestos 

in them, is actually it’s a long-standing practice that really has 

already been in place and used by the previous administration, 

the NDP, for all their years in government. 

 

So although the member does bring forth this Act to maybe 

enhance that particular regime that’s already in place within the 

Government of Saskatchewan and the very fine men and 

women that work in the Ministry of Central Services along with 

the actual Ministry of Labour, that we see there’s still more 

work to be done. And we definitely will be taking that step 

forward. 

 

We also note that, you know, there are some agencies in the 

province, provincial agencies. I see that the Regina Qu’Appelle 

Health Region publishes on its website annually buildings that 

will actually . . . They’re prepared to share that publicly as to 

what buildings there are under their purview to actually have 

the . . . would probably have asbestos in them still. There’s one 

major point when you look at asbestos in buildings really, you 

know, Mr. Speaker. And this isn’t to minimize the purpose at 

all by the member’s Act or the bill coming forward, but if one 

is entering a building — and the Minister of Labour has said 

clearly that the premise should be that every building has 

asbestos — so when you enter a building and work in a 

building, you should have that already in mind, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 1 o’clock, this 

House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m., Tuesday the 13th, by 

order of the Assembly. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1839 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1839 

  Wotherspoon ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1861 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1861 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1839 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1839 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1839 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Melfort Comets in Provincial Final 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1839 

 Saskatoon Organization Develops HIV/AIDS Website 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1840 

 Survey Shows Support for Open Market 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1840 

 Constituent’s Shop Selected as Best Vintage Store 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1840 

 Regina Nursing Campus Opens 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1841 

 New Arena Opens in Spiritwood 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1841 

 Lest We Forget 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1841 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Registry of Asbestos in Public Buildings 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1842 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1842 

 Funding for Education 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1842 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1843 

 Affordable Housing Plans 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1844 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1844 

 Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1845 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1845 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Saskatchewan Plan for Growth 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1846 

  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 1848, 1856 

  Doke ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1850, 1857 

  Chartier ......................................................................................................................................................................... 1851, 1856 

  Michelson ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1853, 1856 

  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1854, 1857 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1855 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1856 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1856 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1857 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 1857 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 604 — The Public Health (Asbestos right-to-know) Amendment Act 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1858 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1867 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


