




















































Hansard: May 02, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 39A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 2, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1359 

 May 2, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 

and to you and through you to members in the Assembly, I rise 

to introduce a group of very special guests in our gallery today 

in the gallery opposite. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 

 

It is my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you a group of 

31 guests which includes members of the Ukrainian Women’s 

Association of Yorkton along with individuals from the local 

Yorkton congregation and guests from Canora, of course a 

community in my constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d love to be able to introduce all 31 individuals, Mr. Speaker, 

but I’m going to mention three names. First of all, Reverend 

Father Slashinsky is in the top; Father Mel also known to many 

in the Ukrainian community. Father Mel does a terrific job 

throughout Yorkton and all of the communities surrounding 

Yorkton.  

 

And I am going to also introduce a lady sitting in the front row, 

an aunt to my wife, Gail,June Skrepnick. June, would you wave 

your hand please. That’s my wife’s aunt, June Skrepnick. I also 

want to introduce in the far row, Mary-Anne Trischuk. 

Mary-Anne Trischuk is a resident of Yorkton. Way back in her 

youthful days, of course she was a student in Canora and was a 

resident of Canora. Mr. Speaker, Mary-Anne serves as the 

Vice-Chair of the Saskatchewan-Ukraine Relations Advisory 

Committee and is of course responsible for playing a large role 

in organizing this trip today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this group is in Regina today to visit their 

legislature and will be meeting with the member from Yorkton 

and myself later today after a tour of this building. I also 

understand that earlier on this morning while here in Regina 

they had an opportunity to visit Selo Gardens. Selo Gardens is a 

planned community for senior citizens sponsored by the Regina 

Ukrainian Orthodox Housing Corporation. Mr. Speaker, I trust 

that these individuals will enjoy the day in Regina, and I invite 

all members to join me in welcoming these very special guests 

to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

join in with the Deputy Premier in welcoming these fine guests 

from the Canora and Yorkton regions to their Legislative 

Assembly. Again, there’s so many there it’s difficult to 

introduce all of them. I’d love to, I’d like to point out 

Mary-Anne. She is chaperoning, I guess you could say, this trip, 

trying to keep these seniors in check. And one thing I learned 

today in visiting with her, she was actually a guide in this very 

building just a couple of years ago, apparently. 

 

So I’m not going to try and follow the Deputy Premier in 

speaking Ukrainian because I’ll embarrass myself, although 

being married to a Ukrainian woman, I have become one by 

osmosis. And I’d just like to ask all members to join me in 

welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. And I look 

forward to meeting with them at 2:30. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

want to join the Deputy Premier and the member from Yorkton 

to welcome our Ukrainian guests. I think it’s very important 

that we do all we can to make sure that people travel to our 

capital city to feel as welcome as they can. So certainly on 

behalf of the opposition, I want to welcome our guests and to 

point out that we’ve travelled to many locations, Yorkton being 

one such beautiful city. So I’ve always had great memories of 

visiting that particular city. And, Mr. Speaker, I know the 

Deputy Premier speaks the language quite well, so I’m going to 

try it. And I’ve done it once before, so I hope that our guests 

forgive me if I make a mistake. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to 

all members of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce a young 

fellow from Sheldon-Williams Collegiate who is visiting the 

Assembly on a work study program, grade 12 work study, Mr. 

Luc Desjardins in your gallery. We welcome Luc to the 

Assembly, and we wish him well in his studies as we go 

through the exercise with Work Studies 30. So welcome, Luc. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 

you and through you to all members of the legislature, Tom 

Graham and Gord Campbell from CUPE [Canadian Union of 

Public Employees] who are sitting in the Speaker’s gallery. And 

they’re interested in some of the proceedings today, so let’s all 

welcome them. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I’d like to join with the Opposition 

Leader in welcoming the members in your gallery to the 

Assembly. These are people that are very committed to the 

movement in our province for our organized labour. They do 

very good work. I’ve had opportunities to meet with them, and I 

would like to thank them for their professionalism and the 

respect that they’ve shown me. And I thank them for that and 

look forward to continuing to work with them as a result of the 

discussion paper that was released this morning. Thank you, 



1360 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2012 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I present 

a petition on highways: 

 

Therefore we, in the prayer that reads as follows, 

respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan undertake to upgrade the section of 

Highway 165 between Beauval and the English River First 

Nation by adding proper lighting for pedestrian traffic, by 

adding space for pedestrians on the highway and the 

bridges, and to be properly surfaced with the proper 

material needed for a busy, heavy-haul road. 

 

And the people that have presented this petition, Mr. Speaker, 

and have signed the petition are people from Beauval, 

Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan residents from 

across the province as it relates to the management and 

accounting of our finances. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada, in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards, and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 

financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 

people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 

taxpayers, and businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Moose Jaw, Weyburn, and Humboldt. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition calling on the Sask Party government to 

support the Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights. 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that many Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed 

incomes and are victims of physical, emotional, and 

financial abuse; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

social and economic security and a right to live free from 

poverty; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights which would 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Pharmacists’ Association of Saskatchewan Awards 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had the pleasure of 

recently attending the 2012 Pharmacists’ Association of 

Saskatchewan conference. This year’s theme was Promoting a 

Healthy Mind and Body. 

 

Pharmacists are important members of our medical teams, 

experts at answering your drug-related questions and 

determining if health issues are related to medication. As well, 

Mr. Speaker, pharmacists are considered some of the most 

highly trusted professionals. 

 

The 2012 PAS [Pharmacists’ Association of Saskatchewan] 

Awards recognized the professionals in six categories: 

Kimberly Sentes won Pharmacist of the Year, Dr. Melanie 

McLeod won the Takeda Magnum Opus Award, and Matt Dick 

won the New Horizon Award. 

 

Loren Regier and Karen Jensen received Awards of Merit, 

while Kerry Mansell took home the PharmaChoice Past Chair 

Award and, along with Walter Peterson, received a Certificate 

of Recognition. 

 

Saskatchewan’s pharmacists are active partners in health care, 

prescribing medication, providing emergency refills, renewing 

and extending prescriptions, changing dosage and formulations, 

and educating the public on their expanding health care 

responsibilities. 

 

Pharmacists are highly valued and are an essential part of any 

effective health care team. Our confidence in this profession is 

demonstrated by providing pharmacists with certain 

prescriptive rights in an effort to enhance health care delivery to 

the people of Saskatchewan. For that dedication, I ask my 

colleagues to join me in thanking our pharmacists for their 

ongoing commitment to high-quality health care. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Green Ribbon of Hope Campaign 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As many of my 

colleagues are already aware, once a year Child Find Canada 

launches the Green Ribbon of Hope campaign. It begins on 

May 1st and continues throughout the month of May. The aim 

is to increase public awareness about National Missing 

Children’s Day on May 25th and the issue of missing children 



May 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1361 

in Canada. 

 

It’s every parent’s worst nightmare to imagine their child going 

missing. Many of us have felt that absolute moment of panic 

when you lose sight of a small child for even a moment. Sadly, 

missing children are a tragic and devastating reality for far too 

many families. According to the most recent data from the 

RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police], anywhere between 

50,000 and 60,000 young people are reported missing each year 

in Canada. These are absolutely heartbreaking statistics. We 

must do more to stop this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As the slogan for the Green Ribbon campaign so appropriately 

suggests, a missing child is everyone’s responsibility. It takes a 

village. And so during the month of May, we show our support 

and concern about missing children by wearing a green ribbon. 

 

I would like to say thank you to Phyllis Hallatt, president of 

Child Find, headquartered in Saskatoon, and everyone else 

involved with the organization in Saskatchewan for their 

amazing dedication. Because of their hard work, Child Find can 

continue to provide support to families during periods of 

incomprehensible loss and uncertainty. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 

 

Saskatchewan Residents Receive Medal of Bravery 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Courage is defined 

as the ability to confront fear, pain, danger and uncertainty and 

act rightly in spite of them. 

 

On April 28th, 2007, Mark Janke of Elbow and Darren Bieber 

of Weyburn were confronted with a situation that called on 

them to sacrifice their own security and display courage of the 

highest order. On this fateful day, the two men rescued people 

from a submerged vehicle near Stoughton. Five passengers 

were in the vehicle when it lost control and flipped into a 

water-filled ditch. One passenger escaped the vehicle and 

alerted Janke who was first on the scene. 

 

Janke pulled two passengers from the submerged car. Bieber 

arrived shortly thereafter, and they worked together to free the 

last two victims. These men then took care of two survivors. 

Unfortunately, three other victims did not survive the ordeal. 

 

Both men recently received the Medal of Bravery from 

Governor General David Johnston at Rideau Hall in Ottawa for 

their brave acts. Within the Canadian system of honours, this is 

the third-highest award for bravery. Any person living or 

deceased may be a possible recipient of this honour. Established 

in 1972, the Medal of Bravery recognizes acts of gallantry and 

bravery in hazardous situations. 

 

I would invite my colleagues to join me in applauding the 

sacrifice of these Saskatchewan residents and the great acts of 

bravery that led to them receiving these prestigious awards. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Regina Police Service Half Marathon 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This past 

Sunday, the Regina Police Service held its ninth annual Half 

Marathon. The Regina Police Service Half Marathon has been 

running since 2004 and originated from the belief that the 

Regina Police Service’s employees are in a position to be 

positive role models and leaders in the community. Every year 

the RPS [Regina Police Service] puts on the Half Marathon to 

demonstrate their commitment to wellness and to encourage 

others to make good choices by pursuing physical fitness and a 

healthy lifestyle. 

 

This year’s 850 participants took part in the event, walking or 

running 21.1 kilometres around Wascana Lake and the 

University of Regina. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to share with 

my fellow members that I participated in the Half Marathon. 

While not anywhere near as fast as CTV’s [Canadian Television 

Network Ltd.] own Gareth “Speed” Dillistone, I should point 

out that I was able to complete the course without collapsing or 

breaking into tears. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, in addition to its 850 participants, I would 

like to thank the many volunteers, sponsors, and organizers who 

donated their time and support into making this a very great 

event. Special mention goes out to organizers Patti 

Sandison-Cattell and Elizabeth Popowich for putting on such a 

successful event, and to Ted Jaleta of Regina for once again 

placing first overall and for teaching us all how important it is 

to never give up. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Humboldt Broncos Win Anavet Cup 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 

Assembly to once again talk about the Humboldt Broncos on 

their successes. Today I offer my congratulations on winning 

the Anavet Cup for the seventh and final time in this storied 

tournament. 

 

This past weekend, the Humboldt Broncos battled the Portage 

Terriers in game 7 of the series to become the western 

champions. You would think that game 7 of the Anavet Cup 

would be close but, Mr. Speaker, the Broncos had no problems 

taking the win with a score of 4 to 0. This is not to say that the 

game wasn’t fought hard. Goalie Matt Hrynkiw played an 

exceptional game by putting a stop to 24 shots at the net. 

 

The Humboldt Broncos now look to compete in the RBC 

[Royal Bank of Canada] Cup as the host team. As one of only 

eight teams to win multiple national junior A championships, 

the Broncos will look for national title number three on home 

ice when the RBC Cup returns to Saskatchewan. 

 

The community of Humboldt has been preparing for this 

exciting event that will put them in the national spotlight. I 

know that many have had this marked on their calendar for 

months and are looking forward to the events that are planned 

for this tournament. The RBC Cup kicks off this Friday in 

Humboldt, and I encourage all members to cheer on the 



1362 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2012 

Broncos and their quest for the national junior A championship. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Habitat for Humanity Key Ceremony 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 

the House to talk about a Habitat for Humanity key ceremony 

that I had the pleasure of attending yesterday morning in 

Regina. Yesterday another Habitat for Humanity partner family 

achieved a dream that many of us share — the dream of home 

ownership. 

 

It was a day that they’ll never forget and neither will the many 

caring partners and volunteers who came together to make this 

dream a reality. Mr. Speaker, like Habitat for Humanity, our 

government takes housing very seriously. The goal of our 

government is to ensure that all Saskatchewan people share in 

the benefits of growth to secure our province’s future and most 

importantly to make our province the best place to live, work, 

and raise a family. Habitat includes people from all 

backgrounds coming together to help families build a brighter 

future for themselves, a value that Saskatchewan people are 

well-known for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud that in the 2012-13 budget, we 

announced an additional 1 million to help Habitat construct 20 

homes across the province. Since 2009 the province has 

dedicated a total of 4.5 million in funding for Habitat for 

Humanity affiliates and chapters to build 90 homes in Moose 

Jaw, Regina, Saskatoon, Yorkton, Prince Albert, Lloydminster, 

and most recently, Nipawin. 

 

This home in Regina, another Habitat for Humanity build, is a 

wonderful example of the Saskatchewan advantage where 

people are willing to support others in need and help build a 

stronger community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Services. 

 

Osteoporosis Canada Fundraising Event 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

Sunday, April 22nd, I had the honour and privilege of attending 

the Osteoporosis Canada, Regina chapter’s spring reception. 

Osteoporosis is a disease that causes bones to become thin, 

porous, decreasing bone strength and leading to increased risk 

of breaking a bone. Osteoporosis does not develop overnight. 

You could lose bone mass steadily for many years without 

experiencing any symptoms or signs of the disease until a bone 

fractures. That is why it is often referred to as the silent thief. 

 

Mr. Speaker at least one in three women and one in five men 

will suffer from osteoporotic fracture during their lifetime. The 

cost to treat osteoporosis and the fractures it causes is currently 

estimated at 1.9 billion annually to the Canadian health care 

system. Mr. Speaker, this fundraising event will assist 

Osteoporosis Canada in raising funds to provide ongoing 

programs and resources for those that suffer from the silent 

thief. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to commend the Osteoporosis 

Canada, Regina chapter for organizing the successful afternoon. 

And I would also like to thank Dr. Roberta McKay and Elmer 

Brenner for opening their home to raise awareness and funds 

for osteoporosis. I ask all my colleagues to join me in 

recognizing the commitment and dedication of Osteoporosis 

Canada Regina chapter, Dr. Roberta McKay, and Elmer 

Brenner. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this morning the Sask Party 

government announced a sweeping review of all of the labour 

legislation in Saskatchewan. Just like a number of key 

initiatives that will change the very fabric of Saskatchewan, this 

sweeping review wasn’t in their election platform. 

 

The Premier said this type of review wasn’t top of mind for the 

Sask Party. Mr. Speaker, the review of 15 different pieces of 

legislation will take place over only 90 days. To the Premier: 

why is he taking less time to review this province’s labour 

legislation than he took to review minor football? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, in the Speech from 

the Throne, the government indicated an ongoing interest in 

terms of ensuring that the labour legislative environment in the 

province of Saskatchewan was fair to both sides, was 

competitive, and was as modern as possible. Mr. Speaker, that 

was in the Speech from the Throne. So it shouldn’t be a surprise 

today that the government has indicated that the review is going 

to now take its next phase. 

 

The member’s wrong. The review is not over, Mr. Speaker. We 

have now presented . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — He didn’t say that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well the implication . . . He’s saying he 

didn’t say that. The implication is that it is over, referencing the 

minor football study that was done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what’s going to happen now is that these ideas 

that have been presented to the province of Saskatchewan in a 

very transparent way will be the source of consultation and 

review and study. And we’ll get feedback from all the 

stakeholders, Mr. Speaker, and the process of democracy will 

work. The government will listen to that consultation, and we 

will move forward to ensure that our labour legislative 

environment is fair to both sides, competitive with other parts of 

this country, so that we continue to lead the nation in economic 

growth. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think the Premier confirmed that 

this was not in the election discussion that we had last fall. Bill 

5 was the last time that the Sask Party government talked about 



May 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1363 

fair and balanced labour legislation, and the United Nations said 

it violated human rights. The Court of Appeal said Bill 5 was 

unconstitutional. 

 

This review doesn’t even appear to address the concerns of the 

United Nations. And it’s difficult to gauge whether the views of 

working people will be taken into account in this rushed 90-day 

review. To the Premier: why is he rushing this important 

consultation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’re talking potentially — 

potentially only — about legislation informed by this 

consultation being introduced this coming fall. Then, between 

its introduction and its eventual passage, if there even is 

legislation, will be a number of months as well, because that 

would only happen a year from now, Mr. Speaker. That might 

be rushing by NDP [New Democratic Party] standards. I think 

it’s reasonable by most other people’s standards. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we’re getting a little more 

information about this process. But it’s very clear that the 

feedback from the public is going to be difficult to put into this 

process in the next 90 days. There’s not a single public hearing 

to be held before this July 31st deadline that the minister has 

set. My question to the Premier is this: when did he direct his 

ministry to start this sweeping review? Did the ministry 

commence this work prior to the 2011 election? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — In platforms of the Saskatchewan Party, 

we’ve been pretty clear. We’ve said we believe the labour 

legislation, the environment around labour legislation in this 

province needs to be the subject of constant stewardship. We 

need to make sure it’s competitive with other jurisdictions. We 

need to make sure it’s fair to both sides. We need to make sure 

it’s updated. Mr. Speaker, I’ve got a news article from, well this 

was October 31st, another one from November 1st, Mr. 

Speaker, from, one from CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation] news, the other one from CBC news as well. Both 

highlight the fact that during the campaign I was talking about 

some of the issues that are now the subject of the review 

certainly going forward, including potentially providing the 

option for unions to collect their own dues. Mr. Speaker, that’s 

part of this discussion. 

 

There are other common sense changes that actually labour 

leaders have asked for. Indexing minimum wage is one of the 

subjects of this review. The NDP have asked us to index 

minimum wage even though they didn’t do it in 16 years of 

government. We need to improve the essential services process. 

We’ve recognized that. That’s also part of the review, Mr. 

Speaker. There are a number of items here that both sides, 

labour and management, have asked for. Now we’re going to 

have a review of that. We’re going to have legislation possibly 

in the fall, more consultation, potentially passing in the spring. 

Mr. Speaker, that’s a pretty responsible process. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are fair and 

reasonable. They’ve always appreciated a common sense 

approach. Important issues on their minds today are pension 

security, workplace safety, income security, and the cost of 

living. To deal with these types of issues, labour legislation in 

this province has been developed over many, many years of 

discussion and negotiation between employers and workers. To 

allow 90 days to review this legislation is not adequate and, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m asking the Premier this very specific question: 

why is he disrupting the long history of relatively good labour 

relations at a time when all it can do is hurt our economy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, implicit in the hon. member’s 

question is that things never change, Mr. Speaker. Well in ’07 

they changed. We campaigned on some very specific 

commitments around secret ballot votes in the . . . secret ballot 

certification. We campaigned in favour of having some level of 

common sense prevail in the workplace where management 

could talk to labour. Those changes were made. Other changes 

were made later in terms of the construction labour environment 

in this province. Essential services legislation happened, Mr. 

Speaker. And what we saw, Mr. Speaker, what we saw in this 

province was collective bargaining that proceeded apace, 

collective bargaining that was resolved by both sides, Mr. 

Speaker, and relatively labour peace. 

 

And here’s what else we saw: record job creation in the 

workplace in the province of Saskatchewan. We saw record 

population growth in the province of Saskatchewan. We helped 

create together, and labour had a big part of that, one of the best 

business climates in the province of Saskatchewan. I’d say 

based on that activity in the past, we should continue with that 

kind of due diligence in the future. This is a consultation. This 

is a review. Legislation can’t, by definition, be introduced till 

fall, then passed in the spring, unless the NDP wish it to 

because it’s a co-operative process. So I think it’s a reasonable 

process, Mr. Speaker, for us. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Collective Bargaining at Cancer Agency 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Minister of Health. Does he think it’s fair that nurses at the 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency make $13 less per hour in their 

base wage than other nurses in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we know that the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency is in 

the process of negotiating with their union. As I’ve said many 

times, I won’t get into the process of negotiating on the floor of 

the House. 

 

But what I can say is that, according to Scott Livingstone, the 

CEO [chief executive officer] of the Cancer Agency, who 

identified very well in a letter to the editor that the nurses in the 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency were meeting the same wages as 

the base nurse wage through SUN [Saskatchewan Union of 



1364 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2012 

Nurses], Mr. Speaker. So the premise of that member’s question 

is absolutely wrong. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, for 29 months, health care 

professionals at Saskatchewan Cancer Agency have been 

without a contract. These individuals have publicly stated that 

they do not want to strike. What they do want, Mr. Speaker, is a 

fair and a properly negotiated agreement, Mr. Speaker. But 

negotiations require two willing partners, and it’s not clear by 

the 29 months without a contract, Mr. Speaker, that the 

government is willing to negotiate in good faith, Mr. Speaker. 

And it’s odd because, as we’ve seen with the Saskatchewan 

Union of Nurses, that in that case a settlement was reached very 

quickly. 

 

My question to the minister: when will he take this issue 

seriously, and when will he allow this issue to go to binding 

arbitration? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I believe the member 

opposite talked about a fair and reasonable collective bargaining 

process and then, at the end of the question, he’s asking for 

binding arbitration, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s kind of trying to 

play both sides of the coin, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have settled with over 40,000 health care employees, Mr. 

Speaker, in this province. We have a tentative agreement with 

SUN, Mr. Speaker. Over 10,000 nurses working in this 

province, a far cry from when they were in power, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve come to agreements with all of these without using 

binding arbitration. I would say in this process that we will get a 

contract. I believe we’ll get a contract without using binding 

arbitration, Mr. Speaker. I’d encourage both parties to get to the 

table. 

 

But I’d also, Mr. Speaker, encourage the member opposite, if 

he’s going to start putting out numbers on wages, that he is at 

least somewhere in the ballpark because last time he wasn’t. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s been 29 months that these 

individuals have been without a contract. When we think of 

cancer care, we know, yes, oncologists are very important. Yes, 

Mr. Speaker, we know that medications and drugs for cancer 

treatment are very important. So too, Mr. Speaker, are the other 

health care professionals who provide care to cancer patients. 

 

My question to the minister: does he think 29 months without a 

contract is an appropriate length of time? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in my previous 

answer, certainly the collective bargaining process is working. I 

would say that it has taken too long, I wish an agreement 

would’ve been settled long before this point, Mr. Speaker. But 

as the member opposite said, it takes two sides. It isn’t 

necessarily the employer or maybe the employee that’s holding 

up the process. Between the two of them this process has been 

held up. 

 

But I will say, Mr. Speaker, that cancer care . . . and patients in 

this province can expect excellent cancer care from the 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency and all the employees within that 

Cancer Agency. In fact, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the 

increases in the Cancer Agency budget over the last four years 

of our government, Mr. Speaker, never had they seen more 

money come to that agency to reduce wait times, a full 

complement of oncologists, a full complement of staff, Mr. 

Speaker — again a far cry from when the NDP ran the Cancer 

Agency. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member of Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen our government’s 

actions in the recent weeks. When they want to plow ahead with 

something and take decisive action, they do. We’ve seen them 

plow ahead with the addition of more politicians in this 

province, even though that is something no one in 

Saskatchewan wants. What Saskatchewan people do want in the 

province, Mr. Speaker, is good care for our loved ones, 

especially patients when they are fighting cancer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that the same zeal that we’ve seen them 

pursue the addition of more politicians in the province, they 

have not applied to other situations. It’s certainly the 29 months 

without a contract is evidence of that. 

 

The minister talked about negotiations that occur between the 

two sides. My question to the minister: if he believes that the 

final offer from SAHO [Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations] is fair and reasonable, why does he not allow 

this to go to binding arbitration, allow it to be settled, and surely 

the fair and reasonable agreement will prevail? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

talks about the actions of this government and what those 

actions of this government has been, Mr. Speaker, over the last 

four and a half years. Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that there is a 

65 per cent decrease in the number of days between the referral 

and oncologist’s first appointment. That’s the action of this 

government, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I can tell you there’s a 

50 per cent decrease in the number of patients waiting for 

oncologists’ appointments, Mr. Speaker. That’s the actions of 

this government, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that 

there has been a 76 per cent increase in the funding to the 

Cancer Agency under this government. That’s the action of this 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe a contract will be negotiated very, very 

soon. I certainly hope there will be. Both parties need to be at 

the bargaining table. The employees need to know that binding 

arbitration hasn’t been used in 40,000 other employee contracts, 

Mr. Speaker, and it won’t be used in this one. 



May 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1365 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Immigration Program and Foreign Workers 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the past years 

I’ve had the opportunity to meet many immigrants to this 

province and hear about their stories, and it’s always interesting 

to do so. Many of the new immigrants to Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, have come from larger centres in Canada, for example 

Toronto, Vancouver, and Montreal. 

 

In my interactions with them the most common reason that I 

hear from these individuals is the existence of the family class 

through the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program which 

was introduced in 2005 by the previous NDP government. Mr. 

Speaker, thousands of people have moved here because of the 

SINP [Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program] program, 

specifically the family class. These people established roots in 

our province, often starting businesses, and not just one 

business. Sometimes it’s one, two, or three. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this morning we learned from the minister that he 

plans on gutting the family class within the Saskatchewan 

immigrant nominee program. My question to the minister: why 

is he gutting the family class, something that’s worked well for 

many people here in the province, and something that has 

brought many social and economic benefits to the province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the members opposite would have a difficult time 

responding to Tony Blair’s recent memoirs where he says 

there’s a very simple distinction and question to be addressed 

that is for a jurisdiction. Do more people move in or move out, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, between 2001 and 2006 newcomers arrived, Mr. 

Speaker, and they came in by about 8,000, Mr. Speaker. That 

compared to about 30,000 in Manitoba. Mr. Speaker, in this 

past year alone nearly 11,000 newcomers have come to this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the member’s question — unfortunately he 

framed it as he did — what we did is take steps to sustain the 

family class category, Mr. Speaker, making sure that we’re 

protecting the integrity of the family class category, making 

sure that family class members can still make reference and 

referrals, Mr. Speaker, to family members. And we’re making 

sure, Mr. Speaker, that we’re accountable to stakeholders here 

within the province as well as to the federal government. Thank 

you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the reality is that thousands of 

people move to this province based on their understanding of 

the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program and the family 

class category. They base their decisions upon that. But now we 

learn, Mr. Speaker, that there is only one nominee per family 

and also before that nominee comes, Mr. Speaker, there has to 

be a job offer to that person, which is a change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this certainly is no longer the family stream. I 

think the minister could rebrand this as the low-waged worker 

trickle because that will have a huge effect on people here in the 

province. And of course, Mr. Speaker, the minister made no 

reference to this six months ago during the election. 

 

My question to the minister: what does he have to say to the 

people who have moved here from places like Toronto, 

Vancouver, Montreal based on their understanding of the family 

class and now understanding that the minister is gutting the 

program? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — The first thing I’m going to say to them, 

Mr. Speaker, is watch for the members opposite when they play 

politics with immigration because the people of the province 

always lose, Mr. Speaker. That’s the first thing I’m going to tell 

them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to making sure that people 

understand the changes that we’ve made, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 

made about a dozen changes along the way. It’s these very 

changes that have helped to ensure the sustainability and 

progress that we’ve made under the Saskatchewan immigrant 

nominee program, Mr. Speaker. These are more of these, Mr. 

Speaker. So what we’re doing is saying, instead of seeing 

families nominating up to 20, Mr. Speaker — and that’s not fair 

for others that are simply waiting for one — we’re saying, let’s 

actually make sure that there’s one that they are appropriately 

settled here, Mr. Speaker. That works for families and it works 

for Saskatchewan. And as far as connecting to jobs, Mr. 

Speaker, there are more than 11,000 open and available today, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s the new Saskatchewan: record employment 

and record populations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, members opposite have this 

troubling pattern of using an outlier and then presenting that as 

the norm across the board. Mr. Speaker, it’s growing tiresome 

and, not only that, it’s a concerning way of making public 

policy. 

 

The minister did not only announce the gutting of the family 

class for the SINP this morning; he also announced another 

21-day consultation period on foreign worker protection 

legislation. Of course, Mr. Speaker, 13 months ago the minister 

originally announced a four-week consultation process on such 

legislation. While the minister keeps stretching out the 

consultation process to protect foreign workers, we hear 

troubling stories in the news and we see on the federal front the 

Conservatives making very troubling actions that will hurt 

foreign workers. 

 

My question to the minister: does he agree with the federal 

government’s decision to allow employers to pay high-skilled 

foreign workers 15 per cent less than the wage for other peers in 



1366 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2012 

the area within their region? Does he support that 15 per cent 

lower wage? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, what we support is the provincial nominee program, 

the SINP, Mr. Speaker, being able to sustain, Mr. Speaker, the 

success that we’ve had. Mr. Speaker, today we’ve made a 

number of announcements to help enhance the program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have announced a second round of 

consultations for foreign worker protection, Mr. Speaker. And 

why did we do that? Because we listened to people and last fall 

they said, would you please come out with a second round of 

consultations? We said, of course we will, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

why we’re beginning these consultations. 

 

Are we paying attention to what Ottawa is doing? Of course we 

are, Mr. Speaker. Because within the Canadian Constitution, 

Mr. Speaker, in section 95, we know that this is a shared 

jurisdiction. Mr. Speaker, we’re doing this to ensure that we can 

sustain the SINP and so that we can also make our point. 

 

We actually want more people to come to the province, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re actually asking the federal government to 

ensure that the cap that they’ve put on at 4,000 can go to 6,000, 

Mr. Speaker. In order to do that, we need to ensure the 

sustainability and integrity of this program, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

something the member opposite obviously needs to study a little 

more. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, there was no response in the 

minister’s answer as to whether or not he supports a 15 per cent 

lower wage for foreign workers. A recent StarPhoenix editorial 

had this to say: “This policy certainly makes little economic or 

social sense.” It went on to say: 

 

The long-term effect could well be the de-skilling of 

Canada’s workforce, with employers increasingly relying 

on cheaper foreign workers and not investing as much in 

training, something that will be hugely detrimental to the 

aspirations of young Canadians, particularly aboriginals. 

 

So in one fell swoop, Mr. Speaker, we see the federal 

government taking negative steps towards the treatment of 

foreign workers. We see this undermining training 

opportunities, Mr. Speaker, for all Saskatchewan people and all 

Canadians. Mr. Speaker, you would think this would concern 

the Sask Party. But instead, on the same day, we see this 

government adding injury to insult by gutting the family class 

in the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program. 

 

My question to the minister: why won’t he stand up for 

Saskatchewan’s interest in this case? Why won’t he take a clear 

stand on such short-sighted decisions? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan today has the 

lowest unemployment rate in the country of 4.8 per cent. Mr. 

Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan today, there are 

nearly 530,000 people working. That’s an all-time record for 

the month of March, Mr. Speaker. Today in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, we have an all-time record number of people working 

full-time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that there is a challenge with this red-hot labour 

market, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we’ve invested $3.5 billion, 

Mr. Speaker, in post-secondary education, including millions of 

dollars to ensure that more First Nations and Métis people have 

an opportunity not simply to enrol in programs but to complete 

them and then to move successfully to the workforce. We see 

that, Mr. Speaker, year over year, 4,700 new jobs. Mr. Speaker, 

that’s an increase of 13 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me make it clear. We’re going to stand up for 

Saskatchewan’s people no matter where it is, no matter how, 

Mr. Speaker, to ensure that the economic growth that’s under 

way offers benefits to people straight across the province, Mr. 

Speaker. And that message is clearly made to Ottawa. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Proposed Urban Development Project 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 

we found out that the $348 million price tag currently attached 

to the stadium initiative here in city of Regina, that the province 

was being asked for $230 million of that amount. I guess the 

question to start with, Mr. Speaker, is that wasn’t included in 

the current budget that is still being worked through this House 

in terms of estimates. When will that decision be made on the 

$230 million and in which budget year will it fall? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of First Nations and 

Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well thank you very much for the 

question, Mr. Speaker. To go over the chronology of the events, 

last week we received a proposal from the city of Regina. 

Yesterday I had the opportunity to tell this House that the 

request was for $230 million to include not only the stadium, 

but the revitalization of Regina. Going forward, I asked, I wrote 

a letter yesterday to the mayor, asking for more information. 

That information will be coming in a short order of time, I 

hope. Then we’ll have a chance to look at it and to decide on 

any funding decisions going forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I guess 

the answer from the minister is, you know, in due course, or 

we’ll see, or what happens. But the thing is, Mr. Speaker, if the 

province is being asked for $230 million, what is that 

government going to do to ask the people of Saskatchewan 

whether or not it’s okay to proceed with that $230 million? 

What is their consultation process that they’re anticipating to 

ask the people of Saskatchewan whether or not that’s a fair 

expenditure? One question. Second question is, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of the federal money that this was contingent on 

previously — if there wasn’t federal money they said that they 



May 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1367 

were going to be out; that’s what killed the last deal — there’s 

$30 million of federal money in this proposed deal, Mr. 

Speaker. Is this current proposal contingent on federal 

involvement as well, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of First Nations and 

Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, thank you to the 

member for the question. What this government will continue to 

do is to consult with Saskatchewan people on top priorities 

which are health care, education, infrastructure — something 

that members opposite never did. We will continue, as answers 

portrayed earlier in question period, we will continue to lead the 

way in the country in those areas. 

 

When it comes to talking about a stadium, yes, we will ensure 

that Saskatchewan residents have the opportunity to look at 

proposals that come forward and to ensure that we have a 

quality, state of the art stadium for the Riders into the future. 

 

So that is what a prudent government would do. We will look 

for the information. We will ask for more information when 

necessary. When that information comes forward, we will make 

a decision, all within a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. Thank 

you very much. 

 

[14:15] 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Review of Employment and Labour Legislation 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

am pleased to rise today to announce the most comprehensive 

review of employment and labour legislation in the province’s 

history. Mr. Speaker, the laws that govern employment 

relationships in workplaces have a significant impact on all of 

our lives, from minimum wage to the age of employment to 

keeping people safe at work to ensuring people can form or join 

the unions of their choosing, and to enabling unions and 

employers to engage in free and fair collective bargaining — all 

of these things touch each and every one of us in some way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we recently consulted with business and labour 

stakeholders to amend The Occupational Health and Safety Act, 
1993 to improve workplace health and safety in the province. 

This resulted in the introduction of Bill 23 in the fall legislative 

session. We want to continue with this work to modernize and 

simplify all of our employment . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we want to continue with 

this work to modernize and simplify all of our employment and 

labour relations legislation. Mr. Speaker, this goal is ambitious 

and important. We believe this goal can be achieved through, 

firstly, restructuring and organizing the legislation so it is easier 

to use and understand; and secondly, eliminating 

inconsistencies between provisions that result in confusion; and 

thirdly, clarifying which provisions apply in particular 

situations. 

 

We also wanted to ensure that new labour legislation reflects 

today’s changing work environment while supporting flexible 

work arrangements to enhance productivity and work-life 

balance within Saskatchewan workplaces. To this end, Mr. 

Speaker, we are undertaking a significant consultation process 

with a large number of stakeholders as well as asking for the 

public and all interested parties to participate. To assist 

individuals in considering how to change the legislation, we 

have developed a discussion paper. This discussion paper is 

available on our ministry website. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are doing this important work to protect the 

health and safety of workers in Saskatchewan, to assure 

minimum standards of employment, and to improve compliance 

and ensure effective enforcement. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the minister and the Government 

of Saskatchewan have announced a process to change 

legislation in Saskatchewan as it relates to the relationship 

between employers and workers. And any time this type of 

legislation is looked at, it’s extremely important because so 

much of our economy depends on the good working together of 

employees and employers. And so, Mr. Speaker, we are quite 

concerned that this legislation or this proposal for consultation 

has been brought forward and that it does have some very short 

timelines as it relates to this consultation document. 

 

The Premier has indicated that there are some longer timelines, 

but it comes down to a question of trust. Do the people of 

Saskatchewan trust this government to deal with these types of 

issues in a way that doesn’t disrupt our economy, that doesn’t 

cause us difficulties in the long term? 

 

This is a century worth of negotiation and discussion which 

shows up in the legislation. And as we all know, many times the 

changes are brought forward in this legislature as a result of a 

serious injury or death to somebody that needs to be corrected. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to seeing what the 

government has to do with this particular legislation. But I 

know that we will be watching very carefully because there’s a 

basic issue of trust with this government. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 6, 

The Miscellaneous Business Statutes Amendment Act, 2011 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 



1368 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2012 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments Corporation. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — I request with leave, consideration in 

Committee of the Whole this Bill . . . Pardon me, Mr. Speaker. I 

request leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole 

on this Bill and this Bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Investments 

Corporation has requested leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole of Bill No. 6, The Miscellaneous 

Business Statutes Amendment Act, 2011 and that the Bill now 

be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed moving third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 6 — The Miscellaneous Business 

Statutes Amendment Act, 2011 
 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Crown 

Investments Corporation that Bill No. 6, The Miscellaneous 

Business Statutes Amendment Act, 2011 be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 7, 

The Co-operatives Amendment Act, 2011 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments Corporation. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration of Committee of the Whole on this Bill and this 

Bill now be read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill No. 7, The 

Co-operatives Amendment Act, 2011 and that the Bill now be 

read a third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed by moving third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 7 — The Co-operatives Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 

2011 modifiant la Loi de 1996 sur les coopératives 
 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — I move this Bill be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Crown 

Investments Corporation that Bill No. 7, The Co-operatives 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 8, 

The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2011 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments Corporation. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — I request leave to waive consideration 

in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and this Bill be now 

read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Investments 

Corporation has requested leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole of Bill No. 8, The Land Titles 

Amendment Act, 2011 and that Bill be now read a third time. Is 

leave granted? 

 



May 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1369 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed with moving third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 8 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2011 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Crown 

Investments Corporation that Bill No. 8, The Land Titles 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 34, The 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation Act without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I request leave to waive consideration in Committee of 

the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill be now read the third 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill 

No. 34, The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation Act and 

that the Bill now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed with third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 34 — The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 

Corporation Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Agriculture that Bill No. 34, The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 

Corporation Act be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Committee of 

Finance. 

 

The Speaker: — Committee of Finance. I do now leave the 

Chair. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Executive Council 

Vote 10 

 

Subvote (EX01) 

 

The Chair: — I’ll call the Committee of Finance to order. The 

business before the committee is the estimates and 

supplementary estimates for Executive Council. The first item 

of business is the main estimates for Executive Council, vote 10 

found on page 63 of the Estimates book. 

 

Before we begin, I have a couple of comments I would like to 

make, particularly . . . well, for all members, but particularly the 

newly elected members and more importantly for those citizens 

who may be watching us. We are in Committee of the Whole, 

Committee of Finance and our procedures here are different 

than from our standing committees. For those people who have 

been watching and of course for our members, they will know 

that in our standing committees the first difference is, although 

we call them standing committees, members sit while they 

speak, whereas in this committee members will rise when they 

speak. 

 

But I think a more important difference is, in the standing 

committees the minister appearing before the committee brings 

with him or her officials, as the Premier has here today. And if 



1370 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2012 

the minister wishes and asks the officials to answer a question 

or provide some information, the officials certainly do that. In 

this committee, only elected members speak. So that’s one of 

the main differences. 

 

And also all elected members are voting members of this 

committee, whereas in the standing committee only those 

appointed, which are seven. 

 

So with those opening comments, what I would like to do is call 

upon the Premier to introduce the officials that he has with him 

here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker 

and Chair of Committees. I will introduce the officials that are 

with me here today, Mr. Chair, and then I have a few brief 

introductory remarks. And I’m sure my friend, the Leader of the 

Opposition, has some remarks as well to begin before the 

questioning. 

 

Mr. Chair of Committees, it’s a pleasure to have my deputy 

minister, the deputy minister in Executive Council, Doug Moen, 

to my left. To my right is Reg Downs, senior advisor in 

Executive Council to myself. We have the Acting Deputy 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs with us as well, Wes 

Jickling, immediately to Mr. Moen’s left. Just behind Mr. Moen 

is Bonita Cairns whose official title is executive director of 

corporate services; and then director of House business for 

Executive Council, Cole Goertz is immediately behind me. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, I will from time to time be drawing on the 

expertise and the knowledge of members of Executive Council 

itself to provide information, should the need arise as a result of 

questions. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I look forward to the questions that will come 

and, I’m sure, the debate that will happen. This is always a very 

interesting time in the life of a legislative session, and I think it 

can be used constructively to highlight differences that exist in 

Saskatchewan, differences between the two parties represented, 

but also ensure that the priorities of Saskatchewan people are 

brought to the forefront for this particular time of debate as they 

are throughout a legislative session. 

 

By way of introductory comments, Mr. Chairman, you and I 

know, and members of this committee will know, that usually 

the debate strays from the specifics of the Executive Council 

estimates. This is called Executive Council estimates and again 

— so for those watching or for new members — technically, 

theoretically it’s about the budget of Executive Council. 

Obviously there’s a lot of latitude granted so there can be a 

much wider ranging discussion and debate as there should be. 

 

But I like to offer some comments on the finances of Executive 

Council and executive councillors, in other words, the cabinet. I 

think that’s an important thing. We’ve worked hard to lead by 

example in Executive Council in terms of keeping costs to 

taxpayers down. And so I’m going to touch on that very, very 

briefly before we get on with the specific questions. 

 

For example, Mr. Chair, let’s take a look at staff in Executive 

Council. Currently staff at Executive Council, 63.1. That’s for a 

total cost of $491,000 effective April 1, 2012, Mr. Chair. Just 

compare that with November 2007 when we took over. So 

under the previous administration, 83 staff. So 63 now; 83 staff 

in Executive Council then and a higher cost, $605,000 per 

month. In terms of ministerial assistants that serve the rest of 

executive councillors, under the previous administration, 96 for 

a total of 536,000 a month; today for this government, 74, much 

lower, $429,000 per month. 

 

Mr. Chairman, in terms of advertising, Executive Council is 

involved in helping to direct the advertising of the Government 

of Saskatchewan, not the political advertising that each party 

does or the caucuses do perhaps, but of the advertising of the 

government proper. Here again, Mr. Chair, we’re working hard 

to keep costs down, remembering we’re not spending our 

money. We’re spending the taxpayers’ money. 

 

I could tell you that in the election year it’s an interesting 

comparison because people think, well, governments ramp up 

the advertising in an election year. And it was true in ’07 under 

the previous administration when the amount of advertising, 

compared to what we did in our election year 2011-12, reflected 

in last year’s budget, was a reduction of 30 per cent. Thirty per 

cent less government advertising in our election year versus the 

previous administration. And finally the four-year comparison 

of advertising expenditures between our government and the 

previous one, down 15 per cent under our government. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Finally out-of-province travel and in-province travel is a major 

cost of Executive Council . It’s a major cost for cabinet. And I 

obviously have a budget for travel as well, or whoever the 

premier happens to be at the time. Mr. Chairman, these are very 

interesting numbers. I think we should focus on, again in terms 

of leading by example, number of out-of-province trips. This 

year compared to 2006-07 under the previous government, 

down 42 per cent. Cost of out-of-province travel this year 

compared to the last year of the NDP government, down 43 per 

cent from those days. In- and out-of-province travel expenses, 

Mr. Chair, down 47 per cent this year versus the last year of the 

NDP. 

 

Government Services executive air use, Mr. Chairman — these 

are the planes that the province has for travel — Government 

Services exec air use down 65.7 per cent over a comparable 

time. And this is not adjusted for inflation. These are just 

numbers against numbers, our administration versus the 

previous one. 

 

So we can always do better, Mr. Chair. We can always find 

more efficiencies. We seek to do that, but we know it’s 

important for Executive Council to lead by example. We’ve 

been working to do that over the last four years. There’s an 

example again of that in this budget in particular, and I wanted 

to offer that in terms of maybe contextual remarks for the 

discussion we’re going have. And I want to say to my hon. 

friend, the Leader of the Opposition, I look forward to the 

questions and the answers in the debate that will ensue. Thank 

you, Mr. Chair. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I guess my first 



May 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1371 

comment would be I have to look way down compared to where 

I’m usually looking, so this is a good spot to be. 

 

But I want to thank you, and I want to thank the committee for 

this opportunity to ask some questions of the Premier and of the 

government. And as has been pointed out, the questions will be 

wide-ranging. I know that I’ve asked a lot of questions of the 

Premier, and he hasn’t answered them. So maybe I’ll get a 

chance to ask those questions again today. So we’ll see whether 

that happens. 

 

I also want to say a special thank you to the officials who are 

here in the room. They’re all people that I’ve known and 

worked with in interesting ways over many years. And I also 

especially want to say thank you to all of the people who aren’t 

in the room but who are watching across government because I 

know that people are ready to support the Premier in answering 

important questions. 

 

Now this is about the budget, and everybody who runs a 

household knows that a budget’s about choices. And, Mr. Chair, 

over the last three years, the Sask Party has made some choices 

that we don’t agree with as the opposition, and I think we’ve 

pointed out that. But more importantly, we are disappointed to 

see that the least three budgets of this government have ended 

up in deficit by the end of the fiscal year. And, Mr. Speaker, 

this budget has a very thin positive number both on the GRF 

[General Revenue Fund] side and on the summary side. And we 

are concerned about that. 

 

Now when this budget was, I guess, in its creation, the Premier 

was making comments about the budget. And I made the 

comment that he seemed to be talking out of both sides of his 

mouth, that there was an austerity side to it in a time of 

prosperity. And I think I will continue to say that because for 

the public, they’ve seen a lot of hype, a lot of photo ops, a lot of 

those kinds of things around some of the positive things that are 

happening.  

 

But what we know is everyday families are getting the austerity 

side of the budget. Kids in the classrooms are being asked to do 

with less. Health care, people are asked to manage and send 

money back to the central budgetary fund. Students and 

apprentices are going to pay more for their tuition or for their 

other fees in apprenticeships. Seniors are paying more for 

medication, and everybody’s going to be paying a little bit 

higher on their property taxes where they have the RCMP as 

their police. 

 

So one area where the government seems quite interested in 

expanding is to add three more politicians. And it doesn’t 

matter who you talk to in Saskatchewan, they all know that 

adding three more politicians is a long-term commitment to 

millions of dollars extra in the budget. And we’ll perhaps have 

some better explanation about that as we go along a little later. 

What we do know is that when this government took over, there 

was a long-term budgeting strategy for the province or many 

plans laid out in different departments. There was clearly the 

start of a resource boom which we continue to enjoy. And the 

question we have to ask now is: has the government made the 

right choices over the last number of years? And what have we 

got to show for it? 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think there will be a number of 

questions about the types of things that we could have invested 

the money into. And clearly one of the questions becomes when 

you’re using one-time money, resource money, you have to be 

especially careful because it’s not continuing money. It’s 

money that once it’s used, it’s gone. So what we have is a 

government that’s making choices, and it’s doing some things 

that we’ll have a lot of questions about. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think my job is to ask some good questions 

and to start looking at some of the issues. And I hadn’t planned 

on asking a question about the Executive Council itself right 

away. But I will ask that the Premier table the information that 

he read earlier about the numbers for Executive Council, April 

1st. Unfortunately we don’t have the global estimates because 

they usually come at the end of the session. But I know that 

because we’re not at the end of the session we don’t have the 

global estimates. 

 

So my first question is, actually relates to the timing of the 

Executive Council estimates. Traditionally it’s always been the 

last estimate to be done. Can you explain why we’re doing it 

today? 

 

The Chair: — Committee members, the Chair has neglected to 

call the appropriate vote. We are dealing with Executive 

Council, vote 10, subvote (EX01), central management and 

services. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks Mr. Chair. There’s no particular 

reason why it’s not the very last group of estimates we’re 

dealing with. I think it’s a product of my own schedule. If that’s 

caused any inconvenience, I certainly apologize. I think, to the 

members opposite, I think it was the subject of negotiation 

between both sides. And I’m told by officials, by our director of 

House business and the House Leader, that there was no 

particular or significant concern, I think, expressed about them 

being early. And if I’m wrong about that, I stand to be 

corrected. But that’s my understanding. 

 

I think last year they were also not the very last estimates that 

were done, you know, but most of it’s driven by scheduling on 

my part. And if the opposition feels very strongly that it needs 

to be the last one for whatever reason, we can certainly have a 

look at that in the future. 

 

If I can though, Mr. Chair, heading towards that specific 

question the hon. member asked, he made some comments 

about the budget. And permit me please to offer my own. 

 

He started by saying, quite rightly, that budgets are certainly 

about choices, and we certainly agree. He also, I think, 

mischaracterized, in my opinion, the last few budgets. He quite 

rightly pointed out the summary balanced budget in this budget, 

he referenced that. He said it’s thin, but he affirmed that this is a 

balanced budget from a summary financial standpoint. He 

affirmed it’s a balanced budget from a growth, from a GRF 

standpoint. What he needs to do is share that information with 

his Finance critic, Mr. Chair, because time and again his 

Finance critic has said that it’s a deficit budget. And that’s a 

member that has a lot of respect in this House, and I’m sure 

he’ll want to be on the same page as his leader and vice versa. 

 



1372 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2012 

I would also say, Mr. Chair, that the characterization of 

previous budgets as deficits is a little bit . . . It’s simply not 

consistent with the NDP position. In fact, Mr. Chair, when the 

member that just asked the question that opened up the 

Premier’s estimates, when the Leader of the Opposition was in 

the cabinet — he was in the Romanow cabinet; he was in the 

Calvert cabinet — they brought down a number of budgets. 

And they characterized those budgets, he would have 

characterized them personally as balanced, Mr. Chair, whether 

or not they met the summary financial test, whether or not there 

was the use of a rainy day fund to achieve the balance. Revenue 

from a rainy day fund is revenue they said, they would say, and 

so therefore that also constitutes a balance. 

 

That was their position in government. I assume that’s still his 

position because he sat on this side of the House as a member of 

Executive Council. He voted for budgets based on that 

principle. And it’s interesting because they’ve completely 

changed their mind. That, now, no longer is a balanced budget. 

 

Mr. Chair, the budget was about a number of choices. We chose 

to increase Health spending in a budget where we were striving 

for some efficiencies. Certainly in a balance, we increased 

Health spending by 4.9 per cent. We increased Education 

spending by 11.4 per cent. We chose to increase Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration by 4.1 per cent. We 

chose to increase Social Services — it’s about choices — we 

chose to increase Social Services’ budget by 4.7 per cent, 

Agriculture by 3.1 per cent.  

 

Here’s one that’s down — debt servicing, that’s down, Mr. 

Chairman, down 4.8 per cent. And of course in Highways, we 

have basically what ties a record budget in the Ministry of 

Highways. We have a balance in the Growth and Financial 

Security Fund. And we have a balanced budget, the only one in 

all of the Dominion of Canada, Mr. Chair. So those are the 

choices that we made, and I know we’ll talk about the specific 

steps it took for us to get to that point where we have points of 

disagreement with the members opposite. 

 

But my final comment on choices will be this. I give full marks 

to the Leader of the Opposition because on budget day, in fact I 

remember . . . Sorry, it was the day after the budget, as I was 

getting ready to come over to the legislature, I was watching 

one of the new morning programs. It’s great to have those TV 

morning programs started up in our province. I think it was the 

CTV morning program, and the Leader of the Opposition was 

being interviewed. And he was very critical of the decisions the 

government made with respect to ending the FETC [film 

employment tax credit], which is a grant to the film industry in 

this province. And he was asked, well if you don’t like that part 

of the budget, what choice would you make? 

 

To the member’s question, what choice would you make? And 

he said: 

 

Well practically, [this is a quote now] there are a number 

of areas where they could have left money for films. And 

for one of the things they could have done is look at some 

of the initiatives around the agriculture, and they could 

look at some of the things they’ve done for municipalities. 

 

That is a quote, Mr. Chair. And I think it’s one that we’ll 

reference from time to time going forward because there is a 

choice there. The NDP and the Leader of the Opposition would 

choose to cut funding in agriculture, maybe not to keep the 

programs whole or not to make the improvements to crop 

insurance, and they would reduce money to municipalities. 

 

Interesting on that point, Mr. Chair, because we have kept the 

promise we made to increase revenue sharing to municipalities 

and give them a permanent solution to that problem — 

something that the critic not long ago was taking credit for, 

taking credit for, the NDP critic, the member for Saskatoon 

Centre was taking credit for the fact that the government, this 

government, the Sask Party government had taken care of the 

revenue-sharing piece. It’s an interesting . . . You know, I’m not 

sure the left hand knows what the far left hand’s doing over 

there, Mr. Chair. Because the Leader of the Opposition, when 

asked where would you get the film money? We’d take it from 

municipalities. On the other hand, his critic is saying, taking 

credit for the Sask Party increase in municipal funding. 

 

Mr. Chairman, it is about choices. There was a choice also 

made last fall, and I think the principles that drove that choice 

are the principles that are at work in the budget. And the people 

of the province chose balanced budgets, Mr. Chair. 

 

[15:00] 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I thought I’d put in a nickel to get an 

answer to that question, but unfortunately I must have put in a 

loonie. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have a very specific question here, Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Chair. The global estimates for 2009-10 show that 

there were 65, I guess 66, 68.25 staff in Executive Council. So 

that was at the end of 2010. The next document, the only one 

we have, is at the end of 2011, March 31st, 2011, and the 

number is 80.1. But effectively there was a fairly dramatic 

increase between those two years in the numbers of people and 

the average wages paid to those people. You’ve just earlier 

indicated that the number is 63.1 on April 1st. And so have 

there been 17 people laid off within Executive Council? Or 

what’s happened in this past year? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. It’s a fair question. 

What’s happened in the intervening time is that IGA 

[Intergovernmental Affairs] — which previously used to have 

its own line in terms of staffing, and the acting deputy minister 

is here — and protocol have been moved into Executive 

Council proper. 

 

If you compare apples to apples in terms of the Executive 

Council that supports the Premier and the cabinet now versus 

under the NDP years, the last NDP year, you will see the 

numbers that have been tabled reflect a significant decrease in 

the political staff, in the overall staffing of Executive Council, 

now under this government versus a much higher number under 

the New Democrats. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 



May 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1373 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. We can work with the 

material that we are receiving. And if the Premier wants to 

provide us with more information like that, we’ll be happy to 

look at it. 

 

I have a question about the Executive Council and whether or 

not they have been looking at using the lean principles to 

examine what kind of work is being done in Executive Council. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, we’re happy to discuss lean right 

across government, Mr. Chair. It’s been, I think, a great success 

story. We credit the front line of the professional public service 

of the province along with ministers who have led in this 

regard. We credit the senior levels of the public service, the 

permanent heads, who’ve also been drivers of change. 

 

And you know, there are a number of examples. I’ll speak to 

the member’s question directly, to the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition’s question directly. But I will say that, in a general 

sense, these examples are ones that people need to know about. 

People need to know that as a result of lean, the time between 

the Saskatoon Cancer Agency, the time between that initial 

consultation and your CT [computerized tomography] is down 

92 per cent, Mr. Chair. They need to know that in terms of how 

we manage the blood inventory of the province, as we looked at 

the issue of how many red blood cells were discarded, we have 

leaned out that process. It’s now no longer a just-in-case 

inventory process, it’s more of a just-in-time process. And it 

saved $10 million, and working very well. We’ve leaned out the 

absentee management situation. Regions are leading in that. It’s 

happened across health care in the province and saved $18 

million. 

 

And we have lean, the benefits of lean happening in all 

ministries and social services in terms of the reduction of the 

number of forms. In Executive Council, where it’s a relatively 

small budget but we can always do better, and so we’ve applied 

the principles of lean to the preparation of cabinet documents, 

to reducing the amount of . . . to streamlining the process to the 

better use of technology. You will know, Mr. Chair, that some 

time ago actually our cabinet went to, well, tablet technology to 

get things done. And obviously that reduced the need for a lot 

of the paper and served to streamline process. 

 

We’re currently implementing a lean initiative with respect to 

an app [application] for those tablets called DocShare so that 

ministers and permanent heads and officials can actually follow 

the development of those cabinet items, whether they’re 

information items or memorandums to cabinet or CDIs, cabinet 

decision items. And so they can follow that process through, 

and certainly we have a number of points of access for that 

amongst senior civil servants and the ministers themselves. 

 

We’ve also taken some lean approaches to reducing the amount 

of bureaucracy, I would say, around our diplomat engagement 

program. Mr. Chair, you will know and remember that from 

several days where the Speech from the Throne is read in the 

past, we have had a large diplomatic corps. We take that 

occasion, the occasion of a Speech from the Throne, to invite 

those diplomats and consul generals to the province for Throne 

Speech day. And we engage at that point. They obviously tour, 

and we see them in the gallery often. They tour through the 

provinces, and they come to Saskatchewan outside of a Throne 

Speech, but we use that particular occasion to draw attention to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And we always want to be selling our province, promoting our 

province. We want to make sure we’re highlighting the story 

that is Saskatchewan, and it’s a great chance to do it on Throne 

Speech day. However, that particular day and the overall 

engagement between intergovernmental affairs and protocol and 

the diplomats, the diplomatic corp, has been leaned out. So 

there’s less process involved and less people doing the same 

amount of work. And so those are a couple of examples of lean 

and Executive Council. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. And I want to make a special tribute 

to the Health Quality Council who I know has introduced and 

brought in the whole concept originally to the government. And 

it’s worked out well. Some of the original things were done 

about eight years ago, and I know that a lot of very positive 

things have come from that. So I appreciate the comment. And 

part of our job as opposition is to make sure government money 

is spent effectively, and we will continue to raise those 

questions. 

 

Mr. Chair, when I asked a question of the Minister of Justice 

about Bill 36 adding three more MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] and not including children under age 18 

in the calculation when they set up the constituency boundaries, 

he indicated to me the other night on the record that he hadn’t 

heard about this until after the election was over last November 

and that he wasn’t certain where this came from. 

 

So my question to the Premier is, where did this idea for three 

more MLAs and changing how we calculate the numbers for 

constituency boundaries come from? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Well you 

know, first of all I think we need to clarify the records. 

Sometimes with my honourable friend there’s a real effort to — 

and I don’t blame him — to want to claim credit for a lot of the 

good things that are happening in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Certainly in opposition, we gave the NDP credit 

in government for the good things they’ve done. We still do, 

Mr. Chair. 

 

The business tax changes that Premier Calvert brought into this 

province, called for by our party, they originally ran against 

them when we offered them in ’03 and then adopted that policy 

in government and implemented them finally with our support 

and after we called for those things. But the credit belonged to 

the government because they took the decision, a difficult one, 

because I’m sure much of their base wasn’t very thrilled about 

it. 

 

I think it’s important for all political parties to say, you know, 

sometimes the other guys get it right and you ought to 

acknowledge that. I sense that there’s a great deal of difficulty 

sometimes over there. It’s like the old Happy Days show when 



1374 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2012 

Fonz just couldn’t say that he was ever wrong, Mr. Chair. 

 

The lean process came from Dan Florizone. And it’s true he 

was working on it when he was employed when the New 

Democrats were in power, but he really pioneered it at Five 

Hills Health Region when he was the CEO there. Health 

Quality Council was looking at it but, Mr. Chair, let’s be real. 

The lean expansion in health care, though it found its genesis 

because a CEO like Mr. Florizone led in a particular health 

region, happened under that man’s leadership right over there, 

the Minister of Health. It’s why others are calling in to the 

province as to what we’re doing here. And again, we give full 

credit to the senior civil service of this province who’ve led in 

it. 

 

Mr. Chair, where do the new boundaries, where does this come 

from? Well it comes from the fact that every census, every 

election after a census, the boundary map is redrawn in the 

province. And sometimes we see a reduction in seats and 

sometimes, if a province is growing, we see an increase in seats. 

 

In 1979, under the NDP, the province was growing and it 

increased, I think, to 64, off the top of my head. And they may 

roll their eyes and say, well that’s 1979. The point is, when the 

province is growing in population, then the census that occurs 

during that period of growth triggers in the, after the next 

election, triggers a process where maps are drawn. 

 

And more often than not, here and everywhere else in the 

country where the population is growing, the representation also 

increases. It’s happened in Alberta. They actually elected more 

MLAs in Alberta in this last election. That surprised a lot of 

people. Why? Because their population grew. Canada is adding 

30-some new members of parliament, the House of Commons. 

Why? Because parts of the country have grown in population. 

 

So we looked at this. We said, well we don’t want to 

necessarily . . . We looked at it in this context, Mr. Chair. We 

thought, well I guess since there are more people living here 

than ever before, well we could go to a higher number of MLAs 

than we’ve ever had before, I guess, theoretically. That’s what 

could have happened in the past. Maybe that would have been 

the logic that informed the New Democrat decision in 1979 to 

increase the number of seats. But that would have been, we 

would have had more than 66. I think the highest number we’ve 

ever had in the province was 66 seats. 

 

Well nobody . . . We don’t, we simply don’t need 66 seats in 

the legislature. So we tried to balance the two things. We tried 

to balance a right-sized government with the fact that the 

population is growing and our system is a 

representation-by-population system. And so the number that 

we have is three additional MLAs which we think is, again, a 

balance. 

 

We have committed, Mr. Chair, to ensure that . . . We hope the 

NDP will co-operate in terms of Board of Internal Economy. 

For viewers, that’s the committee that runs the finances of all 

members here. It’s a bipartisan committee, and it’s done 

through co-operation of both sides. 

 

We hope the NDP will co-operate in ensuring that, even with 

these additional MLAs, that there is no added cost to the 

taxpayer because we can achieve that. We’ve already 

highlighted how government travel is down. We’ve already 

highlighted here in estimates how government advertising is 

down. You know, the good faith and the will of the women and 

men of this House can make sure that we add this, I would say, 

modest number of MLAs, given the population growth, and 

maintain the same budget for those MLAs that the people of the 

province have to pick up. 

 

He asks this: where did this come from? Well I’ve kind of tried 

to highlight where it came from. There were two sources of 

early support for the Bill when it was introduced. The first, and 

I was grateful for this, the Minister of Justice supported the Bill 

that he was introducing. I thought that was an important point. 

But who was the second source of support? The second source 

of support for more MLAs, for more MLAs now than we used 

to have, was the deputy leader of the New Democratic Party. 

 

[15:15] 

 

The member for Athabasca was first to speak. And I assume, 

Mr. Chair, they’re . . . You know, I don’t want to be 

disrespectful. But there’s not a large group of them over there 

any more, and so I assume there’s a lot of coordination and a lot 

of co-operation. And I assume that on a major Bill like this, 

before the deputy leader of the New Democratic Party stands up 

to give a speech on a Bill, to issue, excuse me, his party’s 

position on that Bill, I assume he’s checked with the leader. I 

assume he’s checked with his fellow members of the caucus 

when he says, and I quote, page 294 of Hansard, March 5th: 

“There is no question that as our population growth continues 

that the question has to be asked when we’re getting more 

seats.” 

 

It goes on to say, he goes on to say, this is the deputy leader of 

the NDP: 

 

And the obvious answer is yes, as the population grows. 

And you should have more MLAs as the population 

should reflect that in the number of seats that we have in 

the Assembly. 

 

He goes on to say on page 296: “. . . I think the overall thrust of 

the Bill in terms of having more MLAs, and we think it’s a 

great idea . . .” Not, good. Not, we can live with this. Not, we’ll 

hold our nose and vote for it. “We think it’s a great idea,” said 

the deputy leader of the NDP, the second voice to speak out on 

this very Bill in this Assembly.  

 

Finally he said: “. . . there’s a growing population and we need 

more seats.” This is the deputy leader of the NDP: “We agree 

with that, that there is a growing population and more seats are 

necessary. We would applaud that . . .” Mr. Chair, “We would 

applaud that.” 

 

So I hope that when the leader takes to his feet to ask his next 

question, he will explain this massive gap in the position of the 

party when the Bill was introduced, expressed by the deputy 

leader of the party and a veteran member of this House. Will he 

be able to explain the gap? Was that the position of the NDP? 

Or when they thought they might have a political issue, did they 

flip-flop? Was that what happened, Mr. Chair? And I hope I’ve 

been able to answer the question about where did this come 



May 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1375 

from. Now he needs to answer a question about the true 

position of the New Democratic Party. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I asked two simple 

questions, and I got an extremely long answer that didn’t 

answer either one. He didn’t answer whose idea this was, unless 

he is saying that it was his idea. Now if that’s his point, that it’s 

his idea, he’s going to take responsibility for it, then I ask him 

to stand up and say that. 

 

He didn’t say a word about excluding all the young people in 

the province. This sends the wrong signal to the people of 

Saskatchewan and especially to those people who are under 18. 

Anybody who was under 18 on June 1st, 2011, will not be 

included in this calculation of the boundaries for the next 

constituencies that we’re going to have in the . . . elect us here 

to the legislature until 2021, 2022. So he didn’t answer that 

question at all. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would have to say that I have had more 

comments from people who are Sask Party supporters about 

how they don’t understand where this came from and they don’t 

understand why the Premier, if it’s his idea, came up with this 

idea to add more politicians at a time when it doesn’t make 

sense. He makes comparisons to Alberta — population’s two 

and a half times the size of Saskatchewan. They don’t have two 

and a half times the number of members. We have people here 

who represent large numbers, but we’re way down on the scale 

as far as the numbers that we represent compared to our other 

provinces in Canada. 

 

And so, Mr. Chair, I ask him again. I will accept his last, long 

answer as that he was the one responsible for the three extra 

MLAs. What about this decision about excluding young 

people? It doesn’t make any sense. The federal government 

doesn’t do it. Our neighbours don’t do it. I’d like an answer on 

that one. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I beg to 

differ with my hon. friend. The question was answered. In fact 

the question I asked of him with respect to his party’s position 

on this and who speaks for the New Democrats, the deputy 

leader or the leader, was not answered. It was avoided. It was a 

10-foot-pole approach that the Leader of the Opposition took to 

the answer to that question. 

 

Mr. Chair, let’s be very clear about the process, one that he 

knows very well has existed for a very long time not just here 

but in other jurisdictions in the country. After a census, the 

election after a census, there is a process that’s triggered to 

draw a new map. The question is then the number of 

constituencies, how those constituencies are configured. This is 

a representation-by-population form, democratic form that we 

have, democratic form of government. 

 

And so when the population is increased in Saskatchewan, the 

representation has historically increased in Saskatchewan the 

number of members. When the population has increased in 

Alberta, as it has, and they go through a redraw, then the 

number of provincial MLAs increases as it did in the advance of 

this last election. When the numbers of representatives in the 

regions of the country increase, then the number of seats 

accorded those regions in the House of Commons increases. It’s 

a representation-by-population system. 

 

Theoretically we could have perhaps gone with a lot more 

members, as I’ve already said, because the most we’ve ever had 

in Saskatchewan is 66. We just thought that was unnecessary. 

So together as we do, and if the Leader of the Opposition is 

looking for that one person with the agenda who made this call, 

he’s going to be disappointed because, you know, we have a 

team on this side of the House, and we make decisions together. 

We vet those out. We have a discussion afterwards as we have 

on a number of different issues going forward. 

 

And I would just say this as well, Mr. Chair. The Leader of the 

Opposition keeps referencing the fact that if somehow if you 

don’t count, for the purposes of setting up a map that decides, 

you know, where people will vote, that if you don’t include 

people who aren’t eligible to vote, somehow you’re not 

representing them. Mr. Chairman, that’s very informative. Is 

that how the New Democratic government thought for all those 

years in power? Is that how they thought, that that’s what 

qualifies families and kids to be represented in terms of the 

government’s vision and policy? 

 

Mr. Chair, we have decided to organize the electoral map 

around people who are eligible to vote. And frankly, 

notwithstanding what he’s heard from people out there, there 

isn’t opposition to that position. There’s not, other than perhaps 

what’s been orchestrated, significant opposition to the common 

sense principle that those who are of an age, of voting age can 

vote. In fact other provinces and the territory have done it: 

Quebec, Nova Scotia, PEI [Prince Edward Island], and Yukon. 

They actually use a more restrictive process. They limit the 

numbers on a map to those who are registered voters. 

 

We’re certainly saying anyone of the age of majority . . . And 

let me just say this, Mr. Chair. This government will represent 

and work for all people in this province regardless of their age, 

regardless of where they live, regardless how long they’ve been 

in Saskatchewan, because we have a whole bunch of brand new 

citizens coming every single day. We will work for and work 

hard on behalf of all of those people. We will provide services 

to kids in school. 

 

We will actually maybe even throw out ideas like this, Mr. 

Chair, in terms of people 18 and younger. If you’re a young 

person and you’re working part-time in a unionized shop, 

maybe in a large grocer, we may do something radical like say 

that person perhaps shouldn’t pay union dues. That person 

under 18 kind of needs all the help they can get. They’re in high 

school. 

 

So, Mr. Chair, that’s an interesting point. If the New 

Democratic Party are so concerned about 18-year-olds beyond 

this issue of constituency maps, I hope that they will join the 

consultation process we’re having with respect to labour 

changes and support those who have said, look, if you’re under 

18, if you’re a part-time high-school student, you ought not to 

pay union dues in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 



1376 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2012 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Chair, I’m appreciating that the 

Premier’s taking the responsibility for both of these decisions. I 

know that in the Justice estimates the other night it came as a bit 

of a surprise to the Justice minister. And I’m assuming that 

many of the people who were elected last November came as a 

bit of a surprise to them. Because I know it’s come as a surprise 

to many members of the Sask Party who have come to me at 

receptions and on the street and other places and said, that’s not 

something that we were in favour of. 

 

And so, Mr. Chair, I think that what . . . The Premier still has a 

chance. He still has a chance to deal with this particular matter. 

It has not moved from committee back to the House yet. And 

we propose the ability to have this Bill hoisted for six months to 

give some chance for discussion in the province. And that is 

still a possibility. And so I suggest to the Premier that he may 

want to take this opportunity to do a little more consultation 

because, frankly, that’s one of the hallmarks of this government 

is surprise policy without consultation. 

 

And that’s not a very good way to run a government — 

surprising people with different policy initiatives; doing things 

that you have not indicated you were going to do in an election; 

coming forward with a lot of changes in labour policy, as the 

Premier has stated, without running a campaign on that; and in 

fact trying to mask some of those kinds of things. That is a 

hallmark of this government, and it’s a big problem for all of 

the people of the province. 

 

One of the things that is, I think, a characteristic of 

Saskatchewan people is that they like to have a fair and 

equitable way that we deal with each other. They like to 

understand how the rules work. They like to know when change 

is going to come so that they can participate in that change. But 

unfortunately, Mr. Chair, we have seen in quite a number of 

places where, all of a sudden, something pops up. 

 

The most, well not the most recent example, but an example 

that we saw just in the last, since the election, was the 

budgetary decision to eliminate the film tax credit. And I know 

that there’s a letter in the paper today, in the Regina 

Leader-Post, May 2nd, 2012, from Rita Shelton Deverell. And I 

venture to say that the Premier, when he was younger, may 

have seen her participate in a Globe Theatre show as one of our 

best actors. She’s now a filmmaker and lives in Halifax. But she 

wrote this letter, and she said: 

 

I would like to provide some clarification to Tyler 

Willox’s April 9 letter responding to my April 3 letter 

about the Saskatchewan government’s elimination of the 

film tax credit. 

 

First, the long-time Regina resident production company, 

producers of my proposed movie, always have, and would 

continue to pay taxes in Saskatchewan. The partners in 

the company have lived in the province from birth until 

the present moment. Of course they might have to move 

their film company if there is no tax credit or equivalent. 

Likely not to Arizona though. I admit that was a dash of 

attempted wit when I tried to think of a dry hills setting. 

However, as we speak, the Arizona legislature is seriously 

considering reinstating its film tax credit. 

 

But I’d be better off in Hamilton, Ont., on the Niagara 

escarpment. It can look like a dry hills setting, my 

company is resident in Ontario and Hamilton would give 

me a “shoot-outside-of-Toronto” bonus. Either choice 

cuts out the Saskatchewan industry and its workers 

altogether. 

 

End of this letter from Rita Shelton Deverell, Halifax, 

Saskatchewan, but formerly a proud Saskatchewan person. 

 

My question to the Premier is: where did this decision come 

from to eliminate the film tax credit when we know it has 

caused all kinds of uncertainty amongst a very talented group of 

people who are telling the stories of Saskatchewan? They’re 

providing all of us in Saskatchewan with some very, very good 

examples of what our Saskatchewan ingenuity can produce. 

 

So my question to the Premier is, you’ve said that this film tax 

credit wasn’t benefiting Saskatchewan people. I think there’s so 

many who have made the contrary point on that that he deserves 

to give a clear explanation to the people of Saskatchewan. It 

may also be the point today where he will tell us what the 

alternative is that he has proposed. Or is it just a policy on the 

fly that people are now scrambling to complete? 

 

[15:30] 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well I want to answer the member’s 

question, Mr. Chair, but I also want to touch on some of his 

introductory remarks to that last question where he referenced 

again the . . . wondering what was the origin of the new 

electoral map for the province. Of course the origin is growth. 

And he’s asking would we take responsibility; would I take 

responsibility. Well we won’t take credit certainly for the 

unprecedented growth in the province, but members on this side 

of the House, we will take responsibility, Mr. Chair, for the 

economic strength that we see in the province of Saskatchewan 

today, we’ll take responsibility for ensuring that it continues. 

 

We’ll take responsibility to meeting the challenges of growth, 

which are a far cry from the days when the member opposite sat 

in a cabinet and oversaw the decline of the province of 

Saskatchewan — in fact where in Education, for example, they 

would explicitly plan for declining enrolments. Where they had 

effectively thrown in the towel in terms of the future of the 

province. Where one of their members would say, it’s 

statistically impossible for the province’s population to grow at 

the average rate of growth in population in the country. It was 

the former member for Wascana, certainly not the current 

member, who said that in the House, not corrected on the record 

by the NDP government of the time. You know actually, and I 

guess she was right and the NDP were right. We haven’t been 

able to grow at the national average, Mr. Chair; we have 

exceeded the national average. We see historic population 

growth in the province. 

 

So how do you keep the economic momentum going in 

Saskatchewan? Well certainly it’s not all up to government. In 

fact you may argue, quite rightly so, that external factors are 



May 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1377 

very, very important. But there are things that governments can 

do to ensure they’re getting out of the way of the economy and 

to ensure that they are facilitating the right kind of business 

climate, the right kind of environment. One of those things, Mr. 

Chair, is to ensure fiscal responsibility, to ensure that the budget 

is balanced. And this goes to the member’s question, where did 

this decision come from? This was a difficult decision that 

came from this government’s determination to table the only 

balanced budget in all of Canada, Mr. Chair. 

 

This decision was informed by our desire to ensure that we have 

resources to invest in infrastructure, that we can sustain 

competitive taxes, that we continue in the future to pay down 

debt. To get there, Mr. Chair, we have to make difficult choices. 

And the film tax credit was one of those difficult choices. I 

would also say this if I can. There have been many, many cards 

and letters of support that have come in from people around 

Saskatchewan who have said, don’t change the position because 

. . . that the government highlighted in the budget. 

 

This is a grant. To make no mistake about it, I want to be very 

clear in debate, Mr. Chair, so we can . . . Estimates is a time 

when we can get all the details out. Mr. Chair, I think it was in 

the last year, if I’m remembering it right, in the last full year of 

the tax credit — and historically I think this has been about the 

average — 2 per cent of the film tax credit has been paid out as 

a credit. In other words, 2 per cent of the millions of taxpayers’ 

dollars that have gone into the industry have actually 

manifested themselves in a reduction, a de facto reduction in tax 

paid in the province. The reason for that, Mr. Chair, is that this 

is a refundable tax credit. That is a pretty good accountant’s 

way of saying grant, Mr. Chair, because companies, companies 

get that money regardless. 

 

If a company comes in, maybe from Halifax, Nova Scotia — 

where the author of this letter has moved, by the way — maybe 

someone coming in from Halifax, Nova Scotia wants to shoot a 

film here, and that would be a welcomed activity. They would 

set up a shell company, a shell company for that production 

alone. That production would access the taxpayers’ money, 

reach right into here and get a grant. And yes, they would 

employ Saskatchewan people, and that’s important. But then 

that company would go back to wherever they came from, 

maybe Halifax, Nova Scotia. If it looks like a grant and it talks 

like a grant, it’s a grant. 

 

What we’re saying, Mr. Chair — and perhaps there’ll be news 

on this soon — we’re going to be meeting with the industry 

very, very soon. We’ve said, look, we don’t . . . We want to 

move away from these kinds of refundable tax credits, these 

grants. We want to move towards a non-refundable tax credit. 

We’re happy to talk with the film industry about a tax credit. 

We’re happy to talk to them about some other ideas we have 

and they have to actually, to actually bring the art industry into 

the digital age, not just film but the other, the other art forms 

that could benefit from that kind of a move. We’re happy to do 

that. 

 

But we’ve been very clear, and we remain clear: we are not 

going to provide grants to companies that may come in for a 

very short period of time. If you are a Saskatchewan company 

and you would like to make a film in the province and you do 

make that film, the tax credit we’re proposing, that benefit, 

would come off of taxes you pay in the province back to the 

province where you were employing Saskatchewan people, Mr. 

Chair. That is a superior policy, we would argue. We think 

that’ll work well. Now the members opposite say yes, but 

everyone else is doing this grant thing. Everyone else has a 

deficit budget, Mr. Chair, and we have a balanced budget. 

 

We will also want to focus our economic policy on avoiding 

this kind of very deliberate winner and losers analysis that some 

governments do with grant money. It’s not our money. It is the 

taxpayers’ money. And if there are 335 people working directly 

in the film industry, the subsidy works out to between 15, 16, 

17, $18,000 or so per employee. We’ve made the difficult 

decision to say that is not, that’s not enough value for taxpayers. 

 

So is there something else we can do with the film industry to 

move to a non-refundable tax credit offered to companies that 

pay taxes in the province, employing people in the province? 

We think it’s absolutely possible. We look forward to meeting 

with them in the very near future, I would say, Mr. Chair, and 

seeing what we can work on together. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chair, I appreciate the 

Premier’s comment but we’ve been hearing the same line about, 

we’re happy to meet with these people, for two months. So I 

was hoping that he might have said, well we’re working on this; 

there is something that’s going to happen. There’s a deadline 

that’s about eight weeks away. And so I strongly encourage the 

Premier to get involved from his office, get some of his staff 

working on this because it’s clear that it’s not resolvable in the 

ministry that has the responsibility. 

 

So I appreciate the Premier’s explanation. I think that quite a 

number of people will look at this in Hansard or maybe listen 

to it and realize that he’s totally forgotten about all of the 

people who are working, all of the income tax they pay, all the 

sales tax they pay, and how that actually is very important for 

the economy of the province. 

 

Now the Premier kind of flips back to his standard lines on the 

budget. I know as somebody who was around the cabinet table 

many years, but also somebody who was on the Public 

Accounts Committee in opposition, that there were a couple of 

choices, if we can put it that way, that the Premier and the 

Finance minister made with this budget which gave them that 

number that, at least on the paper, looks like it’s a positive 

number. 

 

My question for the Premier relates to why did the Finance 

minister, why did the Premier choose to change how the debt 

involved in building the Academic Health Sciences building 

was treated in this particular budget so that he could end up 

with a positive number? Because what he’s done is he’s pushed 

out debt to both the universities, but the biggest chunk of that 

relates to the Academic Health Sciences building. 

 

And this is a straight accounting solution, I guess, if you put 

solution in quotes, or accounting trick, other people would call 

it, to have the books end up the way they are. And we also 

know that there’s been similar kinds of things done in how 

they’ve pushed debt out into a lot of related agencies. And, Mr. 



1378 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2012 

Speaker, this is possibly within the rules. But any time you do 

this within a structure where you’re making comparisons, I 

think that you’re playing with fire because ultimately all of 

these kinds of debts have to be included in the total books of the 

province. 

 

And so, Mr. Chair, perhaps the Premier can explain why some 

of the accounting decisions were made this year as it relates to 

the money for post-secondary education, especially for the U of 

S [University of Saskatchewan] and the U of R [University of 

Regina]. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Chair. I’m 

surprised. I thought there’d be more questions from the 

opposition on the film tax credit. So I had some information I 

wanted to share with the member that I will do so now in 

relation to that last question. 

 

It’s interesting. In 2006 to 2009, the last four years for which 

we have the complete figures, the total of payments made 

through the FETC was $45.3 million worth of money spent on 

the industry. Of that amount, $44.7 million was paid out in the 

form of grants to companies who paid no income tax in 

Saskatchewan. Doesn’t sound like a very effective economic 

development policy for any sector — not the film sector, not the 

oil sector, not the potash sector — for any sector. 

 

We’ve heard members opposite say, well what about companies 

like, you know, the potash companies can get a . . . there’s an 

incentive for them to locate head office jobs here in the 

province? It doesn’t eliminate the taxes they pay and then give 

them a grant, Mr. Chair. It simply reduces the amount they are 

paying, and they earn those only when new people move to the 

province of Saskatchewan, stay here and then they go out and 

pay the highest royalty rates in all the world in terms of the 

potash industry. So you know, I hope we can return to the 

debate because there’s important points that need to be clarified 

for members of the committee and also for those, as you’ve 

pointed out, who may be watching. 

 

Mr. Chair, the member’s question is on the Academic Health 

Sciences centre. And I’m glad he’s asked this question. I 

remember in opposition, I remember I had a sense of 

embarrassment, as did many people in the province, not about 

the government, not about politics, but just for the province as a 

whole, for this province that we all love regardless of where we 

sit. Where our College of Medicine was making national news 

not because, not to the fault, I don’t think frankly, of 

exclusively of anybody at any particular institution, but because 

of the underfunding of the NDP and the neglect of the NDP, 

that college was put on probation, Mr. Chair. That was a very 

sad day. 

 

I remember I was sitting somewhere over there when there was 

questions asked in this Legislative Assembly about that 

particular college. And so since that and when that occurred, the 

NDP earnestly, and maybe for a time while that hon. member 

himself was a Health minister, very earnestly said, oh we’re 

going to do something about the Academic Health Sciences 

building. There was the former premier said in a press release 

that the project has the government’s unwavering support, in 

2003 when it was first announced. Nothing done. December 

2004 action plan for Saskatchewan health care reiterated the 

commitment. No action for the Academic Health Sciences 

centre. The Throne Speech 2005: in this session, a major 

investment will be made toward this project. But it was 

December 12 in 2005 before there was, and there was at that 

point, some funding announced. But as it turned out, Mr. Chair, 

it was a photo op. Because when we took over government in 

2007, that’s when action started to happen in a meaningful way. 

That’s when the university I think understood they had a willing 

and aggressive partner in the Government of Saskatchewan that 

wanted to get that project finished. 

 

And so now the Academic Health Sciences centre is certainly 

again part of this budget. We have been making investments in 

it year over year since our first election in 2007. We’ve wanted 

to see obviously the college itself be sustained for the 

professional college that it is, to be recognized nationally for 

exactly the institution it is. We’ve avoided just talking about it, 

Mr. Chair. We’ve acted on it. We’ve wanted to actually to see 

that that College of Medicine was a vehicle for promises kept 

by our party. 

 

[15:45] 

 

In the election in 2007, I think at that time there were about 60 

training seats in the College of Medicine, 60 seats. We 

indicated we had a plan to get it to 100. We’ve kept that 

promise, Mr. Chair. There were 60 residency positions in the 

province. We thought they should be doubled. We were behind 

Manitoba. We were behind so many places. We’ve kept that 

promise, Mr. Chair. That institution is vitally important. 

 

The member asks about, well how are we funding it for? Well 

it’s been a combination of cash, and a lot of it, for the institution 

itself. And as we have done in previous projects in other areas, 

including in roads where you’d have government-owned capital 

for example, including in other infrastructure initiatives in 

education for schools, where you’ll have capital that’s shared 

between two partners, the government and a local agency, 

we’ve also indicated that it’s reasonable, and it’s happened in 

the past, the university itself would taken on some borrowing. 

 

Mr. Chair, the bottom line is funding to that particular 

institution, the University of Saskatchewan, has gone up at 

historic levels under this government. It will continue to be 

strongly supported by the government. And most importantly, 

the Academic Health Sciences centre is not just being talked 

about; it’s being completed. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Chair, it’s always fun to listen to 

revisionist historians if they know that they’re revisionist 

historians. But what I would like to explain to the Premier is 

that when you’re building something as complicated and as 

important as the Academic Health Sciences building, it’s a 10-, 

12-, 15-year project. And so I’m very pleased to know that it’s 

there. 

 

But I know that our government was supporting of that project 

every step of the way and that everything that the Premier 

indicates about the things that we did, they were based on what 



May 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1379 

the plans had come together at that point. Now I hear the 

Minister of Health chirping over there in his seat. I know that he 

knows that there’s a 17-step or 21-step, depending on the 

project, of planning when you’re building a new health care 

facility. And it takes a lot of time, a lot of work to make sure 

you get through every step. 

 

The Premier was clearly very pleased when he represented the 

constituency of Swift Current when we built the hospital in 

Swift Current. And he knows that it was quite a number of 

years, quite a number of meetings, quite a lot of community 

activity to get the plan in place and then approximately two 

years or maybe a little more to actually build the building. Now 

that’s the nature of how we do things in Saskatchewan. And the 

Premier likes to take credit for things that have been planned 

and been worked on for many years. And I know that the Health 

minister hasn’t liked it when I go to various projects that I know 

I’ve been involved with for over many years. But when he gets 

in here, he creates another story about it. But when he’s out 

there and he knows that the people in the community know who 

and how the planning was done that allowed for a place to be 

built, and they know as a government. 

 

Now I think that the appropriate thing for the Premier to do — 

and he does it once in a while — once in a while he 

acknowledges that in government you have a trust. You have a 

responsibility to spend the money of the people as carefully as 

you can and to build on the work, to build on the work of 

previous governments to make sure that things are done 

appropriately. And, Mr. Speaker, many of the things that have 

been done by this government over the last five years have been 

building on the work that was there before. And we 

congratulate them for doing those things. People in local 

communities know that. What they don’t like is when the 

Premier goes and tells a different story, a new story to get credit 

for himself or for his government. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, when we are asking questions about what 

happens around this university, we know that as it relates to the 

funding for the university, they have changed the way that 

they’ve been accounting and the way that this money was to be 

transferred. They’ve done it because they’re having difficulty 

with the balancing of the books, and they’ve done it for lots of 

the public PR [public relations] kinds of things that they want to 

do. 

 

I think what the public knows at the end of the year, like over 

the last three years, we’re probably going to end up with a 

deficit. But when the Premier goes and is as blatant as he often 

is in dismissing all of the groundwork that was done on many of 

the areas of this government, then the public says, well yes, we 

understand your hype, but we don’t accept it. 

 

So I would ask the Premier to recognize that that’s what he’s 

doing. I would ask him to explain why he’s changing 

accounting practices in the middle of a project and why he’s 

forcing our universities to take on more debt at a time when 

they actually need capital; they don’t need debt. We know that 

the province is the place that can borrow the money the 

cheapest. That’s where we should be doing it. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well it’s very interesting. The NDP have 

just admitted that it takes . . . This is NDP time now. It takes 10 

years. It would take 10 years to get a building done like that — 

10 years. We’re celebrating the 100th anniversary of this 

building, Mr. Chairman, which was built in the days of a horse 

and buggy in seven years. From ’05 to 1912 is when they 

opened up this place. 

 

Mr. Chair, he says, he asks me to recognize the good work that 

happened before we actually started getting the work done at 

the Academic Health Sciences centre. Well, Mr. Chair, I can tell 

you this. The U of S medical school was put on probation in 

2002, when those members were sitting in government. Here’s 

what the community was saying about their planning dollars 

and the sign they put up and the rocks they moved around. Dr. 

Roger Pierson who’s a medical professor said, small cash 

injections not enough “to recover from the decade of very 

serious cuts that have happened to the college,” Mr. Chair. 

That’s what the community was saying about what happened 

under them versus what happened under this government in 

terms of the Academic Health Sciences building. 

 

Here’s someone else from the community. The president of the 

University of Saskatchewan, who said, and I quote, “A decade 

ago, our College . . . faced existential issues” — there it is again 

to the member from Athabasca — “existential issues regarding 

resources, faculty, and facilities.” Today those challenges have 

been rectified as confirmed by the — not in 2002 were they 

rectified, not in ’03 or ’04 or ’05, when members opposite were 

putting up signs and announcing a planning dollar here and 

planning dollars there; meanwhile the college itself was 

threatened under probation — not then, but as the president of 

the university says, today those challenges have been rectified 

as confirmed by the college’s accreditation site visit this spring. 

 

The member from Massey Place ignores the facts. His leader 

ignores the facts. The Government of Saskatchewan, he goes on 

to say, “has done its part.” That’s a quote. Not that government, 

Mr. Chair, when they were government. This administration for 

this project the member’s asking about today, with the largest 

and most numerous accreditation issues resolved, there remain a 

number of matters for the university to work on, and you have 

my assurance that we will deal with these issues in short order. 

 

The vice-president of the University of Saskatchewan has also 

said on the record, “There’s no question about the province’s 

commitment to medical health, education, and research.” That’s 

what the community’s saying. That’s what they’re saying about 

today’s commitment and action, including the method of 

funding for the project to be completed, because obviously, Mr. 

Chair, that’s how the project’s going to get done. And this is 

what the community said about the New Democratic Party’s 

style. Mr. Chair, I have said in opposition and in government 

that we ought to give credit where credit’s due. I’ve already said 

that earlier today. And we have done that, Mr. Chair, whether it 

was the business tax changes, where it was an initial build-out 

by SaskTel in terms of cell towers, where we issued a press 

release. There were any number of issues where we were to say 

to the New Democratic Party, you did that right and we will 

build on that success in government. 

 

But, Mr. Chair, let’s be very clear. When it comes to building in 

this province, well the important infrastructure facilities we 



1380 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2012 

need in health care and education, we will not give credit to the 

New Democratic Party if what they were doing was putting up 

signs. They announced the hospital in Preeceville five times. 

The senior adviser who’s joined us for estimates lives in 

Preeceville. He’d go home to visit. He’d walk by the site. The 

only thing that changed was maybe the sign got repainted. 

 

How many times have they announced the Humboldt Hospital? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Seven years. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Seven years. Announcement after 

announcement. Guess who built the Humboldt Hospital, Mr. 

Chair? Who got it done? These members on this side of the 

House. 

 

Mr. Chair, there was countless long-term care facilities around 

the province that were promised, never acted on. The school in 

Nutana. Nutana . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — In Saskatoon Nutana, promised in 2003 by 

the New Democratic Party. We cut the ribbon not too long ago, 

right. Well obviously, the current member for Nutana. But Ms. 

Atkinson would have been, I’m sure, happy with the fact that a 

Saskatchewan Party government had finally gotten the job 

done, Mr. Chair. 

 

There are certain things for which we’ll give the New 

Democratic Party credit for their years in government, but they 

must be held accountable for their record in terms of highways 

infrastructure, in terms of the Academic Health Sciences centre, 

in terms of hospitals across the province, the lack of long-term 

care across the province, the new schools that were needed 

across the province, and the fact that under their leadership this 

province underperformed to its economic potential. 

 

Things have changed. Those schools are being built. Those 

hospitals are being built. The Academic Health Sciences centre 

is being built and is in good hands. And this province is leading 

the country, Mr. Chair. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Chair, I will accept with gratitude the 

thanks from the Finance minister when he was in Preeceville, 

when the hospital opened, for the good work that I did and 

many of the people who are with our government did to make 

sure that facility was built. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I notice that the Premier conveniently 

forgets what happened in Swift Current in his constituency 

when he was there. And the work was done well, despite some 

questions. And I know eventually the Premier understood that 

this project was going to get built because it was important to 

the whole community. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, let’s make sure that we have the Premier 

acknowledge that he’s building on a base of careful planning 

that was dealing with some very difficult financial situations in 

this province. And I think Murray Mandryk last week reminded 

all of us, and especially reminded the Premier and a few others 

who were working in that Devine government at that time, as to 

why there were so many difficulties in getting some of the 

projects done during the ’90s. Now, Mr. Speaker, we all, every 

Saskatchewan citizen, every person paid extra on our income 

tax. We paid extra in other taxes. We did with less for a whole 

number of years to try to make sure that we would never be in 

that position again. 

 

And our job here in this particular legislature as opposition is to 

make sure that the government spends money appropriately, 

that they budget appropriately, that they tell us what they’re 

doing, that they don’t do crazy things like add politicians when 

there’s all kinds of other important things that are supposed to 

be done. And, Mr. Chair, the Premier does not do himself well, 

he embarrasses all of us in this province when he gets on these 

tracks of diminishing the base of where we’re going. 

 

And so, Mr. Chair, in this particular budget they had to do all 

kinds of mechanics to get to where they have this, quote, 

balanced budget. And so I want to ask the Premier, can you . . . 

I want to ask the Premier . . . We know that the budgeted 

revenues from potash for this year are $705 million. That’s a 56 

per cent increase over the 451 million that we got last year, 

which was a good revenue. Now we know just in the last few 

weeks that potash revenues are down 19 per cent from last year. 

We know that the Potash Corporation profits are down 33 per 

cent from a year ago and that some of their forecasts have had 

to be readjusted. So any problem at all with the potash revenues 

is going to cause problems for the Finance minister and the 

Premier. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Now one of the problems that a Premier — who is big on hype, 

likes to sell things — gets into is that they overestimate their 

revenues and underestimate their costs. We’ve seen, we know 

from the Auditor’s reports that that’s what’s happened the last 

number of years. And so I would be very much appreciative of 

hearing from the Premier what kind of plans there are to make 

adjustments here because it’s a pretty big jump. Now it’s not as 

high as the member for Kindersley’s estimates on potash a few 

years ago that really got us in the soup, but it clearly is much, a 

fairly dramatic increase. And it’s one that I think many people 

are nervous about. 

 

So the job of the Finance minister, of the Premier is to set out a 

clear plan and then let us ask questions. This is one we have big 

questions about. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Chair. The reports 

the hon. member is referring to are the . . . Well he may be 

interested in this because I think this is germane to his question. 

 

The reports that the hon. member was referring to are from 

about February, the pullback happened. I think the hon. member 

should know, and I think he knows, that that is the first quarter 

of the year for the potash companies. So we’re now going into a 

brand new quarter. The Minister of Energy and Resources is 

reporting and you’ve heard from the companies, the same ones 

you were referencing, that they’re pretty confident about this 

year. In fact April, they’re thinking, might be a very, very good 



May 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1381 

year in terms of potash sales. 

 

So I just wanted to be clear so that member understood that they 

were referencing their first quarter. But I think he should know 

that their first quarter is actually our last quarter and we’re 

actually now in a brand new budget year. And so, well I think 

that’s a very, very important point. 

 

Here’s one other, I think, important point in terms of the 

member’s question on estimates. We looked at the estimates. 

We want to err on the side of caution for obvious reasons, not 

the least of which happened in 2009. We’re happy to talk about 

that. That was an unprecedented collapse in terms of potash 

sales, and we had to make some pretty difficult decisions and 

deferrals as a result. Happy to discuss that, Mr. Chair. You learn 

from those things, and so you add in, you build in even more 

caution. 

 

We tried to do that with respect to all the commodity prices we 

used, upon which we based the budget. And the Minister of 

Finance wanted to make that very clear to all of us. That was 

the case certainly with respect to oil, where we see it hovering 

above the number we have so far, very early on, obviously after 

a month only. And the same is true in terms of potash. 

 

But we were grateful to see that the day after, I think it was . . . 

or the day before, I think it was the day before the budget, an 

actual sale of potash came in to China, a significant sale at a 

higher level, at a higher level — we should be clear for those 

watching — at a higher price than what we actually put in the 

budget. So it’s still a commodity; it cycles up and down, there’s 

no question. But we’re reasonably confident, based on that 

evidence of our price in the budget actually being lower than 

what happened the day before that in a real sale between 

Canpotex — I believe it would have been Canpotex — and 

China in terms of Saskatchewan potash. 

 

Mr. Chair, at the start of his comments, they may be feeling a 

little bit guilty, the hon. member was I think saying, well we 

couldn’t get to all the things we wanted to, even though they 

were announcing these projects. The academic health sciences 

is one of them. They were announcing they couldn’t get to all of 

them because they were still slaying the deficit. 

 

Mr. Chair, there was $1.2 billion in their rainy day fund when 

they left office. There was money to get these things done. 

There was money to invest in highways in the province of 

Saskatchewan. We’re still digging out of the hole left behind by 

their lack of attention to those issues. There was money to build 

that Humboldt hospital. There was money to get going in 

Preeceville. There was money to deal with the long-term care 

bed needs in 13 communities. There was money to share with 

municipalities. Now they want to take credit for a 

revenue-sharing deal that they failed to do. There were 

resources in the budget but they never acted, Mr. Chair. Maybe 

because they needed to . . . Maybe there needed to be a 10-year 

planning process. I’m not sure what was paralyzing the then 

government and what paralyzes them even today. 

 

But it’s interesting though that the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition wants to talk about fiscal responsibility. In fact we 

understand from people that were at his discussion with the 

Yorkton Chamber of Commerce that he’s taken to calling 

themselves the fiscally conservative New Democrats. Fiscally 

conservative New Democrats, it’s very interesting. 

 

Maybe former Premier Romanow can make that case. Maybe he 

can. Fair enough. Maybe Premier Calvert early on, at least, in 

the term can make that case. But that member and all those 

members there ran under a banner of the New Democratic Party 

led by Mr. Lingenfelter that had $5.5 billion worth of promises 

over four years, and it would have resulted in a massive deficit, 

Mr. Chairman. If that member wants to talk about deficits, 

we’re happy to do it because thank goodness the people of this 

province said, no way. And, Mr. Chair, I think if the hon. 

members wants to start calling themselves, saying that they’re 

fiscally conservative New Democrats, they ought to act like 

fiscally conservative New Democrats. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, our job here is to look at and 

examine the books of the government, the actions of the 

Premier, Finance minister, cabinet, Executive Council people to 

see how they do the spending for the government, the 

budgeting. I stand proud on the record of New Democrat 

governments and how carefully we worked to make sure that 

we got the finances of this province in order. And the Premier 

himself said that in 2007, we had money to go ahead with a 

number of the different plans that we had available. And my 

question now becomes, to the Premier, as we’re moving 

forward here, is you now have the responsibility. You now have 

the trust of the people to spend the money appropriately. Our 

job, which some people argue is even greater than that of the 

government, is to ask the hard questions about how you’re 

spending that money. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, when we see a budget that comes forward 

that has these soft spots, or they’ve got these things that don’t 

quite feel good or they don’t smell good, then our job is to point 

it out. And, Mr. Chair, I don’t get an answer from the Premier 

on some of the things that I’m asking, about why you’ve 

changed how you’ve done some of the expenditures. Why have 

you got some fairly, I guess, optimistic revenue numbers in 

your budget? And why are you doing things like that? Because, 

Mr. Chair, that’s the fundamental question when you’re in 

government is, how are you spending the money and how are 

you doing it? 

 

Now unfortunately for those of us in Saskatchewan who are a 

little bit older, no matter what the Premier says or what he does, 

he has the taint of the ’80s with him. And, Mr. Speaker, it 

relates to what Murray Mandryk said the other day is that he 

has to be extremely careful. Now I heard the Premier say that he 

had learned a lesson a couple years ago around potash 

projections. And so that’s good. But practically, what his job is 

is to be more than a salesman. It’s to be somebody that the 

people can trust with the books of the province. 

 

Now when I was in Yorkton the other day, I was saying to those 

people that what happens in our province is that we all want to 

make sure that things are done in a fair and even-handed 

manner. And I was telling them that there are some of the 

projects and some of the things that they need for their 

economic development that don’t seem to be on the horizon in 

the plans of this government. Now my question this time is, 



1382 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2012 

does the Premier know about a plan within the Department of 

Highways and Transportation which was called TEA, the 

Transportation for Economic Advantage? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, I’m going to get to this specific 

question at the end here, but he asked another question at the 

beginning in his preamble. He said, quite directly, he said, 

we’ve overestimated in the budget. And so I want to be able to 

answer that question. He said we’ve overestimated some 

sources of revenue. He said it again. I need to know which 

revenue he’s talking about. He needs to ask the question so I 

can properly answer and be accountable for the estimates that 

we gave in the budget, and we’ll also be happy to answer the 

question he posed at the end of his question. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Well I think that question from the Premier 

shows that I didn’t get the answer on the whole issue of the 

projections for potash. And so I would like the Premier to look 

at that particular issue. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — The member in his couple of questions ago 

said our potash numbers were overly optimistic. That’s what he 

said, or at least he asked a question about that. And so my 

response was that he had the numbers, in terms of what he had 

heard from the potash companies or read in the newspaper, that 

was their first quarter of this year and not in the current budget 

year, not a part of the forecast we would use. So there was a 

pullback then. But it has no bearing at all on the numbers.  

 

The better indicator of the numbers in terms of this budget, that 

our potash estimates are pretty accurate I would say, is the fact 

that the day before or two days before the budget was tabled in 

the House there was an actual sale of potash — a large one, 

Saskatchewan potash to China, that was higher than the price 

we’re using to project the budget. 

 

So, you know, Mr. Chairman, I know this is a Q & A [question 

and answer] period. But I think it’s important to get those facts 

on the record, especially when it’s the issue of the integrity of 

the numbers in the budget. So I wanted to get that out. 

 

And I would ask the member for clarification, this acronym that 

he’s using, TEA, I think is what he said. If he could provide a 

bit more information, a bit more detail about what he’s talking 

about, I could do a better job of answering the question. 

 

The Chair: — The Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Chair, I’m surprised that he requires 

the clarification because I think the Highways minister knows 

what I’m talking about. Because what this relates to is a plan 

within the Department of Highways that was set up in 

conjunction with obviously the Finance and everybody else to 

propose a $5 billion, 10-year financial plan to build the 

highways. So we’d be, I’m sure, at about year 6 of that 

particular highway plan. And basically the six pillars of the 

strategy were international gateways and corridors, urban 

economic connectors, rural economic connectors, northern 

economic infrastructure strategy, Aboriginal connectors, and 

regional shortline railways and airports. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what happened in Highways when the new 

government came in is, like many things, they kind of took the 

plan but they wanted to give it a different name. And so it has 

some other name now that the Highways minister may know 

about, but it’s built on the practical planning and work that was 

done over many years. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what we do know is that the Premier and this 

government are spending more money on highways. What we 

don’t know is if they’re actually getting more highways and 

roads for our province because the cost of getting these roads 

has gone up quite dramatically. And so, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

where my question is going, is on these, on this area, the 

minister will never say how many miles of highway he’s being 

built compared to previous years. He’ll only talk about dollars. 

It’s actually similar in quite a number of departments that were 

spending a lot more. 

 

But the practical question is, what are we getting? Are we 

getting the kinds of results that we should be getting? And I 

encourage the Premier to answer my question by telling us, well 

are we, you know, in 2006 did we get 350 miles worth of 

highways of all the different kinds? Or and what amount are we 

getting in 2011? What amount did we get up in ’11-12? What’s 

the plan in this budget for next year? Because practically we 

know that the Finance officials, working together with the 

Highways officials, have all of the information that will show 

what the cost is per kilometre for thin membrane surface 

restoration, for building a new highway, for a gravelled 

highway and, Mr. Chair, it’s possible that maybe there’s some 

money that will fix the road up in your neighbourhood. 

 

[16:15] 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, the hon. member’s caught us. 

We changed the name of a program that existed under the NDP. 

It used to be TEA, as the member has referenced. That’s why 

we had no record of it. We chose to re-call it a, to call it the 

Transportation for Growth program. So it’s a little bit different 

in terms of the wording of the program. Here’s another way it’s 

different. We actually, we’re investing in highways in the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chair. Here’s how . . . Well the 

member’s asked a good question: where did the money go? 

Well we hid it away on the Internet in a press release on 

October the 4th, 2011. 

 

A hundred per cent of the gas tax collected and committed to 

highways improvements, 630 million in four years — this was 

on the previous four. 770 kilometres of major rural highway 

upgrades or rebuilds to support economic development and 

improve safety, such as Highway 40 near Battleford; such as 

Highway 309 near Lloyd; Highway 368 — oh and did that ever 

need work, the member from Batoche will verify — worked 

hard on that project; Highway 47 near Stoughton; Highway 48 

east of Wawota; and to the hon. member for Cypress Hills, 

thank goodness, Highway 32 near Lancer, so that we can end 

the days of people having to pose nude in a calendar to get the 



May 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1383 

attention of the NDP. Gone are those days, Mr. Chair. They 

don’t have to make a calendar. It’s not the NDP in power. They 

just have to phone their MLA for Cypress Hills. 

 

1485 kilometres of major repaving; 3856 kilometres of light and 

medium preservation treatments on some of the province’s most 

heavily travelled highways, such as Highway 1, Highway 11, 

Highway 16. Accelerated the twinning: that’s what they got for 

the money between Saskatoon and P.A. [Prince Albert]. I mean 

the list goes on. This is this year’s budget estimates. As for this 

year, 207.8 million to maintain and repair provincial highways, 

including 320 kilometres of repaving; 70.5 million to upgrade 

rural highways. And there’s no question . . . He’s asked about 

the cost per kilometre of TMS [thin membrane surface] repair. 

It’s gone up significantly, Mr. Chair, since they were in office. 

There has been a great deal of inflation with respect to that. We 

can get you the exact numbers on the amount of increase in that. 

 

38.5 million to repair and replace bridges and culverts. By the 

way, in our first four years, Mr. Chair, I could tell you that 109 

bridge replacements or rehabilitations were completed. This 

was an area that needed a lot of attention, where there was a lot 

of neglect. And that includes a long-anticipated new bridge — 

again there’s Batoche — on Highway 2, the St. Louis bridge, 

Mr. Chair. So going on in terms of the . . . I’ve gotten the 

member for Batoche in trouble with his colleagues. The Estevan 

truck route, $10 million; 6.3 million to Highway 11 between 

Saskatoon and P.A. We can go through the whole long list. 

 

But let me just say this, Mr. Chair: we need to do more. The 

flooding last year has taken its toll on highways. We had been 

working hard to try to catch up on what the CAA [Canadian 

Automobile Association] characterized as a billion-dollar 

infrastructure deficit in our highways left behind by the 

previous administration. When you combine that with too many 

budget years where they weren’t even investing all of the gas 

tax — not all those budget years, but too many of them — 

where they were not investing all the gas tax back into 

highways, and when you combine that with the fact that, even 

as we were catching up a little bit on highways, we had the 

massive flooding that we saw last spring, we readily 

acknowledge that more work needs to be done, something that 

the chairman is very familiar with in his own area. And I would 

just say that we will continue to do that work. 

 

We need to stay very focused and understand that yes, we can 

talk about what’s happened so far. Our highways budget is 60 

per cent higher in our first four years than in the last four years 

of the previous government. And that’s all good and positive. 

But we have work to do, and we are determined to get that work 

done, Mr. Chairman. We know how important highways are in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’ll ask my question at 

the top that wasn’t answered and see if the Premier can get the 

information. My question was, how much does it cost today to 

build a kilometre of highway of the different types versus a few 

years ago? Because all we ever hear from the Premier or from 

the Finance minister is about the amount of money that’s spent. 

And we don’t really know how to compare it with money that 

was spent previously. Because practically what the public wants 

to know is, which roads are being fixed? How are they going to 

be fixed? I mean the example is 2007, that highway was, north 

of Saskatoon to P.A., was to be twinned past Hague. And so 

now there’s obviously, in the last five years, there’s some more 

been paved, but I don’t think it’s too much farther past that. 

 

So, Mr. Chair, the question always becomes: what is the money 

being used for? How much product are we getting? And I 

encourage the Premier to ask that specific question. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. Well the costs for road 

construction have gone up right across the continent, certainly 

gone up right across Canada in . . . That’d be true in all the 

Western provinces. As an example, and we can get the Leader 

of the Opposition some specifics on all the various kinds of 

roads that are built, but here’s an example in terms of granular 

pavement. 2006 the cost would’ve been $350,000 a kilometre; 

now it’s $600,000 a kilometre. 

 

And so I guess one could make the argument that had the . . . 

Well and the Opposition Leader’s nodding his head. Maybe 

he’s on to something. I think we are on to something. If the 

NDP government would have actually committed in all of its 

budget years the full amount of money it was getting off of the 

people from their fuel taxes to the Highways budget, given the 

lower price it cost to build a road just a few years ago, think of 

how many roads would have been built, Mr. Chair. 

 

If the New Democratic Party government would have made a 

higher priority of road construction when prices were lower, 

we’d have much less of an infrastructure deficit in highways to 

deal with today. And so I think it’s . . . I’m glad he’s raised the 

point. I think this is an important issue and it’s one that’s 

frustrating I think for all governments, for all departments or 

ministries of Highways and Transportation because even as we 

invest significantly more — and the hon. member’s right; we do 

highlight how much money we’ve spent on highways — even 

as we invest more, we’re able to do less because of this inflation 

that is really right across the industry in terms of highway costs. 

 

But to suggest, Mr. Chair, that we do not release . . . we just 

release the dollars, and we don’t talk about the amount of, the 

number of kilometres we’re doing, is just wrong, Mr. Chair, and 

I don’t think it’s a service to committee members. Because not 

only do we tell people; we issue press releases. One comes out 

on budget day. We’re talking about the budget. The hon. 

member will know in his briefings, I’m sure, from budget that 

he has in front of him for estimates that we explicitly issue a 

press release from the Highways and Transportation ministry 

that says, here are the number of kilometres we can do in terms 

of new construction, in terms of maintenance; here are the 

bridges we’re repairing. Again, Mr. Chair, we have more work 

to do but we’re determined to get the work done. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m very pleased to 

join in the debate today. And certainly I want to point out one 

of the privileges that I’ve had as an MLA and certainly the time 

that I’ve been here and having the pleasure of serving in cabinet 

with great leaders such as Romanow and Calvert, Mr. Speaker. 



1384 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2012 

I can tell you that today that, as an MLA that has sat on both 

sides of the Assembly, that the number of folks that have had a 

great amount of influence on me and the sheer intelligence of 

many of our former leaders to really build a great province is 

something that I’m always thankful for. I think it’s really 

important that we point that out. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you sit in cabinet and you see the 

people of the likes of Clay Serby, of Romanow, and then later 

Calvert, and of course people like Eric Cline, Eldon 

Lautermilch, there’s no question in our minds, Mr. Speaker, that 

as a young MLA or as a younger MLA, that you certainly are 

privy to a lot of great ideas, a lot of great vision, and certainly a 

lot of great plans and great thinking, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I want to make sure that people out in Saskatchewan know 

that there is something that is obviously very, very important 

that we as MLAs understand that we are privy to some great 

opportunity to learn off some greater people than ourselves. 

And that’s always important to be thankful, and I want to make 

sure that I make that point. 

 

Some of the comments and some of the things that I picked up 

over the years, Mr. Speaker, from the many people that have 

had greater experience than I, is that the thinking and the 

amount of planning and the budgetary processes attached to 

some of those meetings — and long meetings, I might add — 

Mr. Speaker, it takes a lot of time to put things into place. 

 

Now I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that some of the 

discussions, some of the points that were raised when we talk 

about Calvert’s contribution as a good point to start is that he 

often spoke about the fact that we have to govern for all of 

Saskatchewan. That was one of the primary messages that Mr. 

Calvert gave us all as members of cabinet. And I can remember 

the amount of money that was spent in Highways on No. 1 

which really is the Trans-Canada Highway. Mr. Speaker, we 

spent a ton of money on that particular road. Why? Yes, we 

weren’t getting success politically in terms of getting seats in 

that area, but it was the proper and the right thing to do. That’s 

one example I want to share, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the second thing I would also point out, Mr. Speaker, is the 

fact that one of our leaders spoke about the Saskatchewan that 

has to be fair, the Saskatchewan that has to be properly planned 

for, and the Saskatchewan that has to be bold. And they spoke 

about the economy in general, Mr. Speaker. And I’m getting to 

my question for the Premier. And some of the points that they 

raised during many of those discussions around cabinet . . . And 

again you were sitting there, and I’m listening to all these 

people make all these great, impressive points, Mr. Speaker. 

The plan was made. There was commitments and there was a 

process in place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would suggest that many of the plans and the processes, 

while named other things under the Saskatchewan Party, they’re 

following those plans, Mr. Speaker. And they’re following them 

to a T because they’re designed by people that were very 

capable, Mr. Speaker, both the bureaucracy and of course the 

leaders before us. I think it’s important that you respect and 

honour the people before us because we would hope that would 

be the same accord afforded to us as we leave this place. 

 

So some of the comments that were made, Mr. Speaker, talked 

about balance between labour, making sure that we work with 

our working people, and to respect that particular aspect and the 

important players in building this brave new Saskatchewan. 

And we talk about environmental integrity, to make sure we 

have that balance with the environment. Then of course we also 

talk about the private sector and the business community to 

make sure that the word profit is something that we can all 

enjoy and embrace, Mr. Speaker. That’s really important. 

 

So the three principles of making sure we respect our working 

men and women and the young people were engrained in me at 

many of these meetings, Mr. Speaker. They also talked about 

respect for the environment, Mr. Speaker, the environment 

which is something that I think should be part of the language 

with the Saskatchewan Party when we talk about sustainable 

development. Sustainable development means taking care of the 

water, the air, and the land in which we live. I think people 

understand that concept, Mr. Speaker. And of course, engaging 

the private sector as well to the extent where we have to engage 

them and in meeting all those three criteria, Mr. Speaker. Those 

are some of the points that the people that I had the privilege of 

sitting with often spoke about as I sat in cabinet during those 

years. 

 

[16:30] 

 

So my question now to the Premier: as I look at some of the 

points on the environmental front — and I believe that not only 

his government’s doing it, but it’s also the federal Conservative 

government, where they are now compromising the value of the 

environment by some of their recent actions that they have 

undertaken to either what they call streamline but really to fast 

track projects that may create some significant challenge to our 

environment — so the question to the Premier is this: on the 

environmental front, do you believe that that so-called 

streaming by the federal government, and some of the most 

recent actions by his government, really compromises the whole 

integrity of what we think should be a sustainable development 

model, in that the environment is also balanced off versus many 

of these other projects that will add to the incredible challenge 

of making sure that we protect the integrity of the environment 

as a whole? That’s my question to the Premier. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. I want to thank the 

deputy leader for the NDP for the question with respect to the 

environment. And with respect to one project, one assessment, I 

can tell you that we recommended the following, very 

specifically, to the federal government. And when the ministers 

of the Environment met, it would’ve been our position. 

 

And when I met with the Prime Minister, I was also pretty clear 

in stating that this would be the position that the process would 

acknowledge: the provincial environmental assessment 

processes as equivalent to the federal environmental assessment 

processes for the comprehensive study level EAs 

[environmental assessment] for projects on provincial lands; a 

blanket exclusion from all CEAA [Canadian Environmental 

Assessment Act] screening level triggers; consider bilateral 

agreements on environmental co-operation negotiated by the 

CEAA as legally binding on all federal authorities — so that’s 



May 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1385 

the one assessment — introduce proactive and efficient 

measures that enhance the predictability and consistency of the 

federal EA process, environmental assessment process. 

 

Under our administration, we’ve doubled the number of FTEs 

[full-time equivalent] that are actually working on the 

environmental assessment. And that’s why we feel comfortable 

saying to the federal government, you don’t have to have two 

processes. One is good enough, especially when we are 

increasing our environmental assessment resources. 

 

And I’m happy to say that when your Leader of the Opposition 

was the Environment minister, he would’ve been part of the 

ministers of the Environment, the CCME [Canadian Council of 

Ministers of the Environment] environmental assessment task 

group. Saskatchewan had officials on that group and the Leader 

of the Opposition was the minister.  

 

And he, that particular group now, informed by the then 

Environment minister, the current Leader of the Opposition said 

— and this doesn’t surprise me, when I think the member for 

Nutana has said the NDP support one project, one assessment 

— but then they said, and they were consistent, they said that 

they support a process “led or conducted by the best-placed 

jurisdiction, and that ultimately ensures that each order of 

government can make its decisions on projects in a certain, 

predictable and timely fashion” That best-placed government 

we believe are the provincial governments, especially if a 

provincial government, as is the case with ours, has increased 

the resources available in terms of full-time equivalents for 

environmental assessment. And we have done that. 

 

The hon. member, I think, given his long service of the North, 

will be also be interested to know that we took steps 

immediately upon forming government to hopefully make some 

improvements in terms of environmental stewardship in the 

North. Here’s a few examples the member may know. He 

would have been in the cabinet, and he named a number of the 

people that he served with. He would have been in the cabinet 

when the government approved for the then Environment 

minister some mobile air quality units, specifically for the 

North.  

 

But what his cabinet failed to do, including the people he would 

have named, is to actually place any operating resources for 

those vehicles. So they weren’t actually able to be used in a 

mobile way to test air quality. The member will, I think, be 

supportive of this government’s decision to actually make the 

mobile air quality control vehicles mobile by staffing them and 

providing operational resources. 

 

And I hope that he is also supportive of the fact that, for the first 

time in forever maybe, but at least in a very long time, a 

government in Saskatchewan is actually investing in testing 

northern lakes. I think we’re concerned about, I mean, this is 

the iconic image of our province’s North, those beautiful lakes. 

And we want to make sure we are proper stewards of them. So 

we’ve embarked on a $1 million per year program to test those 

lakes. It’s interesting to note that there was testing done in the 

past, I should clarify, but Athabasca lake, Lake Athabasca 

stopped being tested in the ’90s, stopped being tested 

completely in the ’90s, just as there was all of that development 

ramping up on the west side of the province of Alberta. 

And so we have tried to move in and remedy this. The first 

invested million dollars over two years . . . well I should say, 

invested a million dollars for year two. But so far, the sampling 

programs that are taken in 2011-12 include 227 northern lakes 

sampled for acidification; inventory of soils of 110 locations in 

the boreal region and a joint eastern Athabasca regional 

monitoring program. 

 

In the last election, I think the former Environment minister for 

the NDP, Peter Prebble, ran unsuccessfully in Saskatoon 

Greystone. Here’s what he has said about the development of 

the northern stewardship in terms of the lakes under our 

administration compared to the administration of the member 

that just asked the question: “Prior to the autumn of 2007, there 

had been very little monitoring for acid rain in northern 

Saskatchewan. However this has now changed for the better,” 

said Peter Prebble. He said, “We wish to commend the 

Saskatchewan Environment staff [and I’m sure he meant the 

various ministers as well] for the very important monitoring 

work that was undertaken over the past two years.” 

 

Mr. Chairman, and to the member, we know more work needs 

to be done, but again we’re working to get that work done to 

ensure that air quality and lake quality in the North, as well as 

our habitat right around the province, our environment right 

around the province, is properly protected. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Deputy Leader of the 

Opposition, the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I just 

want to point out as well, Mr. Speaker, as I talked about the 

environment in general, and that’s one of the things I want to 

make sure that people out there watching this particular process 

that they understand, that when we talk about sustainable 

development on the NDP side, we’re really talking about the 

environmental code that we have to all certainly embrace. 

 

I think that people out there in Saskatchewan ought to know 

what are the challenges with operating in the province if you’re 

a business, if there’s proper processes. I’m not talking about 

onerous processes, Mr. Speaker. I’m speaking about the fair and 

full public debate on some of these major activities when it 

comes to the economic challenges, or meeting some of the 

economic challenges and opportunities in our province. 

 

And sustainable development for the NDP really means 

incorporating environmental balances overall. And that’s what’s 

really important. Now as you look at how we’re trying to build 

the process, or the future of our province, we want to talk about 

as well the whole notion of streamlining because the federal 

government’s talking about streamlining on the environmental 

front. They’re speaking of doing away with a number of 

processes. We’re not sure what the impacts are. We’re not sure 

how many staff are being affected. We’re not sure when the 

province may take over. Is there going to be some financial 

support for the provinces that are going to assume some of these 

roles? These are all the questions that are really, really 

important. 

 

So on one hand, when the federal and provincial governments 

talk about streamlining environmental approvals for some of 

these economic projects, I ask the people of Saskatchewan to 



1386 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2012 

pay very close attention to that because there is some demands 

on many of our lakes and our water and so on and so forth. So 

it’s important that we pay attention to that stuff. This is the 

point that we make on the NDP side, when we talk about 

sustainable development as a whole. 

 

Now looking at the whole notion of streamlining the federal and 

provincial government like to use when it comes to protection 

of the environment, they say, we’re streamlining. So obviously 

there’s other factors that we have to look at when we talk about 

the economic building. What does streamlining mean? 

 

So I want to shift focus just a bit from the environment to some 

of the players when they talk about the economy in general. 

Recently the chamber of commerce has asked that the whole 

notion of the amalgamating the RMs [rural municipality] be 

something that the provincial government should look at. I 

guess the question I would have for the Premier, are you going 

to listen to the chamber of commerce when they tell you the 

process for some of these projects are a bit onerous because we 

have too many RMs? We would like you to amalgamate the 

RMs, Mr. Premier. That was the message from the chamber of 

commerce. So in terms of continuing on with the theme of 

streamlining, is the Premier going to listen to the chamber of 

commerce, or is the Premier going to listen to SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] on the 

whole notion of amalgamating the RMs? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. You know, let me deal 

with the preamble if I can because I’m a bit confused. The 

NDP, I think in committee the critic for the Environment, the 

member from Nutana has said that the NDP, the provincial 

NDP support one assessment per one project. They support the 

decision of the federal government. Okay, and the member is 

shaking his head, so I’m no longer confused. That is their 

position, and it’s consistent with the position of the leader when 

he was the minister of the Environment. 

 

And so I would just say, Mr. Chair, then, to his point about 

ensuring that the proper assessment is done, we completely 

agree with him there. We agree that one assessment, it simply 

cannot mean less rigor. It cannot mean a smaller process or a 

less effective process for environmental analysis. 

 

And that’s why we’ve nearly doubled the staff in the 

Environment ministry that are responsible for environmental 

assessments, why the minister has put in place a process where 

— they never existed before — where there was a real back-up 

plan so the assessments themselves didn’t come to a complete 

halt because someone was ill or someone had to be away. There 

is now that flow of service and focus on the part of the 

environmental ministry, and we want to thank those officials 

and the staff in that ministry for making those common sense 

changes. 

 

And we also want to acknowledge I think the improvement in 

this province, unique amongst the provinces, of the move 

towards an environmental code where we can ensure that we 

strike that perfect balance — well, nothing’s perfect — that we 

strike a better balance between environmental sustainability, 

which has to be absolutely key and paramount in any project 

approval, that we balance it though with the need to make sure 

that we’re a welcoming place for an investment. And I think the 

improvements there speak well to progress along that path. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Interesting that in the preamble to his previous question, the 

member said quite modestly that when he was a part of the 

government, the previous government — and he named many 

of them — that they governed for all. Interesting that he would 

ask now a question on behalf of the NDP, wanting this 

government to force a rural amalgamation. Obviously the NDP 

have returned to this policy. Well people will be forgiven if 

that’s exactly what they think that member just said. And why, 

Mr. Chairman? Because the best indicator of future behaviour is 

past behaviour. 

 

And what did that member do when he was in the cabinet in the 

Government of Saskatchewan? Maybe he wasn’t in the cabinet 

at the time. What did those members do when they were in 

government? They tried to force rural municipalities to 

amalgamate. Mr. Chairman, I remember that. 

 

That caused a lot of difficulty in rural Saskatchewan. Rural 

Saskatchewan was already a little bit upset with the NDP 

because they had promised, every year, meaningful education 

tax relief and never delivered. And you had tax revolts. Now the 

NDP came along and said, here’s what we’re going to do. 

We’re going to force you to amalgamate. And now they’re 

talking about it again, Mr. Chair. He’s saying, well, the 

chamber of commerce has said what they’ve said, and are you 

going to force amalgamation of the rural municipalities? Like a 

divide, you either do what the chamber wants or you do what 

SARM wants. 

 

Mr. Chairman, actually if he’s really serious about wanting to 

represent all, it’s an interesting question. We believe that you 

can achieve both — that you can represent the interests of the 

chamber, that you can represent the interests of the working 

family, and that you can represent the interests of important 

stakeholders like SARM. It doesn’t mean every particular 

interest groups gets everything on their list, but it means you 

earnestly work with all of those groups to respond to what they 

believe is needed in the province to keep us moving forward. 

 

Mr. Chairman, here’s the short answer. No, this government 

will not force the amalgamation of rural municipalities. Where 

it has happened in the past in the name of efficiencies and 

savings, including Canada’s largest province, the efficiencies 

and savings never materialized. What happened though was 

division and discord. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, we know that SARM, through an initiative 

called . . . I’m going to forget the name of it, but I think it’s 

called the way through or the pathway through. I’m looking 

over at the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Clearing the Path. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Clearing the Path, that’s it. I have a chorus 

of help in the back, Mr. Chair. They’ve identified the need to 

make sure that there’s not unnecessary duplication on the part 

of rural governments and the part of urban governments. You 



May 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1387 

can do that without the provincial government doing as the 

NDP would have us do, forcing, with a gun to their head, the 

amalgamation of municipalities which they backed off on back 

then. But apparently now it’s back on the agenda of the 

Saskatchewan NDP. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Deputy Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to go 

back to the whole challenge that we have in making sure that in 

Saskatchewan the water supply is something that the chamber 

also brought up at their most recent gathering. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think it’s important that people realize that there is a 

lot of demand on water in general. The chamber of commerce 

has quite frankly asked for an aggressive provincial strategy on 

water management. They have been asking for this for a 

number of years, Mr. Speaker. And that’s something that we 

have to absolutely pay attention to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that there are warning signs. 

As we mentioned at the outset, in the province, people watch 

very carefully what happens in and around their communities. 

And we see evidence, like as an example, with some of the 

water challenges in Prince Albert, of how that went on for a 

number of months and how that cost the economy, threatened 

the safety of the local residents, and really spoke about the 

challenge that we have as a province to continue building for 

the future, that some very basic building blocks are not in place 

despite the rhetoric from the Saskatchewan Party that they have 

record revenues, and so on and so forth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not a problem just in Prince Albert. It was a 

problem in Yorkton. It was a problem in Weyburn. And the 

headlines now today in Meadow Lake — this is an older paper 

— but Meadow Lake, the headlines in the Progress said, 

“Meadow Lake still boiling water.” And, Mr. Speaker, one of 

the points that was raised in the article, even though it’s a 

couple of weeks old, was the fact that one of the councillors 

there believed that the boil-water order in Meadow Lake will 

stay till the fall. 

 

And as you look throughout Saskatchewan as a whole, as you 

look to the province as a whole, in many of our communities, in 

our cities, in our towns, in our villages, that the waterworks 

system that they have in place are near their end of life. Now 

the question that I would have to the Premier is that obviously 

the chamber realizes not just the water management strategy is 

required, but infrastructure investment is also required and 

certainly to making sure we balance all the needs on the 

drawing of water within our boundaries to make sure that 

there’s a good sensible plan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s something that really cries for a lot of 

attention. And we’re going to watch very carefully how the 

Premier answers this question because he goes back to talking 

about the infrastructure deficit that they often like to accuse us 

of leaving. We turn around and we say to them, well it was a lot 

worse when we had the financial deficit left to us by your 

predecessors. So I think it’s important that we simply answer 

the question. 

 

The chamber is looking for an intelligent response in terms of 

water management because we’re getting all the warning signs, 

all the warning signs, not just the flooding this year but in future 

years for drought. We’re getting all the warning signs of 

infrastructure within the community failing. We’re looking at 

all the demands by industry for that water that is needed, and 

especially with potash. And you look at the challenges with 

drainage in the agricultural sector. Every single place that you 

look, as the chamber has so aptly pointed out, there are 

challenges with water management, water supply, and the 

protection of water in general. And yet nobody seems to be 

paying attention to this particular aspect of what the chamber is 

trying to raise. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask the Premier: in terms of the water 

management strategy and the whole notion that we’re talking 

about under the argument of sustainable development — 

environmental protection of the water source is so critically 

important to the future of Saskatchewan in many, many, many 

ways — what is your government’s plan over the next several 

months and over the next several years to begin to address this 

huge deficit that we have when it comes to managing our water 

properly and carefully and for the future? 

 

The Chair: — Mr. Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. The 

member raises a very, very important question. There isn’t a 

resource more important in the province frankly than water. 

And the Government of Saskatchewan is seized of this 

particular issue going forward. We’re developing a 10-year 

infrastructure plan, and a provincial water strategy focused on 

three pieces: quality, quantity, and location. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we’re fortunate in that, you know, there’s a lot 

of water in the province and certainly in the river system that 

flows through Saskatchewan where we — and the Minister of 

Agriculture has made this point many times — where we have 

to do a better job of being stewards of that particular resource. 

The evaporation of those waters that move through, especially 

on the Saskatchewan River system, is almost as high as what 

we irrigate. I know the member is talking about water supply 

and potable water, but I think it’s an interesting illustration of 

where we truly need to come together and develop a plan 

because the supply is here in many respects. Location is a 

problem. And then we have to be doing what we can to ensure 

quality and quantity. 

 

Mr. Chairman, there is an important point to be made in terms 

of the first years of our government where we worked with the 

federal government in their various Building Canada Fund 

iterations. And many, many, many of those projects were about 

improved municipal water supply. There’s the example of the 

village of Hepburn, which is now a growing community, but for 

a very, very long time would ask for grants from its provincial 

and federal governments because it was operating on a well 

system and the people were not doing very well by that 

particular system. Well now because of federal and provincial 

participation they have a water system. There are many, many 

other examples and much more that is needed. 

 

And so, Mr. Chair, as I highlighted last week in Saskatoon, our 

government is moving towards a long-term plan for this 

province that is informed by our economic objectives, which 



1388 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2012 

won’t surprise anyone. They’ve been consistent since we 

formed government but also speak to the long-term needs we 

have in water, in generally in infrastructure, in health care and 

education, in the environment. And may I just say that essential 

to the infrastructure component and the water component of that 

particular plan is our stated desire to negotiate with the, to work 

with the municipal sector in developing a longer term 

infrastructure plan. 

 

As you know, Mr. Chair, we dealt earlier on with revenue 

sharing. We have invested in infrastructure through the stimulus 

and in partnership with the feds. We offered a municipal 

economic enhancement program, MEEP, an unprecedented 

$100 million to municipalities where they were no strings 

attached, able to deploy that, again many of them, to help at 

least with the costs of waterworks in their communities. 

 

We know a longer term infrastructure plan is needed for the 

province. We say to our municipal partners at SARM and 

SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] that 

we’re going to continue to work towards that. It will not be an 

inexpensive proposition, but we know the importance of 

infrastructure in particular to water infrastructure to the 

province. 

 

The Chair: — The Deputy Opposition Leader. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 

want to make sure we raise those points because obviously it’s 

something the people of Saskatchewan are concerned about and 

it affects our everyday lives. And it’s important that people 

know not just it affects agriculture but it affects business. It 

affects communities and the health of our children and our 

families. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we pay attention to that, and 

that’s one of the points that I want to really again point out, the 

fact that when you look at the land itself, people make a living 

off that land. We’ve been privy to a lot of discussions from 

different rural families in terms of drainage challenges that 

they’re having. And it becomes more and more of a major issue 

when you see how people that derive a living off that land are 

impacted. So whether you’re in the North or the South or the 

East or the West, it doesn’t matter where you live, the whole 

notion of water quality, water quantity, and safety of that water 

is really, really important. And that’s one of the points that we 

wanted to raise today. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to just shift gears a bit in terms of my 

particular question I have for the Premier. We always assert that 

as opposition members our role is to watch what the 

government does. We relish in that particular role and we 

certainly want to tell people that we’re very proud to fill that 

role. And we encourage people to give us information because 

part of holding the government to account is to make sure you 

have full and fair information that you can challenge the 

government on. And it’s something that we certainly view as 

very important to the Assembly, very important in politics in 

general. And certainly from our perspective, we want to do that 

and continue doing that for as long as the next election comes. 

And at that point, of course, people will have the opportunity to 

judge. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the Northland project in 

North Battleford. I guess we are all . . . have the opinion that 

there is an effort right now. The Crowns are doing well and 

there’s no question in our minds that we feel that the 

Saskatchewan Party want to look at the whole notion of selling 

off our Crowns. And right now, Mr. Speaker, they’re doing it in 

the most quiet manner. As you begin to see the process unfold, 

as you can see whether it’s services within SaskTel or whether 

it’s selling off certain assets, that there is the move to sell the 

Crowns by the Sask Party. 

 

And I guess the most specific and the most important example 

that I would pick up on is the Northland Power deal in North 

Battleford. I guess the question I would ask the Premier is: why 

did you allow that process to proceed? Because I understand 

that SaskPower themselves could have done the project and you 

would have actually strengthened the Crown corporation called 

SaskPower, and that there was a specific deal within that 

Northland Power deal that really . . . Some people have phrased 

it as a sweetheart deal, where you’re guaranteeing them a 

certain rate for 20 years. And a lot of people today have 

certainly made the point that in North Battleford, for the 

generation of power that the Northland Power is able to provide 

to the grid in general, could have easily been done by 

SaskPower themselves. Instead a separate sweetheart deal was 

established by this company out of Ontario, I believe. And I 

guess the question is: why would you weaken SaskPower as a 

Crown corporation on purpose? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, why did the NDP in ’03 cut a 

sweetheart deal for a cogen deal, private generation of 

electricity at Cory? Why did the NDP cut a sweetheart deal for 

the cogen at Lloyd with a private company? That was in ’99. 

Why did the NDP weaken their Crown corporation, SaskPower, 

and cut a sweetheart deal with SunBridge to generate electricity 

— private companies generating electricity in the grid? 

 

Mr. Chairman, we’ve heard this line of questioning. We’ve seen 

the NDP try every way they can to make inferences on the 

Crowns that are simply not true. And it’s interesting, Mr. Chair, 

that he would enter this line of questioning. I’d be happy to 

have him pursue it further. Under the NDP, on certain electrical 

generation projects, some of them renewables, not all of them, 

they made a decision to go with a private-sector generation of 

electricity. They did. The NDP. But when the NDP do it, then 

it’s not about a sweetheart deal, I guess. When the NDP do it, 

it’s not about some sort of backdoor privatization. Mr. 

Chairman, I think the people of this province have had enough 

of those kinds of tactics, but if he wants to ask more questions 

about what they did with private electrical providers, we’ll be 

happy to answer them. 

 

[17:00] 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Deputy Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s important 

is that the people of Saskatchewan, a lot of people in 

Saskatchewan, know that Saskatchewan was certainly going to 

experience a boom. I think people out there . . . I can remember 



May 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1389 

the headlines as far back as 2000 where the headlines in the 

newspapers said, “Saskatchewan’s star is rising.” I remember 

that particular headline, Mr. Speaker. And the work has been 

done over the years, Mr. Speaker. There’s been a great 

opportunity, as I mentioned at the outset of my questions, of 

how we’d been able to learn or how I was able to learn off some 

very qualified people that sat around cabinet and made some of 

the choices that they made, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I can tell you one exchange I had with the former Health 

minister, the current leader of our party, over the whole notion 

of the smoking challenge. And I didn’t think that was a great 

idea, Mr. Speaker, at the time, and I certainly expressed my 

views. Today now I stand corrected that the fact that some of 

the activity undertaken by him when he was the health 

champion of making sure people in Saskatchewan knew the 

dangers of smoking, Mr. Speaker. He won the argument based 

on a fair and square argument, and today now we’re seeing that 

the health benefits of the people of Saskatchewan have been 

improved because of some of the leadership undertaken by the 

current leader of our party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s my point, is that there’s a lot of folks out there that 

had a healthy debate. They weren’t bound by philosophical 

positions. They took some really solid, common sense 

approaches to government. They put some very solid 

commitments in place, and today we’re seeing the benefits of 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In fact I want to be very careful in my closing comments, Mr. 

Speaker, because I’ve only been given a few minutes. But I 

want to point out that in 2006, in 2006, Mr. Speaker, about a 

year before the last election, Mr. Speaker, there was 9,349 

people that moved into Saskatchewan, 1,500 more from Alberta 

alone, Mr. Speaker, than left. Following that year, in the first 

quarter, there’s 4,631 people, Mr. Speaker, that moved into 

Saskatchewan in the first . . . in one of the quarters of 2007. So 

then we start moving backwards, Mr. Speaker, in terms of how 

the growth of Saskatchewan was steady. It was moving forward 

and things were going to happen. And the people of 

Saskatchewan — and I want to tell the Premier that — the 

people of Saskatchewan knew this was going to happen. 

Everybody and their dog knew the boom was coming and 

everybody and their dog now knows that the boom will 

continue regardless of who’s in government, Mr. Speaker. I 

think people have been very, very clear on that. 

 

However in making sure that we ascertain what the people of 

Saskatchewan want when you know the boom is going to 

continue, you have to make sure that they know what values 

that we as a party would have versus their values, Mr. Speaker. 

So my point, as a member of this party, is that Saskatchewan’s 

future is bright. The NDP will embrace that. It’ll continue 

building. But, Mr. Speaker, there are choices that we will make 

that’ll make sure that the people of Saskatchewan realize that 

we’re serious about building for the future, and part of that 

build means sustainable development overall, Mr. Speaker, 

making sure we protect our Crowns and making sure we govern 

for all and not ignore any sectors or any people or any region, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s the most important message I have today. 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I didn’t hear a question in 

there but, you know, this is a good forum to have debates. This 

is a good forum to have debates. That member stood up and 

accused this government of having a plan to privatize the 

Crowns. His example for that, his criticism then of government 

policy took the form of the Northland private sector, privately 

built gas station, SaskPower natural gas station, SaskPower 

purchasing, of course, the electricity generated. This is an 

important opportunity for that member to stand up or his leader 

and be very explicit about what the NDP believe now. Because 

when they were in government, they entered into these 

arrangements. Sometimes SaskPower built their own generating 

facility. Sometimes under the NDP, SaskPower bought their 

electricity from a private generator. 

 

We have chosen both as well. We’re building out the public, the 

Crown-owned capacity, Mr. Chair, because we have demands 

to meet in terms of electricity. And yes, from time to time when 

it makes sense, we’re engaging with the private sector as well. 

 

What is the NDP’s position? What is that member’s position on 

36 megawatts of power coming from a biomass generating 

facility at the saw mill at Meadow Lake, owned by the Meadow 

Lake Tribal Council? Is he in favour of that? Because it’s a 

great economic engine for the tribal council and for the people 

of Meadow Lake. He says he likes that. Well the Finance critic 

says that they do support that. What’s his position about the 

cogeneration facility, the private electricity, that’s going to be 

generated to help reanimate the pulp mill that shut down under 

their watch, Mr. Chairman? Are they in favour of it or not? That 

one will also have a benefit to the Agency Chiefs Tribal 

Council as they’re involved in that whole project. 

 

Mr. Chairman, you can’t just get up and have a little drive-by 

estimates question and say, you’ve got a plan to privatize the 

Crown, the SaskPower — your example is a private generator 

— when you sat in cabinet and you approved exactly the same 

deals. And when current deals like it are economic 

opportunities for people like the Meadow Lake Tribal Council 

for a saw mill, to reopen a pulp mill, when will the NDP . . . I 

mean I know the NDP’s job is to hold the government 

accountable and ask questions, and fair enough, and that’s what 

the member has stated. It’s also their job to state what their 

policy is, especially when there seems to be massive 

inconsistencies, huge gaps in the policy of the NDP. So 

whoever’s up next, stand up and say, are you in favour of 

partnering with the private sector or groups like the Meadow 

Lake Tribal Council for the generation of electricity in the 

province of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Chair, I’m happy to enter back into 

this debate because the fundamental question is trust and 

openness and accountability. And the fundamental question we 

have about Northland Power is we don’t know, as citizens of 

this province, how much we’re paying for that power as it 

relates to our total system because the officials have not been 

able to give that information to us no matter how many times 

we’ve asked about it. 

 

Now this isn’t the only example of that Premier and that 

government doing this kind of thing which raises a lot of 



1390 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2012 

questions. We raised questions about the new long-term care 

facility in Saskatoon which the auditor then said looks like it’s 

costing a lot more money to do it this way because they didn’t 

do a full assessment of what they were doing. They didn’t go 

with the open tendering and, Mr. Speaker, that is the question. 

What are the contracts that they are entering into on behalf of 

the people of the province? And where and how do they make 

sense in light of all the comparisons? We don’t get that 

information. 

 

And so when the Premier stands up and says, are you willing to 

do some of the things that we did over the years, of course we 

are, but we did them in a way where we looked at all of the 

different options and got the advice of the professional people 

both within government and often outside of government that 

this was the type of thing that made the most sense to do. Now 

the problem we have is that the auditor has challenged the 

facility in Saskatoon. We don’t have the details on what’s 

happened with Northland Power and we’ve continued to ask for 

that. Maybe today is the day that the Premier will give us the 

information that we’ve asked for for a number of years. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, it’s amazing to hear what their 

leader just said. It’s very consistent with what he said since the 

election. You know, in the election campaign they suffered an 

historic defeat. I haven’t heard a note of contrition, not one 

admission by that Leader of the Opposition, by any of the 

members over there, that maybe they got something wrong, that 

maybe they weren’t right about anything. Witness his last 

answer. To his credit he tried to answer my question — are you 

in favour of these kind of power purchase agreements or are 

you against them? And you know what his answer is? Well we 

were in favour of ours because we know we would do them 

right, but we don’t know about anyone else. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the disclosure for PPAs [power purchase 

agreement], the rules that are set around disclosing the terms for 

power purchase agreements, were set by the NDP — in other 

words that these cannot be disclosed. They set the rules. He 

may have been the minister. He was a minister of a lot of 

things. He may have set the rules back in 2005 that says we 

can’t disclose the terms of a power purchase agreement. But 

that only applied apparently to them, that non-disclosure, that 

exemption, I guess. Everyone else would have to disclose and 

never mind best business practices. I can assure the member 

that the Crown corporation, SaskPower, is managed and led by 

fine women and men, excellent women and men who are 

dedicated to the integrity of that particular Crown, who are 

dedicated to the proposition that they need to continue to 

provide reliable electricity at the lowest possible cost to a 

growing province. I can also tell you that all the agreements that 

we’ve signed, in terms of power purchase agreements, are 

completely in line with the same agreements signed by the 

NDP. 

 

But you know, Mr. Chairman, I just find it . . . It’s surprising to 

me that given the opportunities they’ve had now since 

November the 7th, since the election, given all the opportunities 

he’s had as a leader to stand up and say, you know, I think we 

made some mistakes and we didn’t get things right and we were 

off of the agenda of the people of the province in the provincial 

election campaign and we need to do better and we need to earn 

their support . . . Those are some of the things I remember 

saying in ’03 when something disappointing happened to us. 

 

It wasn’t the people’s fault. We didn’t say, it wasn’t the 

turnout’s fault; it wasn’t icy roads. It was the fact that maybe 

we needed to be better. Mr. Chairman, I think that every 

member in this House would be well served, including us, 

including our side of the House, by remembering that we can 

always do better and we’re not going to get everything right. 

But to stand in his place and say, well we supported them then 

because it was us doing them and, you know, we always got 

things right and nobody else will, you know, I think that 

explains a lot frankly about what happened on the 7th of 

November last year. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Chair, I thank the Premier for 

answering a question that I know a number of us have been 

asking for a long time is, what is the nature of the agreement at 

Northland Power? And he says that it follows the principles that 

were set out over the years that we worked in this area. And if 

that’s in fact the case, then I appreciate that. 

 

Now, Mr. Chair, we’ve given the Premier a chance to basically 

say, maybe I got it wrong on the three more MLAs question. 

And we’ve done that over many hours, as I think lots of people 

in this room have witnessed. But more importantly, we did it 

last week which would allow him to spend some time and go to 

the people and get a response on that particular issue. Because I 

think that’s the kind of thing, when you’re in government, that 

you need to look at and see where maybe you’ve made a wrong 

choice. 

 

Now we know that they made some wrong choices as it relates 

to labour legislation which the courts have said is 

unconstitutional, but are they looking at it and trying to fix that? 

Doesn’t sound like it. And so, Mr. Chair, I think that when 

you’re governing, you keep working and providing things. 

 

Now one of the concerns as well is related to this facility in 

Saskatoon where the Provincial Auditor has made some very 

direct statements about the process that took place. And we 

raised lots of questions about that which were dismissed by the 

minister and by the Premier, and we don’t think that was 

appropriate. Sounds like it’s going to cost a lot more money for 

the people of Saskatchewan, that $20 million there. Well that 

could have gone to health care to pay for seniors’ medications. 

It could have gone to a number of facilities and staff that are 

needed throughout the health care system. It could have gone to 

many of the concerns that we have about what the provincial 

budget is doing to the educational system across the province 

and how young people in classrooms are not getting everything 

that they should be getting because of some of the changes in 

the education budget. 

 

[17:15] 

 

But, Mr. Chair, when one goes and sets oneself out, setting a 

course for the province, what the public wants to know is that 

you’ve provided the information, you’ve let them know what 

kinds of things are being done. And unfortunately there’s a 



May 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1391 

number of places where we’ve asked questions, that hasn’t 

happened. We’ve also been surprised. I mean things just sort of 

pop out of nowhere and cause everybody a lot of concern. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the announcement came this morning about 

changes to labour law, this is no small matter. This is 100 years 

of legislation and accommodation. That is the nature of how we 

do things in Canada that’s being challenged directly. And it 

may not be, it might not have been a big issue if there was trust 

around this issue. But this builds on some of the direct 

comments of the Premier about how he wants to make war on 

labour. He said that a number of times. It also builds on some 

legislation that was introduced and rammed through the 

legislature and done in a way that basically caused a lot of 

difficulties for many people within the province. And in fact, 

after a very reasoned judgment, one of our most able judges 

said it was done in an unconstitutional manner. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that when we look at what happens, it’s 

about trust. It’s about being open. It’s about being accountable. 

And those are where some of the fundamental questions are 

rising after four and a half years of this government. So I want 

to say that let . . . The people are always right in elections. They 

make their choices at a particular time. But they also continue 

to work and make sure that everybody is held to account. 

 

Our job, as I’ve said a number of times today, is to ask the hard 

questions of the government. And sometimes that’s not easy for 

the government. I know; I’ve been on that side. But if people 

aren’t asking the right questions, then you aren’t doing a good 

job. The next part is to accept that those are the right questions 

and that you have to admit you’re going slightly in the wrong 

direction, or maybe totally in the wrong direction, and change 

course. 

 

But it’s the government and the Premier that are leading and 

that are spending the money. And so he can make all kinds of 

comments and questions to us in opposition. But the question is, 

what is he doing? What is he doing with the people’s money? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. And I thank the member 

for the question. Interesting he did reference the essential 

services decision by the courts. And, Mr. Chairman, here is a 

good example of where I think . . . Shortly thereafter, I was 

scrummed in the rotunda about the particular announcement 

and said, our government made mistakes early on in the life of 

the government. We made mistakes in terms of the details of 

the legislation. The government has since indicated that we’re 

going to certainly be abiding by that court ruling in terms of 

consultation. Witness where we are today, Mr. Chairman, with 

the Minister of Labour releasing the points for consultation on 

potential improvements and changes to the labour environment 

in the province and the creation of an employment code. We are 

actually doing exactly what the court said. 

 

The other recommendations from the court, terms of essential 

services, we are also acting on, Mr. Chair, and they will also be 

the subject of this review. And so I think it is important to 

recognize that early in the life of the government, all the details 

were not got right, obviously. And I think it’s important for 

governments — and by the way, I think it’s important for 

opposition parties — when they get something not quite right to 

admit it to the people for whom we work, the people we serve, 

and then to indicate the ways that we hope to address the 

situation. 

 

But here’s what was not got wrong, Mr. Chair, on that whole 

issue, the principle of essential services legislation. I think that 

principle is widely supported in the province. It’s certainly 

supported unanimously on this side of the House. The NDP to 

their credit created a clear choice in the election campaign. 

Their clear choice was they would repeal that essential services 

piece. 

 

And so we could face this factor again of services being 

withdrawn from snowplows in the middle of a blizzard as a 

result of seeking leverage in a workplace dispute. Mr. 

Chairman, maybe that’s okay for the members opposite. It’s not 

okay for members on this side of the House. So we will make 

the improvements that are needed to essential services that the 

courts have directed. We will make the essential services piece 

open to, subject to the labour review that’s happening. 

 

And here’s the other thing we’re going to continue to do, as I 

said on election night, and we’re going to continue to admit 

readily mistakes and then deal with them because, you know, 

that’s how people in this province conduct themselves in their 

daily lives, in their businesses, in their avocations, in their 

vocations. And I think that’s their expectation of government. 

And we’re going to work to limit those chances obviously, Mr. 

Chair. But when they occur, that’s how we’ll deal with them. 

 

I think I heard the hon. member, the Leader of the Opposition, 

end with what have you done with the people’s’ money? I think 

that was the question. Well, Mr. Chair, I’ll give the longer term 

answer first, and then we’ll focus on the budget. 

 

There were many things that we’ve done with the people’s 

money in the first four years that we’ve had the honour to serve 

as their government. We paid off 44 per cent of the general 

revenue debt of the province of Saskatchewan. We lowered 

taxes for small businesses. We lowered taxes for property 

owners in historic ways. Most producers in rural Saskatchewan 

received an 80 per cent reduction in the property tax, in their 

education property tax. That’s what we’ve done with the 

money. Mr. Chair, we lowered taxes for families right across 

this province so that a family of four can earn more here in 

Saskatchewan without paying any provincial tax than anywhere 

else in all of Canada. That’s what we’ve done with the people’s 

money. 

 

Mr. Chair, we invested $2.2 billion in highways, 60 per cent in 

our first four years higher than their last four years. That’s what 

we’ve done with the people’s money. 

 

We’ve targeted surgical wait times in the province. We’ve 

invested more resources to reduce surgical wait times — those 

waiting longer than 18 months down now more than over 90 per 

cent; those waiting longer than 12 months down over 60 per 

cent. That’s what we’ve done with the people’s money. 

 

We’ve increased funding to the cancer agency, Mr. Chair. 

We’ve added drugs, important drugs, to the formulary. We’ve 

building schools in the province of Saskatchewan. We’re 



1392 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2012 

building long-term care facilities in Saskatchewan. We’re going 

to get the Moose Jaw Hospital done. That’s what we’re doing 

with the people’s money. 

 

And finally there will be a brand new provincial hospital in 

North Battleford. That’s what we’ll do with the people’s 

money. And if we have a chance in the years ahead, in the 

months and years ahead, we’re going to continue to do those 

things. We’re going to continue to lower taxes for 

Saskatchewan families. We’re going to continue to reduce the 

debt in the province. We’re going to continue to build the 

infrastructure. That’s what we’ll do with the people’s money — 

all within a balanced budget. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Chair, I’m not sure the Premier’s had 

a chance to rattle off that speech since last November, so he’s 

doing a pretty good job of remembering. But I’m sure he said it 

enough times that he can say it in his sleep. 

 

Now in 2010 the Sask Party government, the Premier and Sask 

Party government, cut the Aboriginal employment development 

program. And the response to that decision when we challenged 

it was, whoa, we’re going to set up some other options, some 

other kinds of things. And we know that there have been 

increased numbers of Aboriginal people employed because the 

numbers in the province have gone up. 

 

But what is there to replace that Aboriginal employment 

development program which was of, I think, great value to the 

future of this province? Because what we know is that no matter 

how many people we bring from other places, we have this 

incredible resource of young people who are wanting to be 

trained and want to contribute to our economy. In fact I know 

that professor of economics Eric Howe at the University of 

Saskatchewan calculated that there’s a $90 billion value to the 

sort of intellectual or people capacity of all of the young 

Aboriginal people in our province. And so it’s absolutely 

crucial that we make sure we use this resource in the same way 

that we use all of the other resources in the province. 

 

But I have to say that when some of these kinds of programs are 

just cut and not replaced, that’s not a good sign for the 

province. What we also know is that there’s a substantial gap 

between the amount of money that’s available for K to 12 

[kindergarten to grade 12] education on the First Nations 

schools versus what happens in the other system. And I know 

that the minister’s identified that, but what plans does the 

Premier have to deal with that using provincial resources? And 

also what plans does he have to talk to the Prime Minister, 

given the great responsibility at the national level for this 

particular problem? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. The hon. member raises 

a very important question. There’s a labour shortage in the 

province today. It’s a challenge we’d rather have than 

out-migration, but it’s a challenge nonetheless. And so our 

government has a three-pronged approach to dealing with the 

challenge. 

 

We’ve greatly improved and enhanced the provincial 

immigration efforts, Mr. Chair. That’s one source of new 

people to the province in terms of the labour shortage. I think 

there was, under the New Democrats when they were in office, 

I think about 8,000 immigrants between ’01 and 2006. We’ll do 

well over 10 just this year by setting some bold targets and 

investing increased resources on the immigration front. That’s 

one source of help on the labour shortage. Another are 

expatriates from this province who moved to other parts of the 

country. And we’ve seen many of them moving home, and 

we’re grateful for that. We welcome them back. 

 

More important even than those other two is the third, arguably 

the first of those, and it goes to the member’s question, and that 

is that we would continue to work hard to close the educational 

outcomes gap between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal citizens 

of this province. Mr. Chairman, you will know that on the 26th 

of March, there was a joint task force announced on this very 

issue with respect to our province’s efforts building on the 

relationship we have with FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations] on the educational outcomes gaps initiative that 

we have with them. 

 

I think more important than the actual program itself, and the 

member’s raised a specific one, is a measure of the amount of 

investment in post-secondary institutions to train more of our 

Aboriginal citizens — First Nations and Métis. The next part is, 

the next part of the valuation, the measure, the matrix should 

be: are there more Aboriginal students enrolling in those 

institutions now that they have that support? And most 

importantly of all, are there more First Nations and Métis 

people working in a growing economy? So let’s deal with that 

while we acknowledge there’s more work to be done. And 

that’s why we’re engaged with our partners in trying to find 

even better ways to achieve the results that we all want. 

 

Let’s take a look at the first part of that equation, which is 

investing more in post-secondary institutions. This year our 

government provided 47 million in funding directly for First 

Nations and Métis education. There’s been a 25 per cent 

increase in funding for the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 

Technologies since 2007 — 4.7 million in 2012 versus 3.78 

million in 2007. That was the budget that we took over. 

 

Mr. Chair, that is a great institution. That is an excellent 

technical school by any measure, by any standard. You take a 

look at any across the country, and Randell Morris and his team 

at SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies] 

continue to do a great job of not only making that education 

available, deploying these additional resources efficaciously, 

but also ensuring that at the end of that training, there’s a job. 

They have great relationships with industry partners in 

Saskatoon and area and across the province. I think 200 

graduates from SIIT alone are on site at Agrium helping that 

potash expansion under way, an expansion that may never have 

happened if others had their way with a royalty shock in the 

middle of that expansion. But the SIIT is doing a great job. 

 

Thirty-four per cent increase in funding to GDI, to the Gabriel 

Dumont Institute, that’s since 2007 — 10.24 million in 2012 

versus 7.6 million. And then there’s a long list of other 

initiatives. 

 



May 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1393 

But let’s move, if we can, mindful of the time, to the results. 

 

Well the results are in. Registrations have grown at SIIT by 23 

per cent, 23 per cent more higher enrolment at SIIT between 

2007 and 2011. Completions, even more important, increasing 

from 60 to 77 per cent in certificates and diplomas. Gabriel 

Dumont Institute, GDI has trained over 1,000 First Nations and 

Métis teachers. One of the top two training providers of 

practical nurses in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

[17:30] 

 

So that’s the middle part of that formula. The first one is 

advancing some resources to these institutions, beyond 

programs. I think that’s important. Two is, are more people 

taking advantage of the programs and completing them? And 

thirdly, what happens after that? Are they employed? Well, Mr. 

Chairman, in the last numbers from Stats Canada, year over 

year, the employment stats are out. I think there were 5,200 jobs 

created year over year in the province. We have the lowest 

unemployment rate in Canada. 

 

I’m happy to report to the House I think 4,700 of those new 

jobs went to Aboriginal citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan — 90 per cent of the new jobs. So there is more 

work to be done, but we’re making progress with respect to the 

institutions, funding them. They’re making progress in terms of 

enrolment and completion, and more and more First Nations 

and Métis are working in the province. First Nations and Métis 

employment have 39,200 and 2011 was the highest on record. 

More work to be done, Mr. Chair. But we’re making progress 

beyond specific programs to a broader strategy that seems to be 

working with more work needed. Thank you, Mr. Chair. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, we all are pleased about more people 

getting training, more people working. But unfortunately, 

Statistics Canada showed that, at the end of 2007, 13.9 per cent 

of First Nations people were unemployed. At the first part of 

2012, the unemployment rate is 20.5 per cent. So there’s work 

that’s been done, but there’s more work that needs to be done. 

And that’s why I ask the question because it’s absolutely crucial 

that this becomes a priority for the government. 

 

It took an awfully long time from the collapse or cancellation of 

the Aboriginal employment development program to get just 

the committee started a few weeks ago. And so the question 

really comes, what priority is being placed on this? Because it’s 

part of the fundamental nature of what the future of our 

province is going to be. When we look at all of the resources we 

have, I think the Premier agrees with me that our biggest 

resource is always our people. And it also then takes me back to 

the question about why you exclude these people under 18 from 

your calculations. Because we know that about a quarter of the 

population’s about . . . is under age 18. And a very large 

percentage of those under 18 are First Nations and Métis 

people. And so it raises a bigger question about the future of our 

province and where we intend to take it. 

 

Some of the changes that were announced today by the Minister 

of Immigration around the nominee program also raised 

questions around how we’ve welcomed people to the province. 

We all know that the motto for the province is “from many 

peoples, strength.” And we all know that when our families 

came to this place, they didn’t come with one at a time with a 

job. They came with great numbers of people from Norway or 

from Eastern Europe or other places. 

 

And so some of the announcements today I think have sent a 

cold splash of water over quite a few of our new Saskatchewan 

residents because one of the positive reasons that they came to 

the province was so that they could build a place for their 

family here, but also invite other members of their family here. 

So when we look at how we set out what we want to do in our 

province, we need to make sure that we include the new people 

that are coming. But we also make sure that those who are here 

and have great strength in their presence in this province get the 

best training possible, so they can contribute to what’s 

happening in the province. 

 

So I say to the Premier that, keep working on this, but I would 

say make it a higher priority to make sure that these numbers of 

twenty and a half per cent of First Nations people reporting 

unemployment, let’s try to really work on that and bring the 

number down. So I would ask the Premier what emphasis he 

will have to accomplish that. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. Well, you know, I think 

we’ve gone through what we’re doing in government in terms 

of increasing the participation of First Nations and Métis into a 

growing economy in the province. We’ve seen an 

unprecedented increase in funding for institutions like the 

Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies and for the 

Gabriel Dumont Institute. We’ve seen them increase their 

completion rates and then we’ve seen Aboriginal employment 

increasing. And I’ve said quite clearly, there is certainly more 

work to be done. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we’ve come a long way between 1996 . . . We 

all know that education is the key here; there is no question 

about that. I think we agree. I’ve heard the Finance critic speak 

to that eloquently in this House, and members on this side have 

as well. Between 1996 and 2006, the gap allowed at that time 

by the government between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal 

high school completion rate grew from 20 to 27 per cent. 

Between 1996 and 2006, the gap allowed to grow by the 

government in place of the day of Aboriginal and 

non-Aboriginal post-secondary completion rate grew from 17 to 

20 per cent. There is a lot of work to be done. This is a 

long-standing problem. 

 

His question is, what are you going to do? Well we’re going to 

continue to do what we have been doing in government. We’re 

going to make those investments in infrastructure. We’re going 

be working with our partners to deliver that education. We’re 

going to provide them the resources so they seek completion of 

the programs. And then we’re going to encourage and provide 

even more incentives for institutions like SIIT that have a great 

track record in ensuring that those graduates are then working, 

whether it’s at a potash mine, at Agrium, or in construction or 

in some other trade. In the case of those who graduate from the 

professions, the same is true there, or in health care as in the 

case of the Gabriel Dumont LPN [licensed practical nursing] 



1394 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2012 

program that they have there. 

 

And, Mr. Chair, importantly here’s the best thing that we can do 

to ensure that that gap continues to close, to ensure that people 

have the opportunity to pursue education first, but then a job at 

the end: we’re going to continue with a growth plan that’s got 

this province in a pretty good place right now in terms of 

economic performance. The best thing we can do is ensure that 

Saskatchewan’s growing, that there are opportunities here first 

and foremost for our own residents, then for those who have left 

for other places in Canada, and new citizens to the country. 

 

And let me just close with an answer to the member’s question 

on immigration and some of the changes announced by the 

minister today. You know, you’ve got to kind of watch our 

opposition. They’re going to do a good job. They’re the nimble 

nine, after all. They’re going to hold us accountable. And they 

will; and that’s their job. And certainly they’ve done that this 

session. But you’ve got to watch and make sure that, and make 

sure that they’ve got everything right. 

 

Because . . . I’m going to watch my words very carefully here, 

Mr. Chairman. But I think we all need to make sure they’ve got 

everything right, including that minister. Because he just stood 

up on his . . . took to his feet in the legislature and implied that 

the changes we are now making in immigration will mean that 

only one can come in at a time. That’s nonsense, Mr. Chair. 

This is about families continuing to be able to move to where 

there is opportunity, to where there are jobs. So let’s be very 

clear about that. There are changes happening nationally in 

terms of extended family so that we can, all of, every province 

and the federal government can continue to meet the objectives 

and the goals of immigration. 

 

And I want to just say this, Mr. Chair. Notwithstanding the fact 

that we’ve covered some issues that we could have done a little 

better in government over the first four years, I am very proud, 

and members on this side of the House are very proud of a 

complete turnaround in the immigration record for the province 

of Saskatchewan — a complete turnaround. 

 

The New Democrats were afraid to set goals. When they did, 

they were tepid; they were small. Manitoba, NDP in Manitoba 

— it’s not a partisan statement — NDP Manitoba was leaving 

us in the dust. The goals were small, if they had any at all. And 

they were starting to make a few improvements towards the end 

but, Mr. Chairman, I do think it took a change in approach. It 

took a little bolder strategy. It took a government that could 

actually maybe work with the federal government, who 

obviously have shared jurisdiction in immigration, to see a 

turnaround the numbers of which I’ve already touched on, the 

numbers that are manifest I’ve already touched on between 

2001 and 2006 — I think about 8,000 total. And we’ll do better 

than 10,000 this year alone, welcoming brand new citizens to 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, again I would say there’s more work to do, 

but that’s a record we’re proud of on this side of the House. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Chair, I think the Premier will join 

me in thanking Pat Atkinson, the member from Nutana, for 

taking this immigration issue head-on and making sure that we 

had a policy which would develop the way it has right now. 

And I know that the Premier knows that he’s rewriting history 

when he gives the little talk he did just a few minutes ago. 

Because Pat worked very diligently to look and see what 

Manitoba was doing so that we could do a similar kind of thing 

here. And it took a few years to build up. And now what our 

concern is, as announcements are made today, that they’re not 

somehow jeopardizing this plan. 

 

But, Mr. Chair, it’s this continual rewriting of history that is 

frustrating for all of the people of the province. I think . . . Let’s 

acknowledge people who have worked hard to do things. And 

Pat worked very hard on this and I think that the Premier knows 

that. 

 

Now I see the hour of the day, and I’m not sure what the final 

procedure here is, whether I get the last word or the Premier 

gets the last word, but I’m assuming it’s the Premier. That’s 

part of how it works. 

 

What I want to say is that in this particular set of questions and 

answers, we have been able to go and talk about quite a number 

of issues but clearly not all of the ones that I had on my plate. 

And I’m sure the Premier probably had about five times as 

many things that he would have been happy to talk about. But I 

think that the fundamental question for the people of 

Saskatchewan as it relates to budgets, once again, is about 

choices. 

 

And some of the choices that the Premier and the Sask Party 

government have made in this particular budget are being 

challenged by us because we think that wrong choices have 

been made. Three more MLAs, we don’t think that makes 

sense. We don’t think the Saskatchewan people, common sense 

Saskatchewan people, agree with that one. Not counting young 

people in the 21st century when you look at your democratic 

institutions, that one doesn’t make sense. And we think that the 

Premier should take the opportunity we’ve given him to perhaps 

back off on that one for a while and work out some other way to 

deal with that. That’s an area where we don’t have to make the 

changes that the government has proposed. 

 

Issues around pushing more costs on some of our seniors and 

some of these other areas are choices that we, frankly, have had 

a great deal of difficulty as well. We’re watching very carefully 

what happens within the education system, both in the K to 12 

system but also with the post-secondary institution, because 

costs are being pushed out to people and parents in the K to 12 

system and then tuition, apprenticeship fees, those kinds of 

things in the post-secondary education system. And at a time 

when the province is needing all of our people to be as well 

trained as possible so that we can meet all of the economic 

needs of the province, these are some of the wrong choices that 

have been made. 

 

And we appreciate the fact that in this legislature there’s a place 

for us to talk about these things and deal with them in a way 

that allows for the differences of opinion to be registered and 

for it to be done in a relatively peaceful fashion. But we will 

stand with the people who are being pushed to the edges. We’ll 

stand with the people who are being left out of what’s 

happening with the government. We will point out where 



May 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1395 

certain things that are happening don’t meet the needs of the 

public and also maybe are not right in the long-term future of 

the province because that’s an important fact of what has 

happened. 

 

[17:45] 

 

I also would say that we as New Democrats are very proud of 

the work that we did when we were in government, and we will 

continue to look at some of the things that are there. Clearly 

there are areas where change has been made. We appreciate 

when the government continues with things that we had planned 

and proposed, and we also appreciate when there are things that 

they’ve brought forward that will benefit the people of the 

province. 

 

But I think that it’s time for this government to take off the 

training wheels, as my colleague says, and ride on two wheels 

and take responsibility for what’s happening in the economy 

and in the province. And I know that that’s how people are 

looking at this government. Look forward. Don’t keep looking 

back. Because that’s what’s going to make a difference for the 

province. Thank you. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Appreciate your 

patience with all of us today. Appreciate the questions from the 

Leader of the Opposition. I’ll thank my officials in a moment, 

but just in terms of a wrap-up, I note that the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition provided some advice at the end of his closing 

remarks. Interestingly enough, I think the very last bit of advice 

was don’t look back. And it strikes me honestly that between 

himself and the deputy leader, most of these questions they’ve 

asked have been — a lot of them I should say — have been 

looking back, frankly. 

 

And, you know, we’ve had a good debate around some issues to 

move forward, and I think we share a lot of the same priorities. 

The water infrastructure piece is one of them here recently. The 

piece around Aboriginal education, they’re engaged in the 

economy. These are priorities that we all share in this 

Assembly. We may differ in terms of the way to deal with them 

most effectively. 

 

But I will say that I appreciate his advice. We will work hard to 

make sure we’re focused on the future, that we’re not looking 

back. And if I may, I think that advice applies to all members in 

this House. It might even apply to the Leader of the Opposition 

himself whose article in the most recent Commonwealth was 

called, “The NDP must focus on the road ahead” is the 

headline. But he quotes a poem. It’s a great poem by a 

Saskatchewan poet called “The Rear-view Mirror,” Mr. Chair. 

And I would offer this advice to him. If the New Democratic 

Party wants to take the road ahead, they may want to avoid 

looking in the rear-view mirror because back home in Swift 

Current we call that crashing, Mr. Chairman. 

 

It is absolutely essential that nobody in this province on either 

side of this House take anything for granted in terms of the 

current economic standing that we enjoy. It’s also important 

that we recognize outside factors that are responsible for the 

economic standing we enjoy. 

He also counselled myself and members on this side of the 

House just now to take responsibility for the economy. Well, 

Mr. Chairman . . . And the province and its economy. I’ll tell 

you this. We don’t take credit for what’s going on in the 

economy, but you bet we’ll take responsibility as a government 

that has campaigned just a few months ago on a plan to keep the 

economic momentum of this province moving forward not just 

for the sake of a growing economy but because we know what 

that growing economy will pay for in terms of health care and 

education and infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I could assure the member opposite that we have 

taken that advice. That advice has come from him today, but it 

actually came from the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

over our first four years culminating an election campaign 

where they very, very clearly said to, I think, both parties — 

and I hope both were listening — we want you to keep this 

province moving forward in a steady way. You ought not to be 

shocking the economy with royalty changes. You ought to live 

within your means and balance the budget. You ought to 

continue to do everything you can to put this province in a 

leadership position so that First Nations are better engaged in 

the economy, so that people are coming home, kids are coming 

home from Calgary, and so that people can come all the way 

from Ireland and find their hope right here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we hear that advice from him, and even more 

importantly we’ve heard it from the people of this province. We 

will take their advice. We will work earnestly not to let them 

down, Mr. Chairman, to keep the promises we’ve made and to 

keep the province moving forward. Thanks for your time today. 

 

The Chair: — If there are no further questions . . . I recognize 

the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Just before we vote off the estimates, I want 

to thank again the Hon. Leader of the Opposition and the 

deputy leader of the NDP for their questions. I want to thank all 

members for attending, all members of the committee, for 

attending. And I especially want to thank the officials that have 

helped provide advice today. We’re grateful not only for their 

work today, but they represent of course many others, all of the 

professional public service that we benefit from here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And through the deputy to the 

Premier, I just want to say on record we’re grateful for the work 

they do, thank them very much for the work they do every 

single day on behalf of the people of the province. Thank you, 

Mr. Chair. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — I too also want to add my thank yous to Mr. 

Doug Moen and through him to all of the civil service for the 

good jobs that they do every day of the year. Sometimes they 

are working 365 days of the year. I know that, so I want to say a 

special thank you. And as I said when we started, there’s a 

special task of preparing a Premier for estimates even though 

it’s relatively short period of time, so thank you for that. 

 

I also want to thank my team of staff within the caucus office. 

As everybody knows it’s quite small, but I think we’re doing 

very well. But most importantly, I want to thank my caucus 



1396 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2012 

colleagues here who have been working with me as we hold the 

government to account. This forum, this place that we all 

honour has that ability to sometimes take us in directions in the 

activity that, you know, aren’t maybe the best way to do it. 

 

And I’ve talked, I think today we’ve had a relatively calm 

interchange of information. I’ve appreciated that as a person 

who’s been asking some questions. I think maybe the Premier’s 

appreciated it as a person answering some questions. So I want 

to say thank you to the caucus over there as well for all of the 

work that they do. But with that, Mr. Chair, I look forward to 

the completion of this committee. 

 

The Chair: — We will now proceed to vote the estimates. 

Subvote (EX01), central management and services, in the 

amount of $5,678,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX07), Premier’s office, in 

the amount of $581,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX04), cabinet planning, in 

the amount of $1,020,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX05), cabinet secretariat, in 

the amount of $529,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — That’s carried. Subvote (EX03), 

communications office, in the amount of $1,696,000, is that 

agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — That’s carried. House business and research, 

subvote (EX08), in the amount of 427,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — That’s carried. Subvote (EX06), members on 

Executive Council, 129,000, that’s a statutory amount. So that 

does not need to be voted. 

 

Subvote (EX10), intergovernmental affairs, in the amount of 

4,783,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — That’s carried. Subvote (EX11), Francophone 

affairs in the amount of $1,063,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — That’s carried. Subvote (EX12), Lieutenant 

Governor’s office in the amount of $666,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Chair: — That’s carried. 

 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 

months ending March 31, 2013, the following sums for 

Executive Council, $16,443,000. 

 

Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — That’s carried. That motion is carried. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Supplementary Estimates — December 

Executive Council 

Vote 10 

 

The Chair: — The second item of business is the 

Supplementary Estimates — December for Executive Council, 

vote 10, found on page 13 of the Supplementary Estimates — 

December. Executive Council, vote 10, subvote (EX11), 

Francophone affairs in the amount of $173,000. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — That is carried. 

 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 

months ending March 31, 2012, the following sum for 

Executive Council, $173,000. 

 

Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Members, before I ask for the motion to 

rise and report progress, I would like to take this opportunity to 

thank the members that participated in the Committee of 

Finance. I would thank you for respecting the rules of the 

Assembly and for conducting yourselves in a manner that is 

worthy of the place that we work in. 

 

So with that I would note that there is no further business, and I 

would invite a member to move that the committee rise and 

report progress and ask for leave to sit again. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move that the 

committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader that the committee rise and report progress and ask for 

leave to sit again. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — That is carried. 

 

[18:00] 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 



May 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1397 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the committee to 

report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — At the next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. The hour being after the hour of 

adjournment, this House stands adjourned to 10 a.m. Thursday 

morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 18:01.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1359 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1359 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1359 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1359 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1359 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1359 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1360 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1360 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1360 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Pharmacists’ Association of Saskatchewan Awards  

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1360 

 Green Ribbon of Hope Campaign 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1360 

 Saskatchewan Residents Receive Medal of Bravery 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1361 

 Regina Police Service Half Marathon 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1361 

 Humboldt Broncos Win Anavet Cup 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1361 

 Habitat for Humanity Key Ceremony 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1362 

 Osteoporosis Canada Fundraising Event 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1362 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Labour Legislation 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1362 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1362 

 Collective Bargaining at Cancer Agency 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1363 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1363 

 Immigration Program and Foreign Workers 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1365 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1365 

 Proposed Urban Development Project 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1366 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1366 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Review of Employment and Labour Legislation 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1367 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1367 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1367 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1369 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 6 — The Miscellaneous Business Statutes Amendment Act, 2011 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1368 

 Bill No. 7 — The Co-operatives Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1996 sur les coopératives 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1368 

 Bill No. 8 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2011 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1369 

 Bill No. 34 — The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation Act 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1369 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund — Executive Council — Vote 10 

  The Chair................................................................................................................................................................................. 1369 

 



 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1370 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1370 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1383 

 General Revenue Fund — Supplementary Estimates - December — Executive Council — Vote 10 ................................. 1396 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


