




















































Hansard: October 30, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 4A  TUESDAY, OCTOBER 30, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1647 

 October 30, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

to introduce, in the west gallery, a group of 15 grade 11 and 12 

students from the social justice program at Campus Regina 

Public on 14th Avenue here in Regina. 

 

Their chaperones, teachers, are Karen McIver, Ryan Wood. 

They teach this class. This is sort of a pioneer group. It’s the 

first group that is going through this project, this pilot project 

that was once Cochrane High School. I mentioned it in my 

speech last night. And welcome them to their Legislative 

Assembly, please, everyone. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

with the member opposite and welcome the bright students 

from Campus Regina Public that are here today. And also a 

couple of exceptional teachers that are here with them today, 

Ms. Karen McIver, formerly of Trek School and Churchill 

River paddler extraordinaire; and also Mr. Ryan Wood, also 

known as Woody, formerly from Regina Public Schools’ adult 

campus. 

 

It’s a pleasure to have these bright students with us today, and 

these exceptional educators. Let’s provide a warm welcome to 

all. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 

two individuals seated in your gallery, Syed Rizvi and Afzaal 

Siddiqui, two individuals from Regina and active in the 

community. And they also have been active, Mr. Speaker, in 

the Coalition for a Fair SINP [Saskatchewan immigrant 

nominee program]. I’d ask all members to join me in 

welcoming them to the legislature today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you and to all members of the Chamber, I’d like to introduce 

some folks in the west gallery from the film industry here. 

They’re here today again to illustrate to the government that 

they are still here. There are people who have remained, who 

want to stay here and are very optimistic that the government 

will put a program in place that works for the film and 

television industry here in Saskatchewan. So with that, Mr. 

Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join with me in welcoming 

the folks from the film industry here today. 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today I 

rise to present a petition calling for greater protection for 

late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know 

that British Columbia and other provinces have brought several 

safety precautions through law, including a requirement that 

workers cannot be alone during late-night, early-morning hours. 

And if they are required to work alone, there must be protective 

barriers such as locked doors and protective glass. I’d like to 

read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Jimmy’s law, to 

ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

I do so present. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to education in our province. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to make education a top priority by 

establishing a long-term vision and plan, with resources, 

that is responsive to the opportunities and challenges in 

providing the best quality education and that reflects 

Saskatchewan’s demographic and population changes, that 

is based on proven educational best practices, that is 

developed through consultation with the education sector, 

and that recognizes the importance of educational 

excellence to the social and economic well-being of our 

province and students for today and for our future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Moose Jaw and Regina Beach. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition on behalf of the leadership and community of 

Wollaston Lake, that the Government of Saskatchewan stop 

turning their backs on the people from northern Saskatchewan 

and start investing in public highways in the North. And the 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the construction on the 

road to Wollaston Lake which was started under the 



1648 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2012 

previous NDP government has shown little to no progress 

and must be completed quickly. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many good people of Wollaston Lake. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

rise to present a petition on the possible telephone coverage. 

And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

To undertake as soon as possible to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nation, along 

with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans 

Bay; the Buffalo River First Nation, also known as Dillon, 

and the neighbouring communities of Michel Village and 

St. George’s Hill; English River First Nation, also known 

as Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch 

Narrows First Nation along with the community of Turnor 

Lake, including the neighbouring communities in each of 

those areas. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that signed this petition that I’m 

presenting today are primarily from Patuanak, but the petition is 

supported all throughout the land. And I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Campion College Alumni of Distinction Awards 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On Friday, 

October 26th, I had the pleasure of bringing greetings to the 

2012 Campion College Alumni of Distinction Awards dinner. 

Three outstanding Campion College alumni were honoured 

with the 2012 Alumni of Distinction Awards. 

 

Dr. Blair Stonechild, an internationally recognized researcher in 

the field of indigenous studies and indigenous post-secondary 

education. Dr. Stonechild’s work on land claims and higher 

education for First Nations has created many opportunities and 

led to greater awareness of these very important issues. 

 

Mr. Kenneth McKay, a lawyer who served the Ministry of 

Justice for over 30 years. Throughout his career, Mr. McKay 

was appointed to various provincial and federal committees and 

investigative commissions and served as the director of public 

prosecution for a number of years. 

 

And Dr. June Zimmer, a nationally recognized researcher and 

coach. Dr. Zimmer was recently named one to watch on the 

most influential women in sports and physical activities. In her 

personal and professional life, Dr. Zimmer has worked 

tirelessly to ensure that young girls in Saskatchewan have equal 

access to healthy, active opportunities. Her program of Girls in 

the Game is a great success. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 

congratulating the recipients of the Campion Collegiate 2012 

Alumni of Distinction Awards. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Grand Opening of Station 20 West 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

October 17th I joined my colleagues from Riversdale and 

Nutana, along with hundreds of others, to celebrate the much 

anticipated grand opening of Station 20 West Community 

Enterprise Centre. Station 20 West, initially a $16 million 

project when planning started six years ago, had to be scaled 

back after the Sask Party government pulled $8 million in 

funding in 2008. Since then the community has rallied to raise 

over $6 million necessary to complete the project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there has not been a grocery store in this area of 

Saskatoon for more than a decade. In addition, only 44 per cent 

of the children under the age of two were immunized in the 

city’s core neighbourhoods in 2006 compared to 91 per cent in 

the five most affluent neighbourhoods. Now thanks to the 

support of the community, Station 20 West houses a grocery 

store, cafe, gathering space, and a mothers’ centre. Quint, 

CHEP [child hunger and education program] Good Food, 

KidsFirst, and the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] 

outreach centre offer help, housing, and food services. 

 

Sheila Pocha, the Chair of Station 20 West, spoke about the 

potential within the walls of this very important building 

saying, and I quote: 

 

We have an opportunity for growth and people to feel 

happy. They have something actually built that’s new in 

their community and not used, not a pawn store. That’s 

really wonderful to be part of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members in this legislature to join with 

me today in celebrating the official grand opening of the Station 

20 West Community Enterprise Centre. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Prime Minister’s Award for Teaching Excellence 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I would like 

to take this opportunity to recognize a very special teacher in 

our province. Ms. Christine Danyluk of Canora, Saskatchewan 

was recently presented with the Prime Minister’s Award for 

Teaching Excellence in Early Childhood Education. She is one 

of only 10 Canadian educators to be presented with this award. 

 

The Prime Minister’s award, Mr. Speaker, honours educators of 

the highest calibre who are fundamental in supporting the 

growth of our young children. Chris was nominated for the 

award by her colleagues in the Good Spirit School Division. 

It’s obvious, Mr. Speaker, that Chris’s fellow educators 

recognize the outstanding contribution she makes to early 

childhood development. 

 

Chris recently flew to Ottawa for three days of celebratory 

activities for the presentation of her award by Prime Minister 



October 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1649 

Stephen Harper. Mr. Harper acknowledged her innovation in 

the classroom and dedication to keeping students engaged in 

learning. She was also recognized for her continuous 

involvement with parents, families, and the greater Canora 

community. 

 

I applaud Chris for the work she does in the Canora Junior 

Elementary School and for her dedication to Saskatchewan 

students. With such talented and committed educators working 

with our young people, the future of our province looks brighter 

than ever. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Christine Danyluk and in thanking all of the outstanding 

educators in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

India Canada Night 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it was a pleasure to attend 

and support the annual India Night that was held on September 

29th at the Conexus Arts Centre. As always, this event drew a 

large crowd and had a ton of support. This special night 

showcased traditional dancing, music, ethnic cuisine, and a 

fashion show and dance that my wife Stephanie and I 

participated in, dressed in traditional Indian attire. While 

Stephanie’s Bollywood moves were impressive, my own were, 

well not so much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The India Canada Association is a multicultural leader that 

enriches and strengthens our province, reflecting our motto, 

“from many peoples strength.” At this year’s event, the ICA 

[India Canada Association] was proud to have the Deputy High 

Commissioner of India speak. She was both engaging and 

insightful as she spoke about building relationships between 

India and our province. 

 

Over the years this exceptional event has been able to raise 

more than $400,000 for community groups. This year’s dinner 

alone raised over $20,000 for the Kids Help Phone. India night 

is a unique and special event that allows its participants to 

explore and appreciate culture and our community. 

 

I ask all members of this Assembly to join with me to thank the 

India Canada Association of Saskatchewan, its leaders and 

members, and to specifically thank India Night Chair Ms. Renu 

Kapoor, the dedicated organizing committee, and the countless 

volunteers. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Royal Canadian Air Force Snowbirds 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to pay 

tribute to the Royal Canadian Air Force Snowbirds’ 

demonstration team. The Snowbirds are comprised of Canadian 

Forces members, both regular and reserve force, who come 

from various military backgrounds and experience. 

 

On Friday, October 19th, the Snowbirds wrapped up their 2012 

season with a final demonstration in front of family, friends, 

and invited guests at their home base, 15 Wing in Moose Jaw. 

 

The Snowbirds theme for 2012, We Stand On Guard For Thee, 

embodied the imperative that Canadian Forces remained about 

and ready for the defence of Canada, our allies, and North 

America at large. This season focused on the Canadian North 

and brought the Snowbirds as far as the Arctic Ocean for a 

performance touching every ocean in North America 

throughout their 2012 tour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, each year the final performance of the Snowbirds 

is often bittersweet, as it is often the last show for a handful of 

pilots, technicians, and officers. Typically Snowbird pilots 

rotate out of the squadron after putting in two years of service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in 

congratulating the Snowbirds on another successful season and 

to thank the outgoing members of the Snowbirds on their 

dedication and service to our country. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Women’s History Month and International 

Day of the Girl 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 

today to celebrate Women’s History Month and the first 

International Day of the Girl held on October 11th. 

 

Women’s History Month is celebrated each year, and it 

provides an opportunity to recognize and appreciate how 

women have shaped our history and to acknowledge the 

important contributions women make in all facets of life. 

 

The United Nations declared October 11th as the first 

International Day of the Girl to recognize the contributions of 

girls and young women as powerful voices of change. For the 

month of October, Saskatchewan’s theme is Women and Girls 

Shaping Saskatchewan’s Future, which recognizes the passion 

and energy that young women and girls bring to leadership 

roles in the classroom, the boardroom, and their communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, women have been making valuable contributions 

to Saskatchewan for many years, and women will continue to 

contribute to Saskatchewan’s growth and prosperity for many 

years to come. Mr. Speaker, I encourage all members of the 

Legislative Assembly to take time to reflect and appreciate how 

women have shaped our province’s history. And I ask all 

members to join me in celebrating Women’s History Month and 

the first International Day of the Girl. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Leadership Candidates’ Position 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan’s NDP 

[New Democratic Party] leadership candidates have at least one 

thing in common: they refuse to stand up for Saskatchewan. 



1650 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2012 

When asked by the media yesterday about whether they support 

their federal leader’s Dutch disease attack on Western Canada’s 

resource sector, one of the candidates said he supports Thomas 

Mulcair’s position. 

 

NDP leadership candidate Erin Weir told reporters he was in 

complete agreement with his federal leader’s position that our 

resource sector is bad for Canada. At least we know where he 

stands, unlike two of his leadership rivals sitting in the 

Saskatchewan legislature. When reporters asked the members 

for Regina Rosemont and Saskatoon Massey Place whether 

they support Thomas Mulcair’s Dutch disease diagnosis, they 

dodged reporters’ questions with evasive language, refusing to 

answer with a simple yes or no if they agree with the federal 

leader. 

 

I’m sure both members are familiar with Mark Carney, the 

governor of the Bank of Canada, who called the Dutch disease 

argument a “scapegoat,” “overly simplistic,” and dead “wrong,” 

and went on to say, “The strength of Canada’s resource sector 

is a reflection of success, not a harbinger of failure.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we still don’t know where those two members 

stand on Mulcair’s attacks against Saskatchewan’s economy, 

but I’m sure these members now have something to say, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for the Film Industry 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today the public 

was finally given the report on the cost and the benefit of the 

film industry in Saskatchewan that I raised in the Assembly 

yesterday. Let me read a quote: “What the report shows is that 

there is an economic benefit to the province of Saskatchewan 

from the film industry.” Those aren’t my words, Mr. Speaker. 

Those are the words of the minister yesterday in the rotunda. 

Will the minister admit his government made a huge mistake 

and reinstate the effective Saskatchewan film employment 

Saskatchewan tax credit? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday we heard from the hon. member opposite everything 

from a conspiracy theory about the government sitting on a 

hidden report that I acknowledged was in existence, and I’d 

received a report and asked them to release it, Mr. Speaker. We 

also heard from the member opposite about numbers throwing 

around as to what the net cost would be to the taxpayer of the 

province, Mr. Speaker, completely inaccurate on that. I think 

the hon. member should take the opportunity to stand up and 

clarify her comments and clarify her remarks and give accurate 

information, Mr. Speaker, give accurate information with 

respect to the numbers that she was throwing around in the 

Assembly yesterday, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, what I said yesterday and I stand by 

today, and this government has always said, any industry in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, provides an economic benefit towards 

the economy and our province. There’s no question about that, 

Mr. Speaker. Any industry that receives preferential treatment 

with respect to a refundable tax credit would also provide 

economic benefit to this province, Mr. Speaker. There’s no 

debate about that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 

Chamber of Commerce doesn’t mince words on the 

wrong-headed decision of the Sask Party government to cut the 

film tax credit. Steve McLellan, CEO [chief executive officer] 

of the chamber, said today in a release, “This decision affected 

real people and real businesses, whose commitment to growing 

the film sector was shattered as a lifeline to this industry was 

cut.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister should stop defending his 

predecessors and his Premier’s bad decision. Will the minister 

admit his government’s decision was short-sighted, petty, and 

ideologically driven instead of one based on common sense and 

facts? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

What I would say to the hon. member is that we are embarked 

upon a consultation process with all of our creative industries in 

this province. A refundable employment tax credit that helps 

offset labour costs, Mr. Speaker, is not a sustainable program. 

The province of Alberta has moved away from a tax-based 

incentive program. The province of New Brunswick has moved 

away from a tax-based incentive program. 

 

The film industry has said to government in the past that we 

needed to increase our incentives and engage in a bidding war 

with other provinces, Mr. Speaker, in order to keep the industry 

sustainable. There is no other creative industry in the province, 

Mr. Speaker, that enjoys the preferential treatment that the film 

community, the film industry enjoyed under a refundable tax 

credit, Mr. Speaker. It is bad public policy. The refundable 

employment tax credit is gone. We’re working on a new model 

with all of our creative industries, Mr. Speaker, moving 

forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member of Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — What’s bad public policy is cutting a program 

before you do any consultations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the study clearly lays out the economic argument 

in favour of the film tax credit. The study confirms that over its 

lifetime, for every dollar invested in the tax credit, it generated 

about six times the economic activity for the province. Six 

times, Mr. Speaker. Steve McLellan said today, “If you could 

get that kind of return on every dollar you spent, you probably 

would.” 

 



October 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1651 

Everyone else agrees the former film tax credit worked for 

Saskatchewan businesses. Will the minister agree that the film 

tax credit was in fact good for Saskatchewan’s economy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

what we know about the . . . well we’re not quite clear on all of 

the NDP positions. We know that the Finance critic has had 

three different positions on resource revenue sharing with First 

Nations, Mr. Speaker. What we do know is that the Leader of 

the Opposition, when given the opportunity to clarify his 

remarks about where he would find money to restore the 

refundable film employment tax credit, said he would cut 

agriculture funding and municipal revenue sharing, Mr. 

Speaker. Those were his words. 

 

The purported front-runner, the purported front-runner in the 

leadership campaign, Mr. Speaker, for the NDP, Mr. Erin Weir, 

the individual they turn to every single time to cost out . . . well 

where they did cost out their platform items, Mr. Speaker, the 

economist they turn to every single time has said he would 

restore the refundable employment tax credit, Mr. Speaker. At 

the same time, he would increase taxes on all small businesses 

in the province of Saskatchewan, a $200 million tax grab 

including the film production companies, Mr. Speaker, who are 

small businesses in this province. Mr. Speaker, it’s bad public 

policy. We’re moving forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every day that the 

Sask Party government puts off fixing the mess it made by 

killing the film employment tax credit, skilled people are 

packing their bags. They’re taking their kids out of schools. 

They’re saying goodbye and taking their tax dollars and their 

talents elsewhere. It’s heartbreaking, absolutely heartbreaking, 

to hear the stories of lifelong and long-time Saskatchewan 

residents leaving their province and feeling like the Sask Party 

government does not value their contributions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, undoing the damage will take a long time but we 

want to keep creative, skilled people here, boost our economy, 

and heal Saskatchewan’s now tarnished reputation on the world 

stage. 

 

Will the minister commit today to immediately put in place a 

film program that aims to undo the damage the Sask Party 

government has caused to this industry and to our province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, we are engaged in a 

consultation process with all of the creative industries in this 

province. We’ve had great turnout at our meetings in Saskatoon 

and Regina. We’ve had 45 submissions submitted to 

government with ideas, Mr. Speaker, on how all of our creative 

industries can benefit from a support mechanism by 

government. 

 

But as the hon. member raises, what are you going to do for the 

film industry, Mr. Speaker? We have been meeting with 

SMPIA [Saskatchewan Media Production Industry 

Association]. SMPIA has been engaged in our consultation 

process, and SMPIA, Mr. Speaker, says it needs to meet sector 

requirements while not participating in what is seen as a 

bidding war. That’s SMPIA’s words, Mr. Speaker. It also says 

it cannot be a tax-related initiative, i.e., not refundable, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We are sitting down with all of our creative ministries to 

develop good public policy, Mr. Speaker, and we will do that 

moving forward. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Immigration Issues 

 

Mr. Broten: — It’s been six months since the Sask Party 

government pulled the rug out from under thousands of 

Saskatchewan families, families that moved here because of the 

Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program. They moved here, 

they followed the rules, and they expected the Sask Party 

government to fulfill its commitments. That all changed when 

the Sask Party government decided to gut the family class of 

the SINP. However when the new minister was sworn in at the 

beginning of June, Mr. Speaker, he publicly stated that there 

would be a review of the change and that they would work to 

have a compromised position, middle ground, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the minister: why has he failed to deliver a 

compromise for Saskatchewan families? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, people from around the world 

have moved to Saskatchewan to make their home here in our 

province. We welcome people from around the world to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The fact of the matter is immigration, though, is a federal 

matter, as the member opposite knows. Upon taking this role 

and responsibility, Mr. Speaker, I indicated to the people of 

Saskatchewan that we would indeed try to work with the 

federal government and work out a compromise on the 

situation. We made representation to the federal government, 

the body that has jurisdiction in this area, as the member 

opposite knows very well. And we made representation to 

them. The federal minister, Minister Kenney, said that he 

wasn’t in favour of any changes with respect to this family 

class, and that they wouldn’t be allowing any changes to be 

made. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister can try 

to hide behind the federal minister, Mr. Speaker, but he has 

clearly failed to deliver on his promise to find a middle ground 

for Saskatchewan families. Mr. Speaker, if he was not sincere 

in his efforts to actually find a compromise position for 

Saskatchewan families, he shouldn’t have put out the false hope 



1652 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2012 

to Saskatchewan families who are already feeling betrayed by 

the Sask Party’s decision to gut the family class of the SINP. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I question how hard the minister actually 

worked to find a compromise, Mr. Speaker, for the families 

affected by this program. I suspect, Mr. Speaker, he was simply 

saying the right words hoping that the issue would blow over 

while he slow-walked the so-called review over the following 

months. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what does he have to 

say to the families, the families who feel betrayed by this Sask 

Party’s original decision, the families who are confused by the 

vague call for a review that the minister made, the families, Mr. 

Speaker, that are now feeling angered at this minister’s failure 

to deliver a compromise for Saskatchewan families? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, we sat down and had a very 

good discussion with the members representing the coalition. 

We told them that we would take the position to the federal 

minister with respect to the family class in terms of addressing 

the concerns that they had put before us. We did exactly that. 

And unfortunately, to use the member’s own, to use the 

member’s own words, yes we failed. Yes, unfortunately we 

didn’t get what we wanted with respect to this. 

 

We went to them and put forward a position that was 

represented by the coalition, and indeed the federal minister 

said that they weren’t willing to make any changes with respect 

to that. We are continuing to work with the members of the 

community in terms of their concerns in this area. We’re 

looking at how we can accommodate them through the 

increasing cap that we have asked for from the federal 

government as well. And we’ll continue to work with them as 

closely as we can. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 

families affected by these changes are so concerned by the 

changes that they’ve formed a coalition called the Coalition for 

a Fair SINP. Mr. Speaker, these individuals have actually 

contacted the Ombudsman, an independent officer of the 

Legislature, to ask for his opinion, a report as to how they have 

been treated, whether or not it has been fair. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think these individuals have been treated 

fairly, and I think they deserve so much better. And I too look 

forward to the report from the Ombudsman on this issue. 

 

My question to the minister, my question to the minister: is 

there any reason that the Saskatchewan family should believe 

the promise that he made earlier to find a compromise? Is there 

any hope left for them, or does he consider this a case closed? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — What we have said consistently, and the 

member opposite I am sure knows this, that we would work as 

closely as we could with members of the immigrant 

community. We have said that all applications that have come 

in before May 1st would indeed be assessed under the previous 

category. So anybody that falls into that circumstance, that had 

made application, will be reviewed and eventually we will see 

resolution to their situation. And I think the member opposite 

knows very well that that is the case. We’ll be again working 

with the federal government to see whether we can increase the 

cap in immigrants moving to Saskatchewan. We will be at the 

upcoming meetings of the ministers with respect to 

immigration. We’ll be very much making that case on behalf of 

the people here in Saskatchewan. 

 

In addition to that, we’ve had a meeting with the Ombudsman 

with respect to this, explained the situation. I think the 

Ombudsman was receptive, obviously, to the explanation that 

was provided at that time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Low-Income People and Food Banks 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Food Banks Canada 

has released HungerCount 2012. The report shows that the Sask 

Party government has simply not made it a priority to address 

the hunger that still exists in our communities. Under the Sask 

Party government in a supposed time of plenty, more and more 

people are using our food banks. Since the Sask Party 

government took office, almost 7,000 more people a month go 

to our province’s food banks. Mr. Speaker, that’s a 38 per cent 

increase under this government’s watch — 38 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

To the minister: with all the resources we have in 

Saskatchewan, why is the food bank usage increasing under this 

government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 

to the member opposite for the question. We were looking at 

the numbers this morning when they came out, and we are 

working with the food bank to determine why the numbers 

reported for 2011 last year were different than the numbers of 

2011 they talked about this year. 

 

That being said, Mr. Speaker, there is still a 3.2 per cent 

decrease in the number from last year. And overall in Canada, 

there’s a 2.4 per cent increase in food bank usage. So overall, 

Mr. Speaker, we know that there is work to be done, but we are 

very proud of the record that we have the lowest percentage of 

people living on low income in Western Canada, that 

Saskatchewan has the lowest percentage of seniors in low 

income, and unemployment in Saskatchewan is the lowest in 

Canada. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sadly, a glaring 

failure of the Sask Party government is addressing the needs of 



October 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1653 

vulnerable and hungry children. Almost half of food bank users 

in our province are children. This is tied for highest in the 

country, Mr. Speaker. Children do not have a choice to live in a 

home with or without food. Parents need the opportunity to 

raise their families out of poverty. That is common sense. 

Clearly the province needs to do more to address the food 

insecurity of our most vulnerable citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why are there 12,000 children a 

month going to food banks in our province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — The issue of poverty and the number of 

people that are relying on government for help is something 

that we look at all the time. That’s why I’m pleased that right 

now we have 33,000 more people working in Saskatchewan 

than we did under the NDP government, and there are 16,000 

fewer children living in low-income families now than when 

under the NDP government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that the work that we’re doing along 

with the partners at the food bank has shown some difference 

because we’ve got programs and other companies that are 

working with us, like the Adult Centre for Employment 

Readiness and Training, First Years Child Care Inc., Regina 

Education and Action on Child Hunger. People go to the food 

bank for more than just food. They go for some of the 

opportunities to take so that they can be part of our economy. 

Mr. Speaker, we know that the number of low-income people 

has declined in our province and there’s more work to be done. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The problem is 

serious. In the words of Food Banks Canada, “Hunger is toxic 

for those living through it.” 

 

It isn’t only vulnerable children using our food banks. People 

who are working, Mr. Speaker, retired people and students 

make up more than one in five users of our province’s food 

bank, Mr. Speaker. People who are working, those off work 

because of an injury or parental leave are another one in ten. In 

other words, Mr. Speaker, working and middle-class people are 

struggling to stretch their paycheques far enough to even pay 

for basic groceries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: when will people with disabilities, 

working people, retirees, and students stop having to line up at 

food banks in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, when our government put 

forward our growth program policy last week, we talked about 

some of the initiatives that we had to ensure that people could 

be part of a growing economy. That’s why we’re proud of the 

fact that we have 4,000 new daycare spaces in the province, that 

we’ve increased minimum wage by 26 per cent, that we’ve 

made sure the people, a low-income family, a family saves 

more than $2,600 a year compared to when they were under the 

NDP government. 

Mr. Speaker, low-income people are looking at us when it 

comes to more money for advanced education and job 

opportunities right across the province. Mr. Speaker, I’m proud 

of the work that we’re doing to ensure that families are part of a 

growing economy. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

SaskTel and Congress on Information Technology 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s not 

news that the Saskatchewan Party government takes rural and 

northern people for granted. Under the Saskatchewan Party, 

rural and northern people are the last to receive any upgrades to 

their cell coverage and the last to get any rollouts of high-speed 

Internet. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 8,000 customers were going to 

have their high-speed wireless broadband Internet cut off until 

we pressed the Sask Party to do something about it, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ll tackle some of those concerns another day, Mr. 

Speaker, ad nauseam. 

 

However last week, Mr. Speaker, Montreal hosted the World 

Congress on Information Technology and SaskTel International 

was a platinum sponsor. My question to the minister of 

SaskTel: what did the Saskatchewan people get from this 

conference for the $135,000 sponsorship from SaskTel 

International and our other Crowns? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we know that the world of technology and especially 

cellphone technology and data usage is increasing exponentially 

in our province, Mr. Speaker, as it is around the world. Having 

said that, SaskTel is working with all its partners from around 

the world to look at how we can better serve not only people in 

our urban centres, but people throughout rural Saskatchewan. 

 

We know that, Mr. Speaker, that there is Xplornet available. 

There is DSL [digital subscriber line] service, Mr. Speaker, that 

SaskTel has spread across this province through many of the 

urban communities. But there is still more work to do, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s why SaskTel recently spent some time in China 

looking at what technology is there and what can be expanded 

and better serve rural Saskatchewan. And that’s how you learn 

from other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think if we were to ever to go back to the NDP where they 

wanted to put walls up around this province, not look what 

other jurisdictions were doing, Mr. Speaker, we’d be way, way 

behind, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, SaskTel is a leading 

company looking for technology to bring back to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the 

problems that this government has a lot of difficulties with is 

how we keep information private or not. We know that SaskTel 

has been dealing with Huawei, which is a Chinese 

telecommunications company that has very serious security 

concerns expressed by three countries — those countries being 



1654 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2012 

Australia, the US [United States] and of course our own federal 

government — about this company hacking into private 

information through their technology. And we know that the 

Premier has stood by his photo op in China with Huawei, a 

company that he has already married.  

 

So, Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister: did the $135,000 

buy us any tips on how to protect the private information of the 

Saskatchewan people and companies? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the security of our information is paramount. SaskTel 

has answered that question. The Premier has answered that 

question. There were some concerns, Mr. Speaker, that were 

raised by officials in the United States regarding Huawei. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s been proven that really, especially for the 

equipment that we’re using, Mr. Speaker, there is no concern 

there. But having said that, SaskTel continues to take that very, 

very serious. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to learn from other jurisdictions. Other 

jurisdictions are leading on telecommunications. At times we 

need to learn from that, take some of that expertise, bring it 

back to Saskatchewan as well as, Mr. Speaker, sell some of our 

expertise as well, Mr. Speaker, at this international conference. 

 

We have more work to do for sure in rural Saskatchewan, but I 

can tell you we’re a far cry from where the NDP are, Mr. 

Speaker. The investment by SaskTel into rural Saskatchewan 

far outweighs any numbers that the NDP could ever put up. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll try 

this again. Mr. Speaker: over $135,000 of taxpayers’ money 

went to this conference. People want to know what was in it for 

us? What was in it for SaskTel? Surely, Mr. Speaker, our 

delegation received something more than just their conference 

books. Once again, hopefully SaskTel at least picked up some 

business opportunities because it does business in other 

countries. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the same minister said that the ISC 

[Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan], another 

Crown corporation, must be sold rather than be allowed to 

compete in the international marketplace. I wonder if that’s the 

same position he’s forcing upon SaskTel. Again to the minister: 

did the people of Saskatchewan at least get a T-shirt or a goodie 

bag for the more than $135,000 spent on this conference? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, what I would say is that 

SaskTel is a world leader in telecommunications and, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s going to conferences like this to learn from world 

leaders, Mr. Speaker. It’s not about the T-shirt, Mr. Speaker. 

That may impress the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, but 

SaskTel brings back information and technology that will help 

lead Saskatchewan into the future. 

Mr. Speaker, I will tell you a little bit of what SaskTel has done 

for investing, not in conferences but right here in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, in five years of our government, 

it’s over $1.4 billion. That’s a 79 per cent increase over the five 

years under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. They cannot talk about 

investment into rural Saskatchewan, especially through 

SaskTel. Mr. Speaker, this government is standing behind rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I think 

the minister should have gone to the conference. Otherwise he 

would have missed out on the platinum opportunity to talk to 

three countries about doing business with Huawei. He would 

have missed out on the opportunities to market ISC 

internationally, as well as SaskTel. But he’s confused on those 

two issues and those two companies. He could have found new 

ways to protect and expand wireless broadband service to rural 

customers and northern customers, Mr. Speaker. But on all 

three fronts, he failed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If the minister did not attend the conference, at least from his 

officials, did he receive a postcard so that the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan would get something out of this platinum 

sponsorship of $135,000, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to 

follow a question like that. Mr. Speaker, what I can tell you is 

that SaskTel is a world leader. I guess if it was up to the 

opposition they would never have SaskTel interface with any of 

the companies, Mr. Speaker, from around the world that are 

certainly leading edge as SaskTel is. 

 

We have software that other countries are looking at. How you 

market that is by going to these conferences. If we ever go back 

to the old days of the NDP, Mr. Speaker, I guess they’d cut all 

that off, because certainly I’m sure we can look back under the 

NDP where SaskTel was looking at learning from other 

countries. Mr. Speaker, most of those questions are, Mr. 

Speaker, hardly warrant a response. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

11-and-Under Initiative 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to rise in the House today to talk about an important 

initiative that I had the pleasure to help announce this morning 

with my colleagues from the Regina Police Service and the 

Regina Public School Board. 

 

The 11-and-under initiative aims to reduce the number of 

children who are 11 years old and younger from entering the 

criminal justice system or being referred to Social Services, and 

to help these children be successful in school. 

 

This initiative provides a way to link children and families to a 



October 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1655 

variety of programs and services that will support their 

development, that will improve their future, provide a positive 

learning experience, and increase their involvement in the 

community. 

 

As Minister of Social Services, I know the dangers of unhealthy 

behaviour all too well. I also know there are things that we can 

do to help prevent these behaviours from getting out of control, 

and this initiative is just one of them. Mr. Speaker, preventative 

efforts like this are vital. The under-11 initiative provides me 

with hope that we are making positive strides in this direction, 

and my ministry is proud to support this initiative by providing 

$94,000 in annual funding. 

 

[14:15] 

 

We all have to work together to make sure that our children are 

safe and healthy. That’s why the under-11 initiative is so very 

important. It provides a way to link children and families 

through a variety of programs and services that will support 

their development, improve their future, and provide positive 

learning experience. All these wonderful outcomes will be the 

result of collaborations between the police, the school boards, 

the community-based organizations, and human service 

agencies. Together we can identify the challenges that are 

facing each child and their family in order to respond to their 

specific needs. 

 

In closing I want to thank all the partners involved in this 

extremely worthwhile initiative. Together we can make a real 

difference in the lives of our most valuable and yet our most 

vulnerable citizens. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

to provide the opposition’s remarks. Thank you to the minister 

for sending over her ministerial statement a little bit earlier. I 

want to commend the government on the 11-and-under 

initiative. At any time that we invest in children, I would say 

that’s a very good thing. The best way to ensure that people 

grow into healthy adults is to ensure that they have the best 

possible start in life and intervening early, I would agree, is the 

way to do things. But I also would . . . The minister here today 

said, “Together we can better identify the challenges facing 

children and their families in order to respond to their needs.” 

 

I would argue that we probably already know some of those 

challenges facing families. We heard about one of them today 

— hunger. We have 12,000 children in Saskatchewan using the 

food banks. I’d argue that housing is one of the challenges 

facing families that can help prevent children going into the 

justice system. And there are so many people here in 

Saskatchewan who are still struggling to have affordable and 

secure housing, Mr. Speaker. Employment and parents being 

employed is one of the issues around helping ensure that 

children have opportunities in life. And we right now, Mr. 

Speaker, in Saskatchewan, have an Aboriginal employment rate 

or First Nations off-reserve employment is over 20 per cent and 

Métis unemployment . . . Sorry. First Nations off-reserve 

unemployment is over 20 per cent and Métis unemployment is 

over 10 per cent. 

So I think that we need to think about the under-11 initiative. 

As I said, I would commend the expenditures to help keep kids 

out of the criminal justice system, but I think we have to take it 

a step back and go even further and think about housing, food, 

employment — all those kinds of things. And I think that that’s 

where the government needs to concentrate its efforts. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 45 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that Bill No. 45, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Saskatchewan Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012 be 

now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Highways and Infrastructure that Bill No. 45, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan Telecommunications) 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now introduced and read for the first 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

Bill No. 46 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill No. 46, The Municipal Employees’ Pension 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 46, The Municipal Employees’ Pension 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now introduced and read for the first 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 



1656 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2012 

Bill No. 47 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that Bill No. 47, The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for the 

Environment that Bill No. 47, The Saskatchewan Watershed 

Authority Amendment Act, 2012 be now introduced and read a 

first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 48 — The Management and Reduction of 

Greenhouse Gases Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

Bill No. 48, The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse 

Gases Amendment Act, 2012 be now introduced and read the 

first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for the 

Environment that Bill No. 48, The Management and Reduction 

of Greenhouse Gases Amendment Act, 2012 be now introduced 

and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 49 — The Forestry Professions 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 49, 

The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for the 

Environment that Bill No. 49, The Forestry Professions 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now introduced and read a first time. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, next sitting of the 

House. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Cox, seconded by Mr. 

Docherty, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Nilson.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I rise in the House today to speak in support of the Speech from 

the Throne. But before I enter into a discussion on the Speech 

from the Throne, there are some very special people I would 

like to acknowledge. 

 

The first one is my constituency assistant, Kelly Zazula. Kelly 

does an absolutely incredible job of ensuring that constituents’ 

needs and wants are being met in a very timely but also in a 

very respectful fashion. And so I do appreciate all the hard 

work that she does on my behalf and on behalf of the residents 

of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

I would also like to thank my husband, Terry Ross, who’s been 

very supportive of my seeking public office and in my role as 

the MLA for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He’s a gem. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Yes, he is a gem. He’s just a good sounding 

board. You know, sometimes when we get caught up in the 

excitement of political life, he’s got his feet firmly planted on 

the ground and has always such wonderful sage and very 

respectful advice to be able to share with me. 

 

Another person I would like to acknowledge is my mother, 

Bertha Masurat. My mom is in her 90s and is of failing health, 

so I’m not sure how many more throne speeches she’s going to 

have the opportunity to listen to. But you know, she’s very 

encouraged and very optimistic of the plan that was set forward 



October 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1657 

by this Throne Speech entitled “Planning for Growth.” And it 

was strong women such as my mother who really worked hard 

to build this province to ensure that women such as myself feel 

confident and are not afraid to take on anything. So it’s strong 

farm women such as my mom who I think a lot of us can really 

acknowledge. She was very involved in the 4-H community, 

gave of her time to the church, so she’s just been a pillar in the 

Springside-Yorkton community. So I really, I think it’s 

important that I acknowledge the hard work that she has 

undertaken over these years. 

 

Now this year is a very special year for people in 

Saskatchewan, well for across Canada, because this is the 

Diamond Jubilee Year of Her Royal Highness, Queen Elizabeth 

II. This year also, the marking of the Diamond Jubilee has also 

special significance for our family. My father-in-law, William 

Samuel Ross, marched as an Armed Forces gentleman in the 

coronation parade. So it’s been kind of interesting when we sit 

around the family dinner table and the information came 

forward that in fact he marched in this parade, and so our 

family takes great pride in that. 

 

But also this Diamond Jubilee, medals that were handed out to 

numerous residents from across Saskatchewan acknowledging 

the wonderful hard work and volunteerism that people in 

Saskatchewan are really known for. And I had the opportunity 

of putting forward a youth, name of Karen Dhaliwal. 

 

Now Karen Dhaliwal is a young woman who has contributed to 

her cultural community extensively. Karen was not able to 

come and attend the awards ceremony. So in fact we were very 

lucky and I felt very honoured to attend temple at the Sikh 

Temple on a Sunday afternoon and, along with the Sikh 

community of Regina, we had a ceremony where Karen was 

presented her Diamond Jubilee Medal. And it was so moving to 

see not only her family, the Dhaliwal family which has just 

embraced me into their own family, but also the whole Sikh 

community was so gracious and so appreciative of coming out 

and performing the pinning on of the Diamond Jubilee Medal. 

Because events like that, they just don’t happen very often. So 

to be able to participate in something like that I think was 

probably, well it was life changing for many of them. 

 

To discuss the Throne Speech, there are so many issues that 

were brought forward in this “Planning for Growth.” And I 

know the opportunity that I’ve had in travelling across the 

province and talking to women who have said to me and shared 

with me they just feel so optimistic, but also so proud of the 

Throne Speech that was brought forward, that there’s so much 

in it for them. 

 

The aspect of education. Moms and dads want to feel that when 

their children go to school that they are going to be able to 

receive the best quality education that we can provide. They 

also want to be confident that their children are going to be able 

to compete here in Saskatchewan, but also nationally and 

internationally. So the objectives that were set forward in the 

Throne Speech I think are just very positive because we are 

taking education very seriously because we know that if we 

don’t have the best educated citizens and young people, we are 

going to be at a disadvantage. So the opportunities that we want 

to be able to ensure that our students have in the highest 

achievement, these are goals. These are not just lip service that 

we’re paying, but in fact these are goals that are being set out to 

ensure that our students are the best they can be. 

 

My husband teaches at the university and he has shared with me 

some concerns of some of the students that maybe have entered 

into university that were maybe not as well equipped as they 

should be. Well we are addressing that. We are going to make 

sure that our students, whether they choose to continue their 

education after graduating grade 12, whether they choose to go 

to university or whether they choose to go to SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] or 

enter into the workforce, that they have all the tools they need. 

And so I’m so proud and so pleased to be able to see that we are 

really addressing this. We’re not just talking about it, we’re 

doing it. And I think that’s what people of Saskatchewan . . . 

People in Saskatchewan want to know that their government is 

a roll up your sleeves and get the job done kind of government. 

And that’s exactly what we want to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to travel across the 

province as a member of the creative industry committee and 

this has been an enlightening but also a very rewarding 

opportunity for myself and the other members of this 

committee. We’ve had a chance to meet with all members, or as 

many members as wish to participate, of the arts and the 

cultural communities across the province. And they have shared 

with us their hopes, their dreams, and their ideas of how we can 

create the province of Saskatchewan, how we can shape it 

moving forward so that in fact all arts and cultures have a 

rightful place here in the province. 

 

[14:30] 

 

So it was wonderful to meet with so many new people. But the 

best part was the opportunity for myself to connect with so 

many of my friends that are artists and craftspersons within this 

province. Because I think that’s the wonderful opportunity that 

I feel truly honoured to have been able to participate in that 

committee. And the report will be coming out after we sit 

down, finalize the information, put it together in a very good, 

working document that, again, is not just paying lip service, but 

in fact is going to be a report that will form future ideas and 

future policies, real policies that will create a much more 

inclusive province. So I do appreciate the opportunity for being 

able to participate in that committee. 

 

One of the things I wanted to address in the Speech from the 

Throne, it’s the newly created Water Security Agency. And this 

is a 25-year strategy. You know, we talk about our different 

resources that are so important to Saskatchewan, but water — 

water is life. And I think we all know that. We all acknowledge 

that. So to put together a long-term strategy that will ensure that 

high quality and sustainable water quality is going to be not just 

for personal use, but for the whole province, we have to ensure 

that with our growing population that in fact a resource such as 

water is there for everyone but also to be undertaken in a 

sustainable and a safe manner. 

 

I had the opportunity of attending a demonstration project in 

my constituency of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley at Grand Coulee. 

And there was a new technology that was brought forward. It 

was clear water clarification. Now this is the kind of thing, the 

technology that Saskatchewan is known for. It’s smart. It’s 



1658 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2012 

environmentally respectful but it also is very doable in this 

province. And this is the sort of thing that I think we can all 

champion in this province. And that’s what the Throne Speech 

addresses. It addresses people in Saskatchewan who have what 

we would call a darn right good idea, that these ideas and this 

kind of technology is going to be looked at, and this is what 

Saskatchewan should be proud of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this document is a working document. It’s called 

“Planning for Growth.” I know we’re all very proud of the 

increase in population and the increase of our industries within 

this province. But it has to be done in such a manner that 

everyone benefits. We’re ensuring that in fact people of 

Saskatchewan will in fact benefit from our growth. And that is 

why the Premier has undertaken a plan called 2020, growth for 

Saskatchewan. This is the sort of thing that in fact sets this 

government apart from others to ensure that we are planning for 

the long range of this province, for the growth for the long 

term. This is not just a plan for four years or five years, but this 

in fact is a long-range plan. And that’s how good policies are 

undertaken and that’s how good governments are undertaken. 

 

So with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I am going to be . . . I am 

speaking in favour and will be voting in favour of the Speech 

from the Throne but will not be supporting the motion from the 

opposition members. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to join 

in the debate on the Throne Speech considering that, you know, 

we’re celebrating the 100th celebration of this great building. 

It’s an honour to be here speaking today on the Throne Speech. 

 

You know, one of the main issues of this Throne Speech is 

dealing with infrastructure and growth, which we’ve been 

dealing with since we formed government. And one of the 

things I want to first as I go on, is, as you know, we’ve had all 

the elections, municipal elections, your school boards, your 

mayors, council of, reeves in rural and small and city towns. 

And as I listened to the major news, watching the major 

Saskatoon, Regina, P.A. [Prince Albert], Moose Jaw, the 

mayors and councils talk about their agenda, the candidates . . . 

Also reading about, in the rural papers, the elections that were 

going on and people that were running for office, and the main 

thing that they all talked about, almost the first thing when a 

reporter would ask them, you know, what’s the biggest 

challenge facing a town, a RM [rural municipality], a city, is 

infrastructure and growth. So with that, you know, those are 

things that as an MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 

that we’ve been listening to. I’ve been hearing that a number of 

years, you know, and it’s been interesting. 

 

You know, in the previous census over half of Saskatchewan 

cities and more than 85 per cent of our towns decreased in 

population 10 years ago. Now that’s what we were facing when 

I first got elected, you know. And now just looking at the stats 

in the last census, every city and nearly 80 per cent of the small 

towns saw their population increase during the most recent 

census period. So that’s how much things have changed since I 

was first elected. That was . . . To me that’s, you know, a major 

accomplishment. That is something as a politician that you 

want to work with to help your province grow and your towns. 

Because I can remember when I was first elected in ’99, one of 

the biggest challenges that the mayors were facing, and the 

RMs, was a loss of population, loss of tax revenue. And how do 

you deal with that? 

 

Now when I meet with them it’s, how do we adjust to the 

growth? And it’s a good problem. I mean they’re happy to 

move that because with growth, you know, becomes more 

revenue. There is challenges but they’re good challenges. 

They’re challenges that you look forward to facing. You know 

if we’d have kept in the decline, I don’t know what would have 

happened over the many years if we’d have kept seeing that 

decline carry on. So you know, dealing with this Throne 

Speech, that is a priority of this government, as many things. 

 

But part of it, most of it is dealing with infrastructure. 

Highways, we’ve doubled. In this year’s budget alone, we’ve 

invested 581 million in Saskatchewan highways. Is that 

enough? No. I mean I have Highway 15 that needs work. But 

we’re working to address that, knowing that we’ve had to 

increase our funding per year, every year in highways. When I 

look back through the ’90s, the highway budgets were basically 

flat. They hardly ever grew. But under our tenure, they’ve 

grown every year because we know that that’s something that 

we have to address. You know, that’s part of the plan we set for 

growth, and part of the plan we’re working on. We set, you 

know, a bold target of 1.2 million people living in 

Saskatchewan by 2020. 

 

I can remember when we were, shortly after we were elected 

. . . not elected. After shortly I was elected, we were talking 

about in opposition we would grow this province to a million. 

And I remember at that time there was the member from 

Wascana Plains said that, from the NDP side, said that was 

impossible like. And all we were doing was hoping or saying 

that we should grow at the national rate. That’s what we were 

hoping in opposition, that the government would at least 

recognize at the time that you should grow towards at least the 

national rate. And she said, oh that wasn’t possible. 

 

Well now we’re growing way more than that because we’ve 

taken the initiative. We’ve taken a dream, and that’s a dream of 

this province and the people — to grow, to grow the province, 

to grow businesses, to make this, you know, one of the best 

places to live in the world. And it shows with the immigration 

that has been coming here and the workers that come here. We 

have the workforce which we’ve been working to increase. 

With that becomes the businesses that are looking here. 

 

At one time you wouldn’t have got the potash companies 

looking to invest, oil companies looking and with that, small 

manufacturing companies that are springing up all throughout 

the smaller towns and the major cities, you know. And that is, 

Mr. Speaker, is what a government should be working towards, 

is always working towards the betterment of people. And one of 

it is through growth because with it becomes money that you 

can improve services as health care which as you know has 

always been an important issue throughout Canada, throughout 

the world, you know, throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, as we work towards improving it, the doctor 

shortages are always one of the things we’ve been working at 



October 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1659 

and trying to improve throughout, you know, our . . . 

[inaudible]. You know, one of the ones was the air ambulance. 

That was a promise that we made, that we brought in. And with 

the STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] that’s . . . You 

know, in fact it was used in my constituency a couple of times 

already, you know, and I believe it saved a couple of lives. And 

that’s, you know, that’s important. That’s something that the 

government should be working towards. 

 

Another one that we did with, you know, with working towards 

how to get rural doctors in rural Saskatchewan or getting 

doctors to rural Saskatchewan, you know, there’s 24 

international medical graduates that have entered Saskatchewan 

international physician practice assessment. And you know, 

since the program began in 2011, we’ve had 37 foreign-trained 

family physicians have completed the assessment and right now 

more than 90 per cent are practising in rural or remote areas. 

That speaks to, you know, our government working in any way 

we can to improve the services out there throughout 

Saskatchewan because just bringing them doctors in isn’t just 

for rural Saskatchewan and the northern. It also helps the cities. 

You know, those are the things that we’re addressing in this 

Throne Speech and as we work forward, as we talk about as 

you plan for growth, I mean, you plan for the infrastructure 

growth. You also plan for medical, knowing that you’re going 

to need that throughout the province as the province grows, the 

population grows, as the towns. 

 

You know, another one is education. We’ve talked about 

education in this Throne Speech of how to improve that through 

training, which our businesses are asking for more skilled 

labour. You know, one time, that maybe 20, 30 years ago, there 

wasn’t as much demand at that. Now every business minimum 

is grade 12 education to work in almost any business and 

usually higher up, part of post-secondary education. And those 

are things that we’re working at to improve that, to improve the 

education chances and abilities for the graduates who are out 

there, more opportunities, providing more educational 

opportunities, and so that they can follow the higher paying 

jobs on the way up. 

 

Those are discussed at length in this Throne Speech on 

education, health, growth, and infrastructure. And that is why, 

you know, this . . . But with growth there is also, you know, 

naturally challenges. But those are challenges that we are facing 

and also, I think, surpassing. You can show in our waiting list 

for surgeries. We’ve shrunken that. It’s a challenge that we’ve 

stepped up and it’s a daunting challenge to bring the waiting 

lists down, but we have. 

 

And those are things in my office that are . . . the phone calls 

come about. You know, those are the improvements that the 

people see that out there. And they know that you’re working 

towards improvements of improving their life. And it shows in 

the support that I guess I’ve received over the numerous 

elections that I’ve served, but also in the support for our 

Premier in polling and also shows the support for the 

government because they know that we’re working towards 

planning for growth and long-range growth, and it’s going to 

keep growing this province. And I want it to keep growing. And 

I know it’s going to keep growing. The potential for this 

province is huge — our natural resources, agriculture. I don’t 

have the statistics in front of me but I know how much exports 

we’ve expanded every year and the markets that we’re gaining, 

whether it be in the lentils, in the peas, in the cereal grains. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And another, you know, another thing that I’ve gotten in the 

agricultural end, a lot when I was going around, was the 

farmers that are . . . Cereal grain acres are up this year. And 

that, I don’t know how many comments I’ve gotten, that they’re 

so happy that they have the choice of being able to market a lot 

of their grain on their own. I’ve been told that by almost every 

practicing farmer out there. And I know I still hear from the 

other side that the farmers were mad the Wheat Board was 

taken. Oh they’re not. If you’re still saying that, you’re way out 

of touch in rural Saskatchewan. What they like is a dual market. 

They have the opportunity, which they had this fall, and I know 

lots of farmers had the opportunity to move bulk amount of 

grain. Most years you’ve had to store it. A lot of them will tell 

you we had a good crop throughout Saskatchewan, our 

constituency, and throughout Saskatchewan especially on the 

cereal grains. There was wheat running anywhere from 50 to 60 

bushels an acre; durum in that 70 bushel an acre range in areas. 

 

And the storage is always a challenge. I mean a lot of times 

you’ve had to store it on the ground. And I knew a lot of 

farmers are moving that grain right now and basically getting 

the cheque up front, the money, but also not losing in grade and 

quality by it laying in the ground. Under the old days you had a 

quota system or you had so many tonnes to sell up to October 

and that was it. Didn’t matter, that’s all you could sell. Then 

they’d open it if you’re lucky by January 1st, another 25 per 

cent. By March maybe they would kick it up to 75 per cent. 

Where now you have the option to move that grain early if you 

want all of it. Get it up off the ground. And there was, is if you 

drive in rural Saskatchewan, you will see many grain bags out 

there. And sure they’re into the bags but they usually take a 

pretty good beating with, out our way, the racoons, deer, mice. 

There is still quite a bit of spoilage if they stay in them bags. 

And that’s an issue that a lot of farmers found after a year or 

two, that there was a lot of damage being done by wildlife, so 

they were trying to move that grain as fast as possible. 

 

But those are, you know, some of the things we’ve addressed, 

not so much this from the Throne Speech in the end, but the 

agricultural end of it being out in rural Saskatchewan and the 

things that we’ve worked to. I mean one of the things we’ve 

listened to which I’ve got from my patrons of the PF [prairie 

farm] pastures that we’re leasing to them, they said yes, you 

know, glad that you’ve listened to us and that you’re looking at 

either selling it, if we so choose, but also looking at leasing it 

like we do. We lease Crown land to different ranchers over the 

years. There’s different situations in the South or the North. 

And that’s one of the things that I heard, and I think many 

MLAs heard too that, you know, provide us with a leasing 

option because sometimes sale just isn’t possible, especially in 

the first year or two. And that’s something that our government 

is listening to and is also working in that direction of willing to 

work with the patrons in that capacity of allowing them to 

lease. 

 

You know, as we move forward, you know, we want to . . . The 

growth plan is to lead the country in high school graduation 

rates by 2020. I know the member that just talked to me before, 



1660 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2012 

you know, talked about how important education is. And she’s 

right. I mean education is the future as we move forward in this 

province and this country. Education, as I mentioned before — 

is with jobs and what the companies are asking — it’s going to 

be more important as we move forward. So we need to be 

putting more emphasis on education which I believe we are. In 

fact I know we are, looking at the money we’re putting into the 

education budget and the programs that we’re bringing forward 

through the education program. Knowing that we want to make, 

you know, this a best place for kids that are going through the 

school system and for the graduation rate. 

 

You know, but also one of the other things that I heard out there 

lots was always run a balanced budget. You know, it’s nice to 

have which . . . make your priorities your infrastructure, your 

highways, your health, but do it in a balanced budget. Look at 

how you can cut costs. Look at just like the people out there 

that are talking to me, how they run their household budget or 

their farm budget or their business. You know, they run it the 

very best way they can, within a budget. And they expect the 

government to do that. 

 

And that’s one of the things we’ve addressed over the years was 

the debt in this province which was, I would say, a very high 

priority with a lot of people. And they want us to keep moving 

where we can on that deficit, but also to run a balanced budget 

within these programs. And within that, when you’re on a 

balanced budget, I mean, you have to make some tough 

decisions. They understand that, as long as you’re running in 

that, and the decisions that you’ve looked at when you make the 

harder decisions in government. And when you’re in 

government there is harder decisions you have to make, you 

know, to keep the province growing in the context of money 

that is coming in. And, you know, people that I’ve talked to and 

that have phoned my office many times and I’ve talked to them 

at many events from . . . such as every MLA here, you know. 

You’re out in the public all the time. And that is, you know, one 

of the bigger comments is that you’re with a few balanced 

budgets not only in the country, possibly in the world, and 

under tough times. And running a huge debt like some places 

are is just going to catch up to them in future. I mean, you look 

at countries like Greece and Ireland, what have happened to 

them over the last number of years. And those are things that 

we don’t want to happen here, you know. What people want is 

a steady future, a great place to live, great place to raise a 

family, a great place for their kids to raise a family and be able 

to get a job in the context of Saskatchewan. 

 

I know we’re looking at lowering the business rate to make us 

competitive, which we have to, with Alberta and Manitoba and 

the rest of the provinces. Because as things change, it’s a lot 

easier now to move businesses from place to place or to go get 

a job in a different province or country. What you want is to be 

competitive with your surrounding neighbours, and those are 

things that we’re addressing. As we know, if you want to keep 

growth going, you have to be competitive. If you’re even 

running a small business, if you’re not competitive with the guy 

down the street, you’re eventually going to lose your business. 

So that’s a practice that we also have as we move forward is 

knowing that we have to be competitive with the surrounding 

provinces, with even the surrounding States, if we want to 

compete for investment money and for growth and to keep the 

people that are working here. 

You know, Mr. Speaker, there is, as I go through the Throne 

Speech, there is many good things. I mean we talked about the 

same thing. You know, more apprenticeship spaces and trying 

to eliminate the backlog of people who want to work but need 

to develop the basic skills. Those are things that I talk about. 

And working with First Nations and Métis to increase their role 

in the workforce, you know. So those are . . . as I looked 

through this Throne Speech, and I know that my time is limited, 

but I will just let you know that I will be supporting this Throne 

Speech and there’s no way I can support the motion that is 

brought forward by the opposition. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with great pleasure 

to join in on the debate, Speech from the Throne, and make 

some comments I guess and opening comments. 

 

First of all, I’d like to start out just with, of course, a thank you 

to the people back home, my CA [constituency assistant] who 

works in the office and does an excellent job of dealing with 

services that government is supposed to provide to our 

residents. And sometimes it works okay and sometimes that’s 

fine and it works the way it’s supposed to. But unfortunately, 

Mr. Speaker, sometimes those services do not serve the people 

in the way it should serve them, and we make sure that that 

happens with my office, and the CA does that. So I’d like to 

just again thank my family. 

 

And, you know, time works interesting. The job that we have to 

do here and we’re asked to do on behalf of the people we 

represent, and that can be in our constituency as well as in the 

rest of the province . . . And if I look at some of the different 

challenges that are facing many of the northern people, and in 

the Cumberland constituency I look at that, and you look at the 

Throne Speech . . . And it’s interesting because I’ve heard so 

many different versions. The government has their versions. 

The opposition has their version of it, and the concerns that 

people are expressing to us as the opposition, and they’re 

asking us to speak on their behalf because they truly don’t 

believe the government’s understanding the issues that are 

facing many in our province, many. This government doesn’t 

understand. It doesn’t consult with . . . It makes decisions. And 

when you have that process, people feel that they are not part of 

it. They don’t feel like they get input into it. Those are the 

challenges and frustrations that people will have. 

 

And I’ll give you, I’m going to give you an example. 

Government wants to talk about spending, and they announce a 

large amount that they’re spending on highways and they want 

to make comments of that about the roads that they’re building. 

And unfortunately . . . Last week we had a group that was here 

— chief and council, community members, elders, a senator, 

PAGC [Prince Albert Grand Council] — bringing their 

concerns to this House because of the actions or the non-actions 

of the government, promises, commitments it made to the 

people of Wollaston Lake to give them an all-season road. 

 

This government made the announcement in a press release in 

February of 2008. Today, today what happened? Well let me 

tell you what’s happened. In that press release you see and it 

said, in the construction ending of that year, 2012, they would 

have an all-weather road. There’s no road there. A few trees 



October 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1661 

were cut down. That’s the commitment that this government 

gave to them in February 2008 and we see exactly where that is. 

So people are asking why. The chief and council came here 

asking the questions of this government. 

 

So there’s the frustration you have. If that’s how you’re going 

to treat people in our province, the leadership has to come here 

and fight, has to bring awareness. And they’ve tried to work, 

they’ve tried to work with the government. They did their part. 

They didn’t want to raise a bunch of issues. They have tried to 

work, but unfortunately this is the way they were treated. They 

are not happy, and they won’t go away. I’ve seen that from the 

leadership. They’re not going to let this just slip away and get 

told the answers they got told, and their frustration. They were 

treated in a way . . . and they were given a promise, a 

commitment by the government. And it is a shame when you 

see a government treat a community and Saskatchewan people 

the way this government has treated them. It is truly a shame. 

 

Now there are many challenges facing northern Saskatchewan 

and facing people in the Cumberland constituency. There are 

many challenges, whether it’s housing, whether the roads. 

When you have a government who talks about — and I guess in 

their own Speech from the Throne, a document that they want 

to brag up — we look at what it’s full of. And we’ve said this. 

It’s full of, I guess, what would be some of the rehashed, 

recycled, reannounced . . . If you look at some of that stuff in 

there, some of them my colleagues have talked about six times. 

Twinning of a highway. How many times are there press 

releases? How many times the photo ops? Why don’t they do a 

photo op on Wollaston Lake on the road that’s for safety of a 

community? And they’ve talked about that. Their concern isn’t 

always about the economics. There are economics. It’s about 

community safety. 

 

And you know, and the chief and the council in the community 

has dealt with loss of life because of the ice roads. And they 

came here to this House to deal with the government, to hear a 

concern. And it’s shocking. It is. It’s frustrating for them. I 

could see that. But they’re going to continue to fight and work 

hard, and they’re going to utilize more groups, more support, 

and I think they’re getting that support. And they’re not done 

with this. Government made the announcements, and they’re 

not done. And they’ll continue. 

 

But that just shows one example of some of the comments that 

they want. And then the government talks about this additional 

funding for highways. I think one area, it’s 50 million. Well 

why don’t they use some of that for priority areas that the 

government’s seen as a priority? Well here is a prime example 

of a priority. It should be the road to Wollaston Lake. The 

government should be utilizing those dollars to deal with that. 

But have they? Well let’s hope that they will do the right thing. 

Let’s hope the government does the right thing. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Now having said that, you know, we have a lot of areas. And 

we talk about education. We talk about unemployment. The 

government says its commitment to First Nations and Métis in 

training and education. We don’t see a lot, to be honest. Why? 

If you see the unemployment rate on First Nations of 20 per 

cent, Métis, 10, when the rest of the province is doing well, 

why is that? Why year after year are the numbers going up with 

First Nations when it comes to unemployment? And a 

government to stand here in this House and say in a document 

that they are moving forward, that they were helping. You 

know, it’s a little late. The government needs to do the right 

thing and work with First Nations and the Métis to deal with 

this problem. 

 

And the problem is from their own, I guess, programs that 

they’ve cut. The problem is, I guess, here dealing with us today 

because of the decisions that the government made without 

consulting First Nations, Métis, and other leaders. If they 

would’ve done that, they might’ve found workable solutions to 

deal with the problem of unemployment. So we see different 

areas. 

 

Now I want to talk about trapping. Our trappers in northern 

Saskatchewan — and there’s trappers in the province in the 

South — but the trappers in northern Saskatchewan, all they’re 

asking from a government that has so much . . . It talks about 

the growth plan. It talks about all the different things it’s going 

to do, but there are so many groups, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

aren’t feeling the so-called growth plan, the advantage. You can 

put it out there and you can put out the press releases all you 

want, but when people are suffering, young people, and I think 

about some of the challenge we hear today, the ministerial 

statements today about working with at-risk youth. When we 

have our trappers apply, and they apply for funding to do a 

program to deal with youth, risk of our youth, and then we see 

that and our youth that are having challenges and need a little 

bit of guidance to take them on the trapline, they get told no by 

this government. We cannot give you any dollars, not one 

penny for that project. Even though it might keep young people 

out of jail, on the right path, the government says no to them. 

That goes to show you. You talk about a smart growth plan. 

You talk about what’s fair. This isn’t fair. 

 

So we see those challenges. We see what the government has 

done in this budget. Has it addressed the commercial fishing? 

No. The industry in northern Saskatchewan, has it dealt with 

their issues? No. Has it turned their back on them? Totally. So 

there’s not a lot of groups that are saying this is the best budget. 

 

If you looked at the Throne Speech . . . Or I mean Throne 

Speech. If you look at what’s been budgeted for different 

groups, and again I’ll go back to the commercial fishermen. I 

can go back to the trappers. I’ll go back to housing. And the 

government talks about their plan, their vision, and the growth. 

In northern Saskatchewan there are many challenges. There are 

many successes. People are doing well. Some of them work for 

the good companies, the mining industry. There are other 

industries that are hiring a lot of First Nations, Métis people, 

northern people. There are organizations, companies, private 

sector. Things are going well in some communities. But in 

some of the isolated communities, there are so many 

challenges. 

 

Does this address some of the suicides, some of the addictions, 

the problems we’re having in our province? No, it doesn’t deal 

with them. It’s time that this government take action. In this 

Speech from the Throne we see no action, and we’re asking for 

action just like the people in Wollaston asked for action of our 

government on a road that was the government’s commitment. 



1662 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2012 

Action was needed. What has the government done? We’ll 

follow that up soon, having said that. So if you don’t have the 

action in this so-called Throne Speech . . . And the government 

wants to say this is the best thing for the people of the province. 

It doesn’t deal with a lot of the issues, concerns, challenges that 

many low-income people are dealing with, middle class, small 

business. Yes, it does some things, but unfortunately more 

needs to be done. 

 

You talk about a province that is the boom. You talk about all 

the different things, the challenges, but you have to also talk 

about successes. And we do have some of that in northern 

Saskatchewan. We have a lot of success in First Nations and 

Métis communities. We have some of the solutions. The 

government has to be willing to sit at the table and consult and 

listen to those solutions. There are many challenges, and this 

Throne Speech doesn’t deal with a lot of that. And I ask, why is 

that? 

 

If the government is so in tune with the communities, with the 

First Nations, with the Métis, with northern people, with all 

Saskatchewan residents, they would understand these issues 

and they would deal with them. And they’re not. There are 

many challenges we see today in question period. We see the 

film industry. We see a lot of different things. What is 

interesting, governments make the decision of the day. We 

understand that. That’s the way it is. But I say this to you as a 

government: when you start taking Saskatchewan people for 

advantage and you do not listen to them, you do not let them 

have their say — yes, you can do surveys and they can say, oh 

yes, doing really good — at the end of the day, the people will 

speak. And they’ll take so much. 

 

I think Saskatchewan people in general, First Nations, Métis, all 

Saskatchewan residents have a tolerance and they accept things 

for so long. And then they will send the message. So I’m telling 

this government, this Throne Speech, the things that you have 

not dealt with and you need to deal with as a government, 

you’re not a new government anymore. You’re a government 

with years and years that you’ve got to move your own policies. 

And we see some of the policies and the direction you’re going. 

You may think that those directions are good for all of 

Saskatchewan, but when people tell you that your policies and 

the direction you’re going are affecting them, then as a 

government listen to them. Hear what they’re telling you. 

 

Do you think people give you heart stories and you listen to 

some of the challenges they’re facing, that they do this because 

they have nothing better to do? That they just want to criticize? 

These are stories and these are challenges that I hear in northern 

Saskatchewan, First Nations community and the Métis 

communities. There are many challenges. 

 

You talk about education. You can’t continue to say you 

support First Nations education when you look at the funding, 

the formula that the federal government, provincial government 

uses to fund students. First Nations, Métis, all Saskatchewan 

residents belong to have a quality education. First Nations 

should be treated and have the same opportunities as all 

Saskatchewan residents. That should be a fact and we should 

have more from our Premier, from the ministers, to talk to the 

government, federal government and say, no more. If they’re 

not going to do it, we’ll do all we can to make sure. But we 

don’t see that. 

 

We see when government makes announcements, they’re going 

to give more funding, someone jumps up and tries to get on the 

photo op. Oh it’s good, or impress or make it look like good. 

But when not one penny of that money comes in, everyone’s 

silent on it. So this Throne Speech doesn’t deal with that. And it 

didn’t, unfortunately, it didn’t deal with the situation First 

Nations are dealing with when it comes to education, when it 

comes to training. 

 

You know, you talk about all the different challenges and we 

talk about the bridge, and I’m going to say the bridge to Prince 

Albert to the leadership over there, to the community. Many are 

family members that live there, of mine, and I see northern 

Saskatchewan can use a second bridge. Yes, with the mining 

industry it’s key. When you see the pileup that’s gone on this 

summer and this year with the bridge, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

is too much. 

 

This government has chosen priorities, and it isn’t Prince Albert 

and area and the mining industry that utilizes those bridges in 

Prince Albert. So it’s clear that the government has picked its 

priority. Well yes, there you go, winners and losers. And 

unfortunately P.A. is not the winner today. And P.A., for a 

second bridge I think they’ve done all they can. They’ve done a 

petition. They’ve done all . . . We’ve met with them. The 

previous mayor and council, we had a chance to meet with 

some of them and talk about some of the challenges they were 

feeling. 

 

Well I think a fight needs to go on. P.A. needs to make ground. 

It’s the third largest city in our province and they’re not picked 

as a priority with a bridge when you see the conditions that are 

going on facing northern Saskatchewan. The lineups, 5 

kilometres we’ve heard, it was unreal. 

 

In a province that talks about the growth plan and all the other 

revenue and the different things that it talks about and it wants 

to, what you want to call balanced budget — only, only 

government with a balanced budget is what they’re trying to tell 

the people in Canada. Well that’s fine about record spending 

and all the different things. How does it affect Saskatchewan 

residents? And Prince Albert, the residents, northern 

Saskatchewan, the mining industry, having a second bridge. But 

unfortunately that was not the priority of this government in the 

Throne Speech. 

 

So unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see many situations 

where this government has not dealt with some of the 

situations, the challenges that people in our province see as an 

issue, as a challenge. This government doesn’t seem to want to 

consult, communicate when it comes to First Nations. 

 

First Nations had an election. They’ve elected a new leader for 

their nation, you know. FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations] has a new leader. Congratulations to Perry 

Bellegarde, new leader. Here’s a chief and I think his 

commitment to his delegates, to the chiefs . . . I was at the 

assembly where he was elected in and listened to his speech. 

This man knows there’s a lot of concerns that have to be 

addressed by both levels of government. And he’s going to do 

all he can to make sure he deals with the issues of both levels of 



October 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1663 

government. So I wish him well. I wish them, that they can deal 

with some of the challenges that First Nations are facing 

on-reserve, off-reserve. So I wish them well with their 

organization, and we will do as an opposition all we can to 

assist them. And I sure hope the government will do all it can to 

deal with the concerns the First Nations have, whether it’s 

housing, whether it’s roads, education. There are so many 

challenges. It’s the right thing to do. 

 

You know, it’s an interesting thing. And I know that they’re 

going to push ahead, and I don’t know some day if it ends up 

going into the courts. But First Nations truly that I have listened 

to, figure the resource revenue, they want what is rightfully 

theirs. And it may go to court. It may. It may go to court. And it 

may be ordered what’s going to happen, and we’ll see where 

that goes. 

 

But I wish them well because they are trying to do better for 

everyone. They’re not trying to say that they have the right to it. 

They want to share it. They want a partnership. They want to 

make sure it works that everyone’s benefiting from resources 

that are in our province. They want to feel like they’re a part of 

Saskatchewan. They don’t want to be lesser than any other 

Saskatchewan resident. We have a right to deal with them in a 

fair way to make sure that their education, their health care, to 

make sure their housing — mould, the different challenges, 

overcrowding — we see the numbers coming out constantly. 

Well here’s one way that we can address that. And I wish them 

well on that, on moving that item on their agenda that they will 

have forward. It’ll be good. 

 

I look at the new mayors and councils in northern 

Saskatchewan, Cumberland constituents that . . . I wish them 

well. Congratulations to those that are re-elected and for the 

new mayor and councils. We have an organization that 

represents the municipality of northern Saskatchewan, which is 

New North. And I think New North has some challenges to deal 

with, and I wish them well when they bring their issues to this 

government for the challenges that are facing northern people. 

And I wish them well, and I will be meeting with them, with 

the new executive, with the association, and I wish them well 

that they move their issues forward to the government. It’s time 

that some of the infrastructure, the challenges of northern 

Saskatchewan get addressed in the Cumberland constituency. 

 

Having said that, there have been many challenges. People have 

identified them. When a government has the opportunity to 

listen to the people — whether it’s housing, whether it’s our 

trappers, whether it’s the First Nation leadership, whether it’s 

our municipal leaders, whether it’s our youth, our elders — in 

the northern communities, the First Nations, the Métis 

communities, we hear there’s a lot of respect for our elders. 

They have a lot of wisdom and strength. And I see as they pass 

that down to the next generation, to my grandchildren who are 

First Nations, and I watch that pass off of their culture, the 

hope. There is so much hope and we have to remember that. 

There’s hope. 

 

[15:15] 

 

But when you see the challenges that First Nations, Métis, 

northern people, and for that matter, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a lot 

of Saskatchewan residents are feeling with the challenges of 

addictions, suicide, mental health — more needs to be done. 

The government can’t say, well it’s not our problem. Yes, it is. 

You are the government. You are not just a new government. 

You’ve had years to deal with some of these issues. You have 

not. 

 

On some of the files, you may have tried to do some areas or to 

improve things, I’ll give you that. There’s nothing wrong with 

that. It’s important. But when you have all these other 

challenges, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the concerns that are 

facing people in this province, and I say this — the people of 

this province — the government has to do a better job. We in 

this House have to do a better job for all Saskatchewan people. 

We cannot take care of some, take care of the few chosen ones 

we want to. We must look after all Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this so-called Speech from the 

Throne again does not deal with a lot of the issues that I’ve 

heard in my constituency that I have had people sharing with 

me. Yes, it may deal with some of the issues, but there’s a lot of 

issues that still need to be addressed. This government has to do 

a better job for the people of our province. They expect no less 

and they should not expect any less from their government that 

they elect to look after all of us in this province. 

 

Times, prosperity, the resource revenue coming in, it’s 

amazing. This government is truly been blessed with resources 

coming in. Now make sure you don’t leave people behind. And 

this Throne Speech leaves many people behind, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So of course I could go on, on talking on different 

issues. And you look at the mines and you look how challenged 

they are, and we hear some areas and we hear some of the areas 

where they’re improving things — employment for our First 

Nations, Métis and northern people, and for that matter a lot of 

Saskatchewan people work in the mining industry. It’s good. 

 

The forestry sector, there’s more work to be done. That’s what 

they keep saying. It’s interesting to watch that. When a 

government is unsure of themselves, and I watch how they 

answer some of the questions, when they’re unsure they use 

that word, yes we know there’s more work to be done. Very 

convenient word. 

 

Well maybe it’s time that this government know, know this: 

there’s more action needed to be done by this government for 

the people of northern Saskatchewan and all of Saskatchewan 

that are not feeling they’re being dealt with in this Speech from 

the Throne. 

 

So I say that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve got a chance to share 

some views, my thoughts on this. There are many issues and I, 

you know, would’ve like to bring up. I know we’re limited to 

the time, but I hope the government, this government will do 

the right thing on some of the issues coming forward, that this 

government will have to deal with over the next while, the 

concerns that people will bring. This document, let’s just hope, 

let’s just hope that the government deals with some of the 

issues and deals with all Saskatchewan people fairly, with 

respect, not being a bully, and it doesn’t matter how they vote. 

It shouldn’t matter who they represent in this House. They 

should all be treated as Saskatchewan residents and treated with 

respect. And it’s time to do the right thing. Thank you. 

 



1664 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2012 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the budget. I 

will be supporting the amendment to the motion. Thank you, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 

River Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and it 

gives me great pleasure, it gives me great pleasure to stand and 

speak to the Throne Speech. First off, Mr. Speaker, I would like 

to thank the people of Carrot River Valley for giving me the 

great privilege to be able to come into this wonderful place and 

represent them on behalf of the constituency of Carrot River 

Valley, this beautiful building on its 100th anniversary. It is 

really a pleasure and an experience to be here and I want to 

thank, from the bottom of my heart, all the constituents of 

Carrot River Valley. 

 

I also would like to thank my CAs — Shelley, Cindy, and 

Charlene — because as everybody knows, the CAs do the 

major portion of the heavy lifting when we are away, and we 

are away lots. And like I said, in Carrot River Valley they 

probably carry more of their share of heavy lifting than what 

they need to, but that’s a different story, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank my wife, Terry, who 

stands behind me all the time and is very instrumental and 

believes that I am helping out the community. The fact is she 

stands behind me so well that when we’re in session, I always 

come in on Sunday and she always has all my clothes packed 

on Saturday. So, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s great of her. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, everyone in this Chamber thinks that they 

have the best constituency, and I’m no exception. There’s 58 of 

us in here and I’ll tell you what: everybody thinks that their 

constituency is the best. But I want to tell you a few stories 

about Carrot River Valley constituency. You know about four 

years ago we had a person up there, Craig and Lorna 

MacDonald, won $20 million on the 6/49. And, Mr. Speaker, 

everybody was asking them, you know, what they were going 

to do, where they were going to move, you know, maybe some 

exotic location, etc. And Craig flat out put it, look, this is the 

best place you could ever live, and he stayed right there. He 

was our volunteer fire chief then and he still is and still working 

hard in the community. 

 

Another thing about Carrot River Valley: it also is experiencing 

growth. You know, under the NDP our logging industry was 

basically closed up. Well it’s taken off now, Mr. Speaker. We 

have a new company, Edgewood Forest Products, who is 

operating the stud mill in Carrot River. Weyerhaeuser has 

reopened their plant over in Hudson Bay. We have a new 

Cumberland community college that was built in Nipawin 

under this administration. A new long-term care facility is 

being built in Tisdale with the new 20/80 split — that’s 20 per 

cent of the money put up by the community, 80 per cent by the 

government. Now, Mr. Speaker, that was something that this 

government initiated to help out our seniors and our people that 

needed the long-term care facilities. In Carrot River we also 

have the Premier peat moss expansion is going on, building a 

brand new bog that is going to be good for 50 years. We are 

slated to have a new school being built in Hudson Bay. 

 

These are all challenges of growth, Mr. Speaker. This is moving 

the province forward. Carrot River Valley is moving forward, 

and with that they do need help from the government. Now the 

government is giving them that help. That’s why we have to 

have a plan for growth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, was a great Throne Speech. It’s a new vision 

for the new Saskatchewan. The NDP don’t like it of course 

because well, first off, they never experienced growth so they 

don’t quite know how to handle this. From 1991 to 2007, 

Saskatchewan lost people. 

 

Now the member from Athabasca tries to spin that the NDP are 

the creators of all this growth. Yet for 16 years when he sat on 

this side of the House, there was a decline. So I don’t know 

how he’s trying to spin that. The interim Opposition Leader 

goes even further. And I want to quote the October 17th Globe 

and Mail where the Opposition Leader, and I quote, said, “A 

document like this distracts everybody, and I think his [Wall’s] 

popularity will stay up there as long as there’s sort of a myth of 

a booming economy.” 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, you can only stick your head in the 

sand or other places for so long. If the population is growing at 

the fastest rate in 90 years, if Standard and Poor’s gives 

Saskatchewan a AAA rating, the highest rating there is, if our 

debt is going down, and all economists in the country are 

saying that Saskatchewan will lead or be second in economic 

growth in Canada for the foreseeable future then, Mr. Speaker, I 

don’t think it’s a myth. You would think that the members 

opposite would embrace Saskatchewan growth, but no. Their 

federal leader, Thomas Mulcair, has called the growth in 

western Canada the Dutch disease. He doesn’t want to see 

Saskatchewan moving forward, doesn’t like the progression, 

and obviously doesn’t like growth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have heard not a peep out of the members opposite 

opposing their federal leader. Not from their current leader or 

any of the leadership candidates. I guess, Mr. Speaker, this is 

why they’re so dead set against the Throne Speech that has a 

plan for growth. They just never did, never did. Remember Mr. 

Calvert’s statements? We will always be a wee province, 

always in and out of equalization. Or Mr. Lautermilch’s 

statement, when questioned on out-migration, said there’ll be 

more here for the rest of us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to live in Saskatchewan. But more 

than that, I am proud to say that both our children are working 

in this province when, just a few short years ago under the 

NDP, they probably would’ve looked west for meaningful 

employment. This, Mr. Speaker, is what growth does. 

 

But we need a plan. Mr. Speaker, the two NDP leadership 

contenders in this House criticize our plan saying there is 

nothing new, just a lot of rehashed ideas. But really, you have 

to look at those two and ask where your plan is. 

 

We have a Finance critic from Regina Rosemont who can’t 

even manage his own leadership campaign, spending twice as 

much as he’s bringing in. And the member from Massey Place 

who feels the best way to fix the government is to have 

different camera angles in the Chamber. Mr. Speaker, do you 

really think the good people of Saskatchewan want these two as 



October 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1665 

leaders for this great province of ours? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a good plan, a futuristic plan, a plan to 

move our province forward. I know many of the things I’m 

going to talk about have already been said, and far more 

eloquently than what I can, but here are a few points from the 

Throne Speech that I have picked out. 

 

One, we have set a plan to have 1.2 million people living in 

Saskatchewan by 2020. Mr. Speaker, with that comes 

challenges, challenges of infrastructure. That’s why our 

government is committed to funding a minimum of 2.5 billion 

in infrastructure investments over the next three years on top, 

on top of the 5 billion that we’ve already spent for schools, 

highways, health care facilities, and municipal infrastructures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan with this growth has a thriving 

housing sector with more than 8,000 housing starts forecast for 

this year, the most since 1979. Now one thing we’ve done is 

what we’ve given to the municipal governments is 1 per cent of 

the PST [provincial sales tax] so they have funding to be able to 

help with this growth on this housing. Government initiatives 

will help add 12,600 new housing units between 2011 and 

2016. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we haven’t forgotten rural Saskatchewan either. 

We are now the top agri-food exporting province with $10 

billion worth of exports in 2011, up 60 per cent since 2007. We 

want to see that increased to 15 billion by 2020. So 

consequently you have to do things to help this along. 

 

[15:30] 

 

This year’s budget includes a record 20 million for agricultural 

research, an increase of more than 50 per cent since 2007. You 

also have to remember, in order to help our farmers out, what 

we have done is lowered the education portion of the tax on 

farm land which has made a big difference to all of the farmers 

out there and also made a big difference to the municipalities. 

 

And in this year we actually plan on capital investment in 

Saskatchewan to pass $20 billion. This is another thing, a 

record amount, nearly double the 2007 total. Mr. Speaker, this 

proves that the companies, all the companies that are coming in 

here and setting up in Saskatchewan put faith in this 

government, faith that they didn’t have in the other people 

when they were in power. Saskatchewan’s on track to surpass 

British Columbia to become the fourth largest exporting 

province. 

 

When you travel, Mr. Speaker, it used to be people didn’t even 

know where Saskatchewan was. I can remember in years past, 

back in my younger years when I travelled around and you said 

you were from Saskatchewan, and they had to ask you to say 

Saskatchewan a couple or three times because they couldn’t 

quite understand what it meant. But, Mr. Speaker, now 

everybody knows where Saskatchewan is. And it doesn’t 

matter, it’s not just in Canada. You can even go well down into 

the States and people know where Saskatchewan is. 

 

Our government will continue to undertake international trade 

missions and support our exporters and strengthen ties with 

other countries, doubling the value of Saskatchewan’s exports 

by 2020. Mr. Speaker, this is why we have a plan. Now I know 

that the people opposite, they sit back and they say well, there’s 

nothing in this plan. They never had one because they didn’t 

plan for growth. They planned for decline, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just mentioned we talked about education. I 

mentioned that the new school being built in Hudson Bay. And 

during the past five years this government has invested 3.5 

billion in the province’s post-secondary education. We want 

smart people in this province, we’ve got them. We want them to 

stay here. They take post-secondary education. We want them 

to stay here. 

 

Now we also have the graduate retention program, and that 

helps them stay here. It provides tuition rebates for up to 

$20,000 over seven years for post-secondary graduates who 

will stay in the province. Mr. Speaker, this is another way of 

having our province grow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the health care end of it, now this is amazing 

because I am hearing this. Health has always been a number 

one issue in rural Saskatchewan and everybody knows that. 

This year though, when I talk to people about surgeries and 

whatnot, everybody is so amazed at how quickly they are 

getting in, how quickly they are being looked after, compared 

to just a few short years ago under the NDP. 

 

Now people are running . . . I just talked to a woman over in 

Nipawin who had breast cancer and she was totally shocked. 

She was in within two weeks of her being diagnosed with breast 

cancer, being in, getting treatment. Since November of 2007, 

the number of patients waiting more than a year for surgery has 

been reduced 81 per cent — 81 per cent, Mr. Speaker. The 

number of patients waiting more than six months has been 

reduced 56 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a government that likes to set goals. By 

utilizing lean techniques and private sector delivery where it 

makes sense, our government is on track to meet its goal, and 

no patient will wait longer than three months for surgery in 

2014. 

 

Now I know the other side didn’t like that and they kept on 

hollering about the privatization of health services. But I’ll tell 

you, that person that needs the surgery, they don’t care where 

they get it done, they just want to go out and get that done. 

And, Mr. Speaker, under this government, this is happening. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have also increased the doctors in 

Saskatchewan. We’ve increased the nurses in Saskatchewan. 

We’ve come up with some other good initiatives to be able to 

keep people within our training facilities. And by the way, 

we’ve increased the number of training spots for our physicians 

within this province. 

 

But another way that we can keep them there, or keep those 

people within Saskatchewan after they graduate, is we will 

forgive up to $120,000 in student loans for new doctors, and 

$20,000 for new nurses and nurse practitioners who agree to 

practice in rural and remote and underserviced communities for 

up to five years. Now we had the member from Cumberland 

just talking about how we weren’t doing things for the North. 

There is a very good example how we are doing things for 



1666 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2012 

northern Saskatchewan. The member from the North . . . or 

from Cumberland is talking. He says what are you doing, what 

are you doing? He obviously wasn’t listening. I was just 

explaining it to him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that my time has basically run out, and so 

therefore I would like to let everybody know that I am going to 

be supporting the Throne Speech, and I will not be supporting 

the amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. First of all, I’d like to start off by thanking my wife, 

Leane, who is watching back in Saskatoon, for all her support 

over the last year. I very much appreciate that. My kids — 

Kassidy, Keely, Courtney, and Carter — thank you very much. 

I’ve missed a few hockey games, and a few dance recitals, but I 

appreciate them understanding why I’m down here in Regina. 

 

I’d like to thank the constituents of Saskatoon Sutherland. They 

were absolutely fabulous to me over the last year. They took me 

in and they showed me exactly what some of their needs were. 

In our question of the summertime when our postcards went 

out, they wanted to talk to me about what was going on and 

what their issues were. So thank you to them. 

 

I’d like to thank my campaign manager, Dan Wiks, who was 

the reason that I got here, elected in the legislature for 

Saskatoon Sutherland. Fabulous campaign manager, and his 

most difficult task was managing me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d 

like to thank Ron Hicks. Certainly Ron is a pillar within the 

Saskatoon Sutherland community. He has been the president of 

the constituency for 10 years and the main reason that we have 

some money in the bank and that we’re able to run an effective 

campaign. 

 

I’d also like to thank my constituency assistants, Danielle and 

Judy, for keeping me on track and keeping me hustling over the 

summertime. And I’d also like to thank my parents, Ted and 

Marie Merriman, back in Saskatoon watching this for all of 

their support that they’ve given me over the last few years. 

 

I do have one last person to thank, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

that is a good friend of mine named Sophie Foster. Sophie 

celebrated her 98th birthday yesterday up in Saskatoon, and I’m 

very proud to call her a friend, a confidante, and certainly a 

mentor. She sent me an email at this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 98 

years old, from her iPad last week. So that tells you how in 

touch she’s in with what’s going on. 

 

And I’d like to certainly thank the Premier and his supporting 

staff of the 48 MLAs that were elected last November. Most 

importantly we need to thank the larger team, the people of 

Saskatchewan who helped the Premier develop the growth plan 

for Saskatchewan that drove our mandate and formed the 

Speech from the Throne. This truly is a Saskatchewan team 

effort, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

All areas of our province are thriving, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 

safe, culturally, and diverse communities. We see proof of this 

in the cities, towns, and villages throughout Saskatchewan. A 

fine example of this is the town of Willow Bunch in the great 

constituency of Big Muddy-Weyburn . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . and Wood River, yes, thank you. This is a 

prime example of . . . Sorry, my in-laws, Leo and Sylvia 

Durand have called Willow Bunch home for over 60 years and 

they are both third-generation Willow Bunch residents. 

 

The town is rebuilding. New young families are coming in 

calling it home. And the Willow Bunch giant is still standing 

tall in front of the school, the old school. The playgrounds are 

full. The parks are busy. And of course the golf course is 

packed, and it has collected a few of my stray golf balls over 

the summer, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

This rural Saskatchewan growth is a typical scene throughout 

our great province. The government is investing in this 

province for my children and for yours. The Throne Speech sets 

out the government’s plan for the future of Saskatchewan. This 

is what the Leader of the Opposition had to say about 

Saskatchewan’s growth plan in The Globe and Mail on October 

17th, “A document like this distracts everybody, and I think his 

popularity will stay up there as long as there’s sort of a myth of 

a booming economy.” 

 

A myth, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of a booming economy. Now on 

one side we have the federal leader, Mr. Mulcair, saying that 

we have Dutch disease in the West because of our booming 

economy. Now we have the Leader of the Opposition of our 

provincial NDP saying that the economy is a myth it’s 

booming. I’m not quite sure what the federal and the provincial 

NDP are talking about. Maybe they should get together a little 

bit more, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and talk about what’s going on. 

 

Here is the reality of what’s happening in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. The Regina Leader-Post on October 10th, 

2012: “Saskatchewan with its booming economy is . . . daily 

attracting Canadians and immigrants in search of a better 

quality of life.” The Gold Report on October 26th said, “ . . . 

few if any Canadian provinces are booming the way that 

Saskatchewan is.” This month the Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business released a national report, Communities 

in Boom: Canada’s Top Entrepreneurial Cities. The scores of 

Saskatchewan cities made up over half of the top 10. Saskatoon 

came in second, followed by Regina and Moose Jaw in third 

and fourth. Lloydminster came in fifth, and the colleagues up 

north in Prince Albert came in seventh. This is the reality, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. There’s no myth here. 

 

I had the opportunity to spend some time in the United States 

this past summer attending a conference as well as some 

training, and the US political leaders from both sides of the 

House are asking about Canada. And no, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

they’re not asking about Alberta or Ontario or Quebec or BC 

[British Columbia]. They’re talking about the potential 

opportunities that we have right here on our own backyard. 

 

They are asking the simple question: what are you doing up 

there to be so successful? Simple answer: our North Star is, 

don’t spend more than you have. An important component of 

our province’s success is having a plan. We look back at when 

the NDP was in power: keep expectations low, and then don’t 

deliver on those expectations. Blame anything and everything 

for their failures. 



October 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1667 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask the members across the floor, what 

is your plan? What are they offering the people of 

Saskatchewan? All they do is seem to attack everything. The 

hon. members across the aisle are the ultimate armchair 

quarterbacks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, yelling at the TV screen, but 

not getting up off the couch to do anything. Well to quote John 

Gormley, what I’d like to call this is, the cave dwellers. 

C-A-V-E stands for citizens against virtually everything. 

Against growth, prosperity, and most all, against change, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

The NDP record speaks for itself. Between July 1st, 1991 when 

they first took office and July 2007 when they left office there 

was no population growth. In fact our population decreased by 

2,542 people. Since we took office in 2007 our province has 

experienced a population growth of almost 80,000 people, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. On average they lost 158 people a year. Since 

we took office, we’re averaging a 16,000-person population 

growth year over year. 

 

With growth comes increased needs. This Throne Speech 

responds to the need for more affordable housing. Between 

2011 and 2016, 12,600 housing units will be built for low- and 

moderate-income families and individuals. This comes as a 

result of the stimulus program from this government. 

 

[15:45] 

 

On September 12th, I brought greetings on behalf of the 

Minister of Health at a new 18-bed Rawlco Radio surgical unit 

at St. Paul’s Hospital. Our government was pleased to provide 

$4.7 million for this project. Response from the Patient First 

Review were released in October 2009. Just over two and a half 

years ago the Saskatchewan surgical initiative was created by 

our government in response to the concerns raised by patients 

and health care providers. Because we have a plan in place to 

address these issues, we have seen great success in this 

initiative. The amount of time that patients are waiting for 

surgery has decreased significantly. 

 

In Saskatchewan, 90 per cent of patients received surgery 

within the first six months and 78 per cent received the surgery 

within three months. By the end of March, the target is to 

achieve 100 per cent of patients receiving surgery within the 

first six months. Long-term goals is that by the end of 2014 all 

patients can receive surgery within three months. The opening 

of this unit is a prime example of how our government, working 

together with St. Paul’s Hospital, the St. Paul’s Hospital 

Foundation, and the community in a partnership to improve 

surgical care for patients. I was very proud to be there, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Once the program was finished, a reporter asked me if the goals 

were achievable. I referred to our government’s 2007 election 

commitment of 800 new nurses. The media and the opposition 

at that time said, it’s not realistic; it won’t happen. We met and 

exceeded that goal but still there is doubt. 

 

This Throne Speech highlights the need for continued fiscal 

responsibility. We have a proven record of fiscal responsibility. 

Our government tabled the only balanced budget in all of 

Canada this year. This is a stark contrast to the opposition 

member from Regina Rosemont, who is running for leadership. 

It’s said that this member is also the NDP Finance critic. He has 

started off his leadership by running a deficit over $11,000 on a 

$26,000 budget, a sign of things to come if he is elected their 

leader. 

 

Years after crumbling roads, our government is addressing the 

legacy left to us by the NDP. Infrastructure spending is so 

important to our growing province. The Throne Speech 

announced increased infrastructure funding and a commitment 

to work with the municipalities to look at innovative ways to 

address their needs. The response from David Marit, president 

of SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 

is, he said, “SARM is eager to work with the province to move 

their plan forward to support economic growth in 

Saskatchewan.” 

 

Our government created the Saskatchewan assured income for 

disabilities or the SAID program. We listened to some of the 

most vulnerable people and members in our society and 

responded quickly. Individuals receiving SAID benefits had 

seen their monthly income increase by over $200. This will be 

increased by another $150 per month on average by 2015. This 

additional monthly income has helped people a great deal. We 

have also pledged to raise the senior income plan. By 2015 it 

will have tripled over the past six years. We are setting goals 

for now and in the future. And we still have the opposition 

saying we’ve set too many goals. Well I’d rather have more 

goals than no goals, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The only goal I see from the NDP is from their federal leader, 

Thomas Mulcair. His goal is to kill the growth in the West with 

this claimed Dutch disease. And yet we hear nothing from the 

potential elected NDP MLAs with the exception of Erin Weir 

who stands squarely behind Mr. Mulcair in trying to kill the 

growth and cripple the West. They’ve said nothing about their 

federal counterpart’s plan to crush our province, any growth to 

please eastern voters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have to ask the question. Is this their hidden 

agenda to crush our dreams and our potential to help their 

federal leader abandon the West? As an aspiring leader of this 

country, Mr. Mulcair is certainly not doing anything for 

national unity. To the NDP, will you stand up for your and my 

Saskatchewan neighbours? 

 

In looking at the New Democratic Party provincial website, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I was looking for their plan. I researched it, 

spent a half an hour on it. I certainly couldn’t find a plan. The 

question that I had was within this, there was something else I 

couldn’t find in there. It was the Regina Manifesto. To the 

people across the floor, I’d have to ask, the question is: where 

did it go? Our government’s plan is the grow for Saskatchewan, 

vision 2020 and beyond. We are growing not for the sake of 

growth, but for all of the 1,079,958 people that call 

Saskatchewan home. 

 

This growth plan is about responsibility, accountability, and 

optimism. It helps keep our province moving forward. We are 

ultimately accountable to our constituents — myself to the 

people of Saskatoon Sutherland, and our team to the citizens 

across Saskatchewan. This Throne Speech sets out hard, fast 

goals for the future. We can measure what’s working and what 

isn’t and we can adjust quickly. 



1668 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2012 

The people of Saskatchewan are known for their optimism and 

hope, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Hope is what got me started on this 

journey to represent the good people of Saskatoon Sutherland. I 

would humbly ask one more time for the NDP to stand up for 

Saskatchewan. My hope is this province will be better for my 

children and some day — hopefully not too soon — my 

grandchildren. To quote Helen Keller, “Optimism is the faith 

that leads to achievement. Nothing can be done without hope 

and confidence.” And a more modern quote from Jay-Z, “I 

believe excellence is being able to perform at a high level over 

and over.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that this government is achieving 

excellence. I have confidence in our Premier and our 

government. This Throne Speech is full of hope for the future 

of this province. On behalf of all of my constituents, I thank 

you for the opportunity to speak today, and that is why I do 

support the Speech from the Throne and do not support the 

amendment. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Bold, 

measurable, and achievable goals: this Speech from the Throne 

is a clear example of a government willing to lead. 

 

As this second session of the twenty-seventh legislature gets 

going and as we near Remembrance Day, a day where we focus 

on remembering the many women and men that have died so 

that we are a free and democratic society, and as I complete my 

first year as a new MLA, my feelings are no less intense than 

they were on November 7th, 2011. I am humbled to walk, talk, 

and work as part of this legislature and in this Legislative 

Building that celebrates 100 years this year. 

 

Thank you hardly seems enough. Yet I can think of no other 

words that indicate my thanks for the support given to me by 

my husband, Allan; my family; my Prince Albert team of 

Sharon, Brent, and Donna; and my executive of Alana, John, 

Gisele, Al, Sophie, Alex, Carol, Jim and many more people too 

numerous to mention. 

 

As I take my seat for this session, my commitment continues, 

my commitment to be here on behalf of P.A. Northcote 

constituents to take your voice and make it heard at the table 

where real decisions are made. 

 

Before I discuss this Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will 

take a minute to describe this past year. The team of dedicated 

and spirited women and men that are part of my team back 

home in Prince Albert Northcote and right here in Regina 

welcomed a new MLA and kept my feet on the ground as I 

entered a whirlwind, a whirlwind of learning and activity. A 

new world of information thrown at me from all sides the way 

it was in university. Of thinking in broad strokes, just like being 

on a board, a really large board guiding Saskatchewan’s future, 

and of being in a really large workplace with hundreds of 

offices in several locations, including two of my own, and just 

learning how everything works. 

 

Then throw in a bit of politics. We — family, friends, and team 

— set a bold target and achieved it when we changed Prince 

Albert Northcote into a Saskatchewan Party constituency after 

25 years of NDP thinking. 

 

You and I, your government, and indeed Saskatchewan has 

chosen a different path into the future. I listened and continue to 

listen to you, the people of Northcote. I took that voice and 

those ideas and added them to those of my MLA colleagues 

from all across Saskatchewan. Together, you, me, and your 

government set bold, measureable, and achievable targets. 

 

Your voice and your ideas created the Saskatchewan plan for 

growth that you see reflected in this Throne Speech, a Throne 

Speech with bold targets that sets a commitment to ensuring 

growth continues because growth has been good for our 

province. This growth means a strong economy and more 

opportunity for our young people. It means more support for 

our seniors and lower taxes for families. This growth means 

that we, your government, are balancing the budget and can 

reduce the debt. 

 

This government, your government, is willing to lead. We set 

two bold targets: to have 1.2 million people living in 

Saskatchewan by 2020, and continued fiscal responsibility. 

Think about it. Five balanced budgets at a time when many 

provinces and indeed many countries are struggling with 

growing deficits and crushing debt. A balanced budget and 

paying down debt while keeping the economy strong and 

remembering those that need a hand up, in other words, a strong 

social conscience. We see that in this Throne Speech and in the 

Saskatchewan plan for growth. 

 

Prince Albert Northcote, Prince Albert, and our province 

benefits. This summer, travelling through the constituency of 

Prince Albert Northcote and consulting with my constituents, I 

heard loud and clear that infrastructure is top of mind. Our 

government, your government, has invested more than $5 

billion in infrastructure to improve highways, schools, and 

health care facilities. Prince Albert Northcote and indeed Prince 

Albert welcomes the connection of the South to the North. Your 

government set as a priority the twinning of the No. 11 

Highway into P.A.. Next, by partnering with industry, your 

government will fund half the cost of the final road to connect 

Highway 914 in the Athabasca Basin. Prince Albert Northcote 

is willing to be a leader and part of the solution for our future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year the Prince Albert community 

mobilization partnership was in early stages of implementation. 

This year this community partnership that proactively identifies 

problems and gathers community agencies, health and 

education providers, and police to address issues before they 

become criminal matters, this partnership is being asked to 

mentor other communities in Saskatchewan and across Canada 

to begin their own community mobilization partnerships. Talk 

about leadership to help create vibrant, safe communities that 

we all so much want. 

 

Last year Prince Albert was the launching point of artsVest, a 

partnership program with business for the arts. Canada’s 

national association of business leaders who support the arts. 

These partnerships have generated $1.17 million for the 

province’s cultural economy in its first year in Saskatchewan. 

This year OSAC, the Organization of Saskatchewan Arts 

Councils, held its annual convention in Prince Albert. Your 



October 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1669 

government through the ministry of arts, culture and sport is 

investing 500,000 over two years in artsVest. What a shining 

example of how our government, your government, values arts, 

culture, and sport. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Many of my colleagues highlighted the various facets of this 

Throne Speech and how Saskatchewan people benefit. Prince 

Albert Northcote constituencies will see themselves and their 

goals reflected as well — from building the workforce in many 

ways such as working with First Nations and Métis 

organizations, to adding 300 more apprenticeship spaces. From 

innovation in nuclear medicine that extended the lives of 

millions of cancer patients, to research in food security and 

agriculture. From the Saskatchewan advantage scholarship to 

the Saskatchewan graduate retention program. From supporting 

Habitat for Humanity housing for those of moderate means, to 

improving the senior income supplement program. We see a 

balanced approach, Mr. Speaker, an approach that keeps our 

economy strong and social conscience stronger. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last weekend I helped celebrate our newest 

grandson’s christening and visited with his older sister, our 

granddaughter. This reinforced my commitment to the future. It 

is for our families and our children’s children and their children 

that your government sets policies and bold, measurable, 

achievable targets — these targets that you and I, as a team, are 

implementing. This plan for growth that turns vision into 

reality. That vision is to make Saskatchewan the best place in 

Canada to live, to work, to play, and to raise a family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the Throne that was delivered on 

the occasion of the opening of the second session of the 

twenty-seventh legislature brings Saskatchewan closer to that 

reality. That is why I support the Throne Speech and I do not 

support the amendment. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before we begin, I 

would like to thank my wife Sheila and my daughter Shanaya 

for their support over all these years. 

 

It has been roughly one year since our government was 

graciously re-elected by the people of Saskatchewan. This last 

year has been humbling and rewarding for me, and I cannot 

thank my constituency of Saskatoon Meewasin enough for 

entrusting me with this job in this beautiful building. 

 

In the last year, this province has grown by more than 22,000 

people. This is the highest population growth that our province 

has experienced since 1921. The amount of people working in 

Saskatchewan has grown to an astounding 540,000 which is an 

all-time high. 

 

Wait times have dropped even lower, and all of this has 

occurred while maintaining a balanced budget. Mr. Speaker, the 

people of Saskatchewan should be proud of what they have 

accomplished, especially when Saskatchewan is remaining atop 

the unemployment rankings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is moving forward steadily and 

responsibly. Of course simply because we are in an 

advantageous position does not mean that we shouldn’t strive to 

be more. While governing Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, as 

referenced by our Premier, our colleagues in the opposition 

released 12 plans for growth, so to speak. After presenting these 

plans in 2000, the population dropped by 7,672 people. The 

opposition released another in 2001, and what do you think 

happened? Well the population dropped again by 2,816. And in 

2005, the opposition released another growth booklet and again 

our population dropped by 3,752. Mr. Speaker, thank goodness 

the people of the province stopped them from printing any more 

booklets or there wouldn’t be anyone left in Saskatchewan 

except for maybe the nimble nine across. Mr. Speaker, our 

Premier has not only made it a mission to make sure that our 

population continues to grow, but that our province is also a 

leader in many fields — agriculture, exports, and in health, to 

name a few. 

 

With our growth plan having been announced in the past few 

weeks we now have a clear vision for Saskatchewan, the . . . 

[inaudible] . . . this year, next year, and for years ahead. With 

our abundance of natural resources and agriculture, it is of little 

surprise that Saskatchewan is on track to surpass British 

Columbia to become the fourth largest exporting province. We 

have developed trade relationships with Japan, China, 

Indonesia, Singapore, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, India, and Hong 

Kong, among others. These trading partners are ensuring our 

province’s growth will continue for years to come. Our 

government is committed to pursuing advantageous 

arrangements with these and other countries in order to sustain 

our economic . . . while advancing our goal of doubling the 

value of Saskatchewan exports by 2020. Brad Bly, a 

representative of Ag-West Bio and envoy from the company to 

the most recent trade mission to India, spoke very highly of the 

mission, stating: 

 

India holds huge potential as a trading partner for 

Saskatchewan . . . Developing this relationship is mutually 

beneficial. It can accelerate existing trade and build a new 

market foundation for Saskatchewan research & 

technology. 

 

These countries rely heavily on our agriculture products to feed 

their people. With the hard work of our farm and ranch 

families, Saskatchewan is now Canada’s top agri-food 

exporting province. 

 

In 2011, Mr. Speaker, our province exported more than $10 

million worth of grains and produce which is up 60 per cent 

since 2007. Our ranchers and farmers should be proud that they 

are helping keep our neighbours in other countries fed. There is 

still work to do, however, as we have set a goal to increase 

agriculture exports to $15 billion by 2020. This a herculean task 

to be sure, but with the help of our hard-working farm families 

we can make this a reality. 

 

In addition to the major exportation of agriculture and produce, 

we are committed to leading the nation in agri-food research. In 

our plan for growth, the Premier announced that we will 

continue to enhance Saskatchewan’s reputation as an 

agricultural innovator by establishing the Global Institute for 

Food Security. This institute will help at the forefront of 



1670 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2012 

agriculture research and will no doubt be bolstered by 

budgetary items similar to the record $20 million for agriculture 

research included in this past year’s budget cycle. 

 

Another important area we are focused on is our highways. 

Over the last five years, Mr. Speaker, our government has 

improved over 7,500 kilometres of provincial highway and 

have invested more than $3.1 billion into improving our roads. 

We are continuously looking ahead and understanding that 

highway maintenance should be an integral part of an 

infrastructure plan. That’s why we have committed to funding a 

minimum of $2.5 billion of infrastructure investment over the 

next three years. There is much work left to be done but we are 

positive that we can improve our highways significantly before 

the end of our term. 

 

One aspect of highways is often overlooked before it is too late. 

Mr. Speaker, Ashley Dawn Richards’s untimely death was as 

tragic as it was eye opening to the growing issue of drivers 

speeding through orange zones. Drivers’ behaviour in 

construction zones is becoming increasingly worse, and sadly 

one’s impatience to arrive at their destination one or two 

moments quicker ended another’s life. Ben Diprose, boyfriend 

of Ashley Richards, said recently: 

 

Something had to be done about this, people can’t just 

keep on driving through construction zones like they have 

been and disobeying the laws and killing people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is why our government is implementing 

stiffer speeding fines, photo radar in construction zones. No one 

wants to relive this tragedy again and we will do what it takes 

to stop it from reoccurring. I believe I speak for all members in 

this House when I implore drivers to slow down in the orange 

zone and be aware of your surroundings within it. Please be 

attentive and take care out there. 

 

Our growth plan sets some fairly outstanding goals with regards 

to our economic growth. For Saskatchewan to achieve these 

goals, Mr. Speaker, we will require a large and capable 

workforce. For this reason Saskatchewan will require at least 

60,000 more workers by 2020. With over 540,000 people 

working in Saskatchewan today, as well as the hard-working 

attitude this province holds dear, this goal, this goal should not 

be very difficult to reach. 

 

Our government has facilitated this requirement of workers by 

investing $3.5 billion in post-secondary education since first 

being elected in 2007. This funding includes more funding for 

programming to assist First Nations and Métis students. Often 

these students are regrettably slipping through the cracks, so 

our government will continue to work with First Nations and 

Métis organizations on ways to improve educational outcomes 

and increase employment. 

 

This is in line with our commitment to pursuing strategies 

which will ensure Saskatchewan has the right workers at the 

right place at the right time. Over the last five years, Mr. 

Speaker, the number of apprentices registered in Saskatchewan 

has increased by 43 per cent. Additionally, there are now more 

than 35,000 training opportunities available to up-and-coming 

tradespeople in Saskatchewan. We will absolutely require more 

skilled tradespeople if we are to reach our prospective goals in 

Saskatchewan, so we will be adding 300 more apprenticeship 

spaces and working to develop additional apprenticeship 

training opportunities for students in high school. 

 

Providing these spaces for young people who are ready to enter 

school will be crucial for our budding workforce. If these 

workers can train in Saskatchewan, there is a much higher 

probability that they will live and work in Saskatchewan. 

Retaining our youth through education is something we take 

very seriously. On the topic of retention through education, Mr. 

Speaker, our government introduced the Saskatchewan 

advantage scholarship as well as the graduate retention program 

as measures to retain high school and post-secondary graduates. 

The Saskatchewan advantage scholarship provides high school 

grads with up to $2,000 over four years to attend 

post-secondary in Saskatchewan, and the graduate retention 

program provides tuition rebates of up to $20,000 over seven 

years to post-secondary grads who stay in the province. 

 

This fall roughly 4,000 students received the Saskatchewan 

advantage scholarship. These programs are helpful but we felt 

there could always be more done to help students through 

school. For this reason, this fall we are introducing legislation 

to create the Saskatchewan advantage grant for education 

savings. This grant will help families saving for their children’s 

post-secondary education by providing $250 per year, per child. 

This will ease the burden of a high tuition cost before school 

even begins for these children as costs rise for both students and 

their families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government’s goal is to have Saskatchewan 

lead the country in high school graduation rates by 2020. To 

this end, we are committed to ensuring parents that their 

children are succeeding in school. We will support schools as 

they prepare students for post-secondary studies through a new 

student achievement initiative. This initiative will see the 

introduction of assessments for every student from 

pre-kindergarten to grade 12. Our goal for this initiative is for 

every school division to be consistently and transparently 

measuring and reporting all students’ progress. These reports 

will help students understand what they should focus on and 

will give parents and teachers a window into what supports they 

can provide. These initiatives and programs all ensure that our 

youth will be knowledgeable, skilled, and less financially 

burdened as they exit school and enter into the workforce. 

 

Mr. Speaker, whether it is in education, employment, 

agriculture, or infrastructure, our government has a plan that 

will take us not simply to the end of the term but to the end of 

this decade and beyond. We have goals that are attainable so 

long as we are vigilant and prudent and work within our means. 

Our growth plan is a good one for Saskatchewan people and is 

good for the province as a whole. We are proud of how far we 

have come and are certain that we can go much further. 

 

Thank you for the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, and I will be 

supporting the Speech from the Throne and I will not be 

supporting the amendment. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise and join in the debate today on the Throne 



October 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1671 

Speech. It’s always an interesting time surveying the Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what is said, what comes 

down from rhetoric to actual goals to specific measures, and 

what is of course left out there in the ether in terms of the 

Throne Speech. 

 

I guess one thing that I do quite appreciate about the Throne 

Speech occasion, Mr. Speaker, is the opportunity it provides for 

members to get on the record to say thank you to the people in 

their lives, to say thank you to their constituents, and to say 

thank you in just a general sense. Because of course this is a 

tremendous privilege that we have in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, to serve in this legislature. Certainly to sign the roll is 

a pretty momentous thing, and to realize that we’re a very 

privileged few who have this opportunity to represent in the 

province of Saskatchewan. So certainly, Mr. Speaker, sign me 

up for that. 

 

[16:15] 

 

I’m very thankful to have the opportunity to represent the 

people of Regina Elphinstone-Centre, one of the most diverse, 

one of the most interesting, one of the most, I think, unique 

constituencies in the province of Saskatchewan — though again 

certainly every MLA has that opinion, I’m sure, of their 

constituency. But just in terms of sheer diversity, Mr. Speaker, 

in terms of ethnic backgrounds, in terms of occupations, in 

terms of income brackets, Elphinstone-Centre has got people 

from every walk of life and, you know, from pretty much every 

corner of the globe, and certainly folks from right around this 

province. 

 

I want to say thank you to the people that work with me on a 

daily basis to ensure that the people of Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre are served as best we can. It’s a privilege to 

work with Colleen in the constituency office and to work with 

the folks in the caucus office here. And again we nine on this 

side, the 48 on that side, Mr. Speaker, one of the chief jobs that 

we have is to hold this government to account, and the sheer 

logistics of that is sometimes daunting, sometimes challenging. 

But never, never do we despair, and certainly we draw a lot of 

strength and a lot of encouragement from the folks that we 

work with, Mr. Speaker, and quite frankly from the people, 

again in places like Regina Elphinstone-Centre, that, you know, 

be it door knocking or be it the sort of being out and about in 

the constituency or even in terms of travels throughout the 

province, Mr. Speaker, and working with the different 

stakeholders for different of the critic areas, one of the things 

you hear, different good points being made and they depend on 

Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition oftentimes to bring those 

points to the legislature, to have those concerns, have those 

questions raised of this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And certainly we’ve heard from the members opposite that that 

is something they’ve been engaged in in the summer, and you 

know, that is as it should be. And I guess one of the things that 

we find interesting about that is, you know, today we had a very 

interesting tabling of a document. If you’re going to be out 

genuinely consulting with people, genuinely listening, actually 

remembering, as Tommy Douglas said, you know, “You’ve got 

two ears and one mouth, and you should use them in that 

order,” if you’re going to give those things their due, Mr. 

Speaker . . . And I hear the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone chirping from his seat and that’s not 

uncommon, Mr. Speaker, but perhaps he’ll have an opportunity 

to get up and talk about his portfolio and participate in this 

Throne Speech, and let us in on some of the special insights 

he’s got for his new portfolios. 

 

But one of the things, Mr. Speaker, is that if you’re going to 

genuinely listen to people then the proof of course is in the 

pudding, and it’s been claimed a number of times that this 

Throne Speech and the $100-a-plate edition of it the week 

previous was based on consultation with the people of 

Saskatchewan. Yet today we find a very interesting 

circumstance, Mr. Speaker, where SaskFilm had put forward 

money in conjunction with the Sask Chamber of Commerce to 

do a study on the film employment tax credit. And it’s, I think, 

symbolic of a larger tendency with this government in terms of 

how they make decisions, how they select evidence, and how 

they make decisions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it reminds me of a friend of mine who’s a public policy 

practitioner describing a tendency that I think is on display here 

is, you know, evidence-based decision making is a bit of a 

buzzword. And certainly we’re all familiar with the scientific 

method or at least I would hope so, all of us having I think gone 

through grade 7 science and on, but the idea that you gather the 

facts and then you make a decision. And certainly my friend 

who’s a public policy practitioner talked about the sort of 

antithesis of that or the sort of attempt that some people make 

to subvert that approach to things. And you can see it on display 

in different jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. But I think you saw a 

great case today of opinion-based evidence making, and in 

terms of what we’ve heard from the Minister of Culture, for 

example, in terms of the importance of getting out and doing 

these consultations with the cultural sector and getting the 

creative industry’s report on tap and ready to go. And how they 

can do these things with a straight face, Mr. Speaker, is beyond 

me because a very important segment of the creative industry 

sector in this province, of course, is the film sector. 

 

And what we saw with this government over the past year is I 

think very much an approach to policy decision making where 

it’s not so much about the evidence. It’s not so much about 

gathering the facts to make a well-informed decision. It’s about 

knowing your ideology and then jamming reality into it to make 

it fit, you know, regardless of the facts and the damage to them. 

 

And certainly again today, we had the report come out from the 

chamber of commerce — usually a body that has a lot of 

laudatory things to say about this government — come out with 

some very strong and very harsh critique of this government 

when it came to, you know, what the facts were with the film 

industry in that 6 to 1 return on investment and how the 

decision was made. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Speaker, is . . . You know, is that the whole of 

the Throne Speech? Or is that the whole of the record of the 

government? Or is that, you know, the sum total of things that 

we could bring forward for critique or discussion? It’s not. But 

I think what this represents is a very worrisome tendency on the 

part of this government to, you know, pick and select the 

evidence and jam it into their world view and, you know, to 

heck with the consequences. 

 



1672 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2012 

And you know, the great things that are being said about the 

growth in this province, you know, we on this side, we 

welcome growth. We celebrate growth. But we also ask, 

growth? To what end? And growth to . . . Is it just for a 

precious few or is it for the great many? And do you grow from 

the bottom up or is it just, again, the lucky few that benefit from 

growth? And so it’s not just a question of growth, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s a question of what kind of growth you have and how that 

benefits the great many and not just a lucky few. 

 

And again we’ve heard, you know, sort of a, I think, 

unfortunate rendering of the history of this province and the 

sort of description of what’s happened over the last few years. 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, I was part of the previous 

government. We weren’t perfect. There were things that we did 

that perhaps in hindsight I would disagree with. But it’s part of 

a collective decision-making process and you do the best you 

can with the information that presents in the circumstance. And 

you do your best to try and forecast what’s over that horizon. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Speaker, as much as there are things that, you 

know, do I have regrets? Absolutely, I have certain regrets over 

some of the things that happened. But are there, on balance, so 

many things that I’m proud of? To have been part of that 

government and the difference that it made in the communities 

and the lives of Saskatchewan families; and the way that in 

2005 we became a have province; in the way that those men 

and women who had come before me in that government 

having been elected in 2001, Mr. Speaker, the way that some of 

those folks had to confront the kind of debt and deficit 

catastrophe that this province faced in 1991, and the terrible 

decisions that a lot of those folks had to make, yet the way that 

they brought this province back from the brink of bankruptcy to 

a place where we could become a have province; and instead of 

being a Canadian basket case, being a Canadian leader in 

different segments of the economy and society — am I proud of 

having been part of that government, and am I proud of the 

people that made those tough decisions? You bet I am. 

 

And do I think it’s enough to throw stones and to say, you 

know, the one side says everything’s all bad, and the other side 

says everything’s all good, and people shake their heads and 

become even less engaged in the political process. I don’t think 

we’re well served in that, but that is the coin of the realm in this 

debate in this House, Mr. Speaker. And it’s particularly so for a 

lot of the folks that were elected in the last election, for the 

observation of one person in this Chamber. You know, the kind 

of boasting and self-congratulation that goes on on that side in 

terms of, you know, there’s never anything bad done on the 

watch of the members opposite compared to what’s happened 

previous, or ever, or in any other jurisdiction — you know, it 

defies belief, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I guess one of the things, you know . . . Friday we had 

folks in from the North, from Wollaston Lake where a road is 

not just mere infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. It’s not just an 

economic lifeline. It’s a matter of life and death. It’s a huge 

impact on their quality of life and with often very tragic 

consequences, Mr. Speaker. And you know, this is a 

government that in 2008 put out the press release, and I might 

add parenthetically, Mr. Speaker, they put it out before a 

by-election that was to take place in the North. They put it out 

before a by-election saying that that road would be fixed and 

finished in 2012. And then, of course, the seasons changed. 

Maybe it was that they didn’t win the by-election and they 

wanted to punish the people of Cumberland for voting NDP. 

Maybe that was part of the consideration. I don’t know. But one 

of the things I do know for sure, Mr. Speaker, is that it took 

those folks coming from all the way from Wollaston to this 

legislature to say, you know, can you give us a straight answer? 

This is a matter of life and death for our community. This is 

hugely important. You said that it was going to be done by the 

end of 2012. Well here we are. So where’s the road? And of 

course we got the, you know, the usual sort of tap dance from 

the members opposite, which is sad and which doesn’t find its 

way into the kind of self-congratulatory sermons that we 

receive from the members opposite. 

 

I think about in Regina Elphinstone-Centre, Mr. Speaker, the 

situation around Scott Collegiate and what is commonly known 

as the North Central Shared Facility and what started out as a 

joint project between the school board, the Regina Public 

School Board, and the Regina Health District in terms of 

providing a much needed revitalized Scott Collegiate for the 

inner city of Regina and what kind of difference that could 

make in the lives of students, and the fact that that was no. 2 on 

the province-wide capital list in the summer of 2007. 

 

The appropriate planning dollars had been forwarded to it by 

our government. It was a going concern, Mr. Speaker. And 

since then we’ve seen different announcements from this 

government on it. But these five years later, Mr. Speaker, do we 

see any concrete action on the revitalization of Scott 

Collegiate? We do not. 

 

There’s another school a stone’s throw from there, an 

elementary school, Mr. Speaker, Herchmer, which in fact was 

torn down on the watch of the members opposite. And you 

know, there’s the ongoing question about, will they combine 

Wascana with that and the population in the different regions 

that are affected there. And you know, it’s still an open 

question. But what is undeniable is that Wascana has had 

questions raised about it by the school board in terms of the 

health of the facility, and you have an empty field where 

Herchmer used to stand. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, these are some of the things I think 

about when it comes to the streams of self-congratulations you 

get in an occasion like the Throne Speech from the members 

opposite. I think about the fact that, you know, not a few times 

we’ve heard members opposite congratulate themselves on the 

increases made to the seniors’ income plan. And that’s fine, Mr. 

Speaker, but you don’t hear a darn thing about the increases 

that have been made to the clawback and the cost for 

prescription drugs for seniors. And the thing is in the last 

speech, Mr. Speaker, in the last budget, the amount of money 

that this government put aside for the increase to the seniors’ 

income plan was one, and then three times that was going to be 

clawed back from the seniors’ prescription drug plan increase. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, how reality sizes up along with what is 

happening in terms of the way members opposite present things 

is oftentimes difficult to sort out. 

 

[16:30] 

 



October 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1673 

There are so many things that I could talk about in this speech, 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the critic areas alone. What’s gone on 

with the First Nations and Métis Relations on the watch of this 

government is quite frankly a bit shocking. You know, in the 

term that these members opposite have been in power, we’ve 

seen First Nations and Métis Relations go from a stand-alone 

ministry with different program offerings to have their full-time 

employee, full-time equivalent employee complement cut by a 

third, Mr. Speaker, going from 99 to 66 and the attendant sort 

of decrease in service represented by that and being folded into 

the Department of Government Relations. You know, it’s 

moving it backwards in terms of a decade of what had been 

progress, in terms of having a better window on the government 

in terms of First Nations and Métis Relations in this province. 

 

And when you look at things like what’s happened with the 

off-reserve First Nations employment numbers in this province, 

Mr. Speaker, where it’s increased from roughly 14 per cent or 

just under 14 per cent in 2007, the last months of 2007, to 21.3 

per cent on the watch of these members opposite, in this time of 

what should be great breakthrough in terms of First Nations in 

this case, coming into the mainstream of economic life in this 

province. This is a government that would do well to look long 

and hard in the mirror and think about what are the things that 

they’re doing wrong and what are the things that they needed to 

do better on. And what is the great potential of this province? 

What is the great opportunity of this province and how can that, 

how can that be realized for not just a few or not just, you 

know, not just a certain segment of society, but to really change 

the game for people that have been on the outside for far too 

long. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what’s happening with the 

First Nations employment and education task force and how 

that’s going to hopefully affect life for not just First Nations but 

Métis as well, we think that in and of itself is a good thing. We 

think that the chair, Gary Merasty, task force members Rita 

Bouvier and Don Hoium are individuals that have great 

credentials. And we wish them well in their endeavour, but this 

is a task force that was, you know, again in the difference 

between where this government is long on the announcements 

and short on the follow-through. It was announced in spring of 

2011. It was supposed to be up and running the fall of 2011. 

Well that took until the spring of 2012. And whereas that work 

of the committee should’ve been finished by now, well you 

know, we await an interim report for it to have impact by the 

end of this year. Yet critical goals are attached to the work of 

that committee. And as the members opposite say, well you 

know, we’ll wait and see. And we’ll, you know, we’ll look 

forward to the report of the committee. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not good enough. It’s not good 

enough, you know, if all things were more or less equal. But 

when you look at that in a context where First Nations 

unemployment has increased by nearly a third under the watch 

of the members opposite in a time of what should be great 

breakthrough. Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty hard to take. 

 

There are a number of issues where I think of . . . I have the 

privilege of representing Pasqua Hospital. And Pasqua 

Hospital, General Hospital, in the last year, Mr. Speaker, have 

experienced severe overcrowding. I think about the impact that 

has in the way that hallway medicine is being practised in my 

constituency, and how that is unfair for the people that expect 

that good quality health care to be there for them and have the 

right to expect that, Mr. Speaker. And if it’s going to be really 

about patient-centred health care, then why, why do we have 

this great precedent with hallway medicine? I think about the 

way that the government needs to pull up its socks there. 

 

I think about the critical infrastructure needs of this province 

and the way that things like the bridge from Prince Albert, you 

know, the gateway to the North, how that has languished under 

the watch of these members and how that situation has gotten 

worse. 

 

I think about, again, the economic lifelines like the road to 

Wollaston as was, I think rather powerfully brought to the 

attention of this Chamber by my colleague from Cumberland 

last week, and how these are the issues that we’re going to keep 

bringing up. Another critical piece of infrastructure, and you 

know, infrastructure’s just a word unless its actually the roof 

over your head or the street that you’re on, Mr. Speaker. You 

know, what’s happened in housing in this province and the way 

that housing shortages and the way that dramatically increasing 

rents impact the bottom line, and again there’s some good 

measures brought forward by this government, but what 

happens with the taking on the other hand in terms of that 

increased cost of living? And how do people make amends and, 

well we know how they make up the difference, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the things about the watch of this government over the 

past four years, the hunger count at the food bank, is that the 

hunger count has increased to the order of 38 per cent. And 

again, Mr. Speaker, it’s taken somewhat of a drop over the last 

year, and we’re thankful for that. But we know that that also 

takes place against a backdrop of a government that refuses to 

bring into being any kind of an anti-poverty strategy. And in 

point of fact, Mr. Speaker, when certain members opposite 

were not backbenchers in that caucus, they talked about the 

need for an anti-poverty strategy. And the way that that . . . The 

lack of that is drawn into pretty bold relief when the hunger 

count from the food banks comes into the public domain. And 

again, Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard a speech from one of those 

members that said one thing when they weren’t in the 

backbenches, but it wasn’t anywhere in that speech today, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So again, you know, I love this province, Mr. Speaker. I had the 

great fortune to be up in the North this summer, out on the 

Churchill River. I had the great fortune to be down at the 

homesteads, you know, the home quarter that my dad was born 

and raised on this summer out by Montmartre. It was lush and 

green. And the member from Moosomin was talking about the 

privilege he had of joining constituents that had celebrated their 

125th anniversary on their farm, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And my cousins, you know, a quarter section over. They’re 

going to be celebrating, this year to come, their 130th 

anniversary of the first quarter that was taken up by McCalls in 

Saskatchewan. And in terms of the way that this province has 

been good to my family and to the kind of dreams that have 

been realized, I know first-hand the kind of hope and optimism 

that so many share when they come to this province. And again, 

Mr. Speaker, if we can’t hold up our end of the bargain on 

things like the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program, I 



1674 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2012 

think again about, you know, those McCalls that came in 1883. 

And as fine Scots, I think they may have even been Tories back 

at that time, Mr. Speaker. But they were also thoughtful people, 

so they wound up CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation] and then NDP. 

 

But you know, the way that dreams were realized and also the 

kind of challenges and hardship that they faced throughout, 

things like the Great Depression and then seeing relatives go to 

war and the fact that my great uncle Roy McCall, his name is 

on that cenotaph in Montreal, and the way that we’re proud of 

that record of service that our family had. But we grieve that 

loss as well. And as some members have said, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

not hard to think about those things at this time when we wear 

our poppies and we remember, lest we forget. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, these are the things that went into the 

making of a wonderful life, a life not without challenge, not 

without hard work, not without struggle, but a life that was 

realized here in Saskatchewan for my forebears and for the 

generations to come. 

 

And with that great fortune, Mr. Speaker, I’m always reminded 

of the Biblical imperative that to whom much is given, much is 

expected. And I guess that’s where I’ll wrap up my remarks, 

Mr. Speaker. And we are so fortunate here in Saskatchewan. 

We’ve been given so much, and there has been much made of 

these great opportunities that are there in front of us. But on too 

many critical files for the future of this province and for the 

day-to-day reality of people in all sorts of corners of this great 

Saskatchewan of ours that are not enjoying that prosperity. You 

know, it’s interesting to hear some of the language from the 

Throne Speech where they say a society is judged by what we 

do for the least among us. And you know, I agree with that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I guess the thing is if you’re relying on a cheering bunch of 

staff writers in the caucus office to do that judgment for you, of 

course it’ll come up rosy every time. But you know, if members 

are really out there on the streets and out there talking to people 

around this province, they’ll know that there is, with this 

growth, there are also challenges and that those challenges for a 

government that pledged to be ready for growth, challenges that 

have gone unmet, and the kind of hardship that that realizes for 

people that should be doing better, as we can all do better in 

this Saskatchewan of ours. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll return to whence I came. I’m 

thankful to my family for putting up with me. I’m thankful for 

friends and for constituents for their support and for their 

counsel, some of it hard to hear sometimes, Mr. Speaker, but all 

of it well-meant and well-appreciated. Mr. Speaker doesn’t 

know what the heck I’m talking about there. It’s interesting. 

But anyway, it’s a privilege to stand in this House. But for this 

Throne Speech, I’ll not be voting for the Throne Speech. I will 

be voting for the opposition amendment. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is a 

pleasure to rise in this honourable Assembly and to enter the 

debate on the Throne Speech. 

And I would like to begin by stating what a privilege it is to 

represent the people of the Estevan constituency. And as 

everyone in this Chamber knows, or should know, Estevan is a 

very diverse constituency. We have agriculture. We have a lot 

of oil and gas and coal and, you know, small business. And of 

course we have energy with the Boundary dam power station 

and the Shand power station. And, Mr. Speaker, that area of the 

province is really booming, and I stress — especially to the 

members opposite — that, you know, the boom is real and not a 

myth as their leader would suggest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank my family for their love and 

support. And I have two adult children and four grandchildren, 

Beau, Bailee, Shelby, and Tristan. And, Mr. Speaker, my 

family, like every other MLA’s family, has paid hugely for us 

being here through personal sacrifices, functions that we can’t 

attend with our family, and just not being home. 

 

And you know, sometimes it only seems like yesterday when I 

was first elected, but it was in 1999. And I can remember in that 

1999 election when my oldest grandson, Beau, was four years 

old at that time and he would go to town with his grandpa, Mr. 

Speaker. And of course he’d see all the campaign pictures all 

over the place. And he, you know, would always say, papa, 

how come grandma’s picture is all over the place? He just 

couldn’t grasp it. And Beau is in grade 12 now and he will be 

graduating from the Estevan Comprehensive School next spring 

and going into . . . He’s chosen a career in the military and I’m 

very proud of that. And he, I might add, he’s also very 

politically astute and thinks very much like his grandmother 

when it comes to politics. I’m really proud of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank my constituency 

assistants. Full-time is Rosalie Story, and my casual girl is 

Wilma Bjorndalen. They do a great job for me and the 

constituents, and I thank them for that. We all know that they 

are our eyes and ears in the constituency. And you know, 

people often . . . they decide, you know, how their MLA is by 

the way their constituency assistant treats them. And I really 

want to thank Rosalie and Wilma for treating my constituents 

with courtesy and professionalism and respect. So thank you to 

those girls. And, Mr. Speaker, I also of course have to thank the 

Premier for his leadership, and my other family seated around 

me, my colleagues. I am so lucky. I work with the best of group 

of men and women that anyone could ever wish to work for, 

and I thank them for that. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne delivered last week in 

this Chamber is a continuance of the growth plan that the 

Premier had outlined the week before that. And other than those 

nine members seated on the other side of this Chamber, I have 

heard only positive remarks. For example, Jim Puffalt who is 

the city manager for the city of Estevan, said in last week’s 

edition of The Mercury that they are pleased with our plan. 

They are happy we have infrastructure in our focus. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to add an example of municipal 

revenue sharing. The total percentage increase from 2007 for 

the city of Estevan was 137 per cent. That’s from $885,879 to 

two million, ninety-six dollars, three hundred and twenty-one 

dollars. The total funds allocated were $8,806,550. And, Mr. 



October 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1675 

Speaker, that is just one example of revenue sharing in this 

province. Any other person on this side could get up and share a 

very similar example for their constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from July ’07 to July of 2012, our population has 

increased by nearly 80,000 people. In the last year the 

population increased by more than 22,000 people, and this is 

the most growth in any year since 1921. Mr. Speaker, this 

increase is because people want to come to Saskatchewan now, 

a province where the government is forward-thinking instead of 

backward thinking, the backward mentality of those people 

across. Mr. Speaker, a government that targets growth rather 

than plans for decline, a government that is optimistic rather 

than gloom, doom, the sky is falling. That’s the pessimism we 

hear from those members on the other side. This is a 

government that has raised the bar and will not settle for 

mediocrity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Helen Keller once said, “There is only one thing 

worse than being blind and that is being able to see but having 

no vision,” and that is so true. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has set a bold target regarding 

population: 1.2 million people living in this province by 2020. 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I remember when a former member of 

the NDP — they were sitting on the government side at that 

time, and she represented I believe it was Regina Wascana 

Plains, Doreen Hamilton — she said that when we are talking 

about growth above the national average, she said it was more 

wishful thinking than statistically possible. And, Mr. Speaker, 

you know what? If you plan to succeed, you will; but if you 

plan to fail, you also will. And that was the NDP’s thinking 

then and it’s the NDP’s thinking now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has committed a minimum of 

$2.5 billion to infrastructure investments over the next three 

years. Forecasts are that there are more than 8,000 housing 

starts for this year. That’s the most since 1979. Government 

initiatives will help add 12,600 new housing units between 

2011 and 2016. Mr. Speaker, a trip out to my constituency will 

provide evidence that this boom is real and not the myth that 

the NDP claim. 

 

During the past five years, this government has invested $3.5 

million in our province’s post-secondary education. This 

government has committed to support schools as they prepare 

students for post-secondary studies through a new student 

achievement initiative which will see introduction of provincial 

assessments for each student enrolled in K to 12 [kindergarten 

to grade 12]. We will also introduce legislation to create the 

Saskatchewan advantage grant for education savings. And, Mr. 

Speaker, this will all be done within a balanced budget. 

 

And while I’m speaking of balanced budgets, Mr. Speaker, I 

was listening to the comments made by the member from 

Regina Rosemont last night when he gave his speech. And he 

spoke of revenue assumptions, the values of Saskatchewan 

people, and he actually preached quite a sermon on responsible 

financing and deficit financing, often referring to the buy now, 

pay later plan. Mr. Speaker, when that member mentioned the 

buy now, pay later plan I immediately recalled the NDP 

election platform from 2011, a platform that made promises of 

over $5 billion. Now talk about spend now, pay later. Mr. 

Speaker, if the taxpayers of this province would’ve bought into 

that plan, they would’ve been paying for it for the rest of their 

lives and for generations to come. 

 

And I also noticed, Mr. Speaker, that same member, the 

member from Regina Rosemont, and of course he is the NDP 

Finance critic, which is kind of scary, and he’s a leadership 

candidate, and he’s running a deficit in his own campaign . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. And he’s even, you know, he’s 

even given himself, you know, a pretty nice donation and he’s 

still running a deficit of over $11,000. And those figures were 

taken from the NDP website. And who knows? His deficit may 

have grown because that was from a while ago. And in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, one of his fellow leadership candidates has referred to 

that member’s policy as a wish list with no indication of how 

much it would cost or how it would be paid for. And again he is 

the Finance critic. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, then we have the leadership 

candidate from Saskatoon Massey Place whose biggest concern 

are the camera angles in this Chamber, and I think if he moves 

just a little bit to the right it will all be better. And I don’t mean 

just a physical move. So you know, but I could imagine I’m 

speaking to pretty much deaf ears on that one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has spent record amounts on 

infrastructure and health care. We have STARS running out of 

Regina and more recently Saskatoon, and you know STARS 

has made numerous visits to my constituency. And I can 

remember when we were debating bringing in STARS, in this 

Chamber, and the members opposite were on about the cost, the 

cost. And you know and I said at time, it’s okay if you’re living 

in Regina or Saskatoon or Moose Jaw, but not everyone in this 

province does. And when there’s a life-and-death situation out 

there, how do you put a price tag on a life? And STARS is so 

important to this province and I have never spoken to one 

person in my constituency that isn’t so thankful that that 

program is in effect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have shortened the surgical wait-lists and, you 

know, we know there’s more to do regarding doctor retention 

and we have taken the initiatives to work on that. This fall 24 

international medical graduates will be entered into the 

Saskatchewan international physician practice assessment, and 

in the upcoming year it will go to 90 international medical 

graduates. And you know we are aware, as I said, of the need 

for more physicians and keeping the doctors here and have 

taken initiatives to work with that. 

 

More than 1 200 kilometres of highways have been rebuilt in 

this year’s budget, Mr. Speaker — $581 million was invested 

and a recent commitment of another $50 million. Again, Mr. 

Speaker, there is so much to do out there. The NDP when they 

were in power . . . 16 years of neglect, abandonment, and 

devastation. And I mean we have so many highways that need 

to be fixed and you know what, I mean we would love to do it 

all right now, but it is just financially impossible to do that. And 

you know and it is . . . We will get to doing that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, something very near and dear to my heart is 

agriculture. As you are aware, Mr. Speaker, I am a grain 

producer. I’ve kind of rented out some of my farm, but you 

know, what I’m a farm girl at heart and the closest thing I’ve 



1676 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2012 

ever . . . the closest I’ve ever been to living in a city is this, my 

place here in Regina that I live in just part-time. And I love the 

farm life. It’s great. And, Mr. Speaker, just thanks to the hard 

work of a lot of farm families and ranchers out there, 

Saskatchewan is now the top agri-food exporting province with 

more than $10 billion worth of exports in 2011. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s up 60 per cent since 2007. And this year’s 

budget included a record $20 million for agriculture research, 

an increase of more than 50 per cent since 2007. And I’m happy 

to see that this government will focus on value-added 

processing and irrigation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know it has never made sense that we in this 

province, the farmers, grow the best quality durum in the world. 

We send it out to be processed and packaged and then it’s 

returned to our store shelves and we buy it as pasta. And that 

has just never made sense to me. And I think if we can work 

towards adding value to any of our products, I think that is a 

great thing. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, speaking of agriculture, I would like to thank 

the former Agriculture minister, the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats, for his leadership on the Ag file. He was a 

strong voice for Saskatchewan and had a strong voice when 

representing the needs of this province. And saying that, Mr. 

Speaker, I will also say that I know the present Minister of 

Agriculture, the member from Thunder Creek who is an active 

farmer and rancher himself, will very capably continue to 

represent the province at the Agriculture table, and I guess that 

is already a proven point, Mr. Speaker, as he’s been very vocal 

when it comes to defending the interests of Saskatchewan 

farmers and ranchers. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can’t help but remember when I sat in 

opposition and the NDP was government — and God forbid 

that ever happen again. But I can remember the Agriculture 

ministers, I mean they never had any experience on the farm. 

You’d just shake your head because, you know, they’d try to 

get these agreements with the federal government and the 

federal government would agree to them, and this was, I think it 

was CFIP [Canadian farm income program] or one of those 

joint programs, federal-provincial programs. And so they’d get 

the . . . The federal government would say, yes, okay. That 

makes sense. And so then the provincial government, they’d 

back off because, you know, we still can’t fund it. They left 

farmers hanging year in and year out and I guess, Mr. Speaker, 

with policies like they had, it’s no wonder that there aren’t any 

rural members over there and probably won’t be for some time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, we’ve had many people that tell us, 

you know, give third party support for this plan. I mean Peter 

MacKinnon, Marilyn Braun-Pollon, Erin Weir, Murray 

Mandryk, Sandi Urban-Hall, Don Atchison, there’s many, 

many people that have given us third party support, and I think 

that is absolutely great. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there are many issues, other issues I would 

like to discuss but my allocated time is running out. But I 

would like to say again what an honour it is to serve in this 

legislature with this Premier and the great group of many men 

and women that are my colleagues. And I am so proud to be 

part of this team and, Mr. Speaker, I am also proud to support 

the Throne Speech which was seconded by my colleague and 

friend, the member from Battleford, and I will not be 

supporting the amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 5 o’clock, this 

House stands recessed till 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 1647 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1647 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1647 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1647 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1647 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1647 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1647 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1648 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Campion College Alumni of Distinction Awards 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1648 

 Grand Opening of Station 20 West 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1648 

 Prime Minister’s Award for Teaching Excellence 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1648 

 India Canada Night 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1649 

 Royal Canadian Air Force Snowbirds 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1649 

 Women’s History Month and International Day of the Girl 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1649 

 Leadership Candidates’ Position 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1649 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for the Film Industry 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1650 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1650 

 Immigration Issues 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1651 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1651 

 Low-Income People and Food Banks 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1652 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1652 

 SaskTel and Congress on Information Technology 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1653 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1653 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 11-and-Under Initiative 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1654 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1655 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 45 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1655 

 Bill No. 46 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2012 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1655 

 Bill No. 47 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment Act, 2012 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1656 

 Bill No. 48 — The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Amendment Act, 2012 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1656 

 Bill No. 49 — The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1656 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1656 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1658 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1660 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1664 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1666 



 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1668 

  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1669 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1670 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1674 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


