




















































Hansard: April 05, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 28A  THURSDAY, APRIL 5, 2012, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 991 

 April 5, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 
have some very special guests with us today seated in your 
gallery, here to talk a little bit about trade and commerce, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a delegation from Kazakhstan. 
 
In the mid-1980s, former Premier Grant Devine executed a 
memorandum of understanding with the then governor of 
Kazakhstan who is now the president, President Nazarbayev. 
And since that agreement was signed, Saskatchewan and 
Kazakhstan have been working together to develop mutually 
beneficial trading opportunities and relationships. 
 
The effort has been led on our part, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 
our partnership with Kazakhstan, by Lionel LaBelle and the 
team at STEP [Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership] of 
late. But STEP’s long-term interest has been to further this 
particular relationship, Mr. Speaker. The profiles of our 
respective jurisdictions in Saskatchewan and Kazakhstan are 
very, very similar in terms of the mineral resources we offer, in 
terms of agriculture, and in terms of energy as well. 
 
Today from Kazakhstan we have the Minister of Agriculture, 
Minister Mamytbekov, as well as His Excellency Mr. Zhigalov, 
who’s the ambassador of Kazakhstan to Canada. And I want to 
invite all members to welcome these very special guests to their 
Assembly. They have a busy program over the rest of this day 
with representatives of industry in our province and 
representatives of the government. Would all members please 
join with me in welcoming our delegation, our guests from 
Kazakhstan here today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
welcome the guests from Kazakhstan on behalf of the official 
opposition. As the Premier has indicated, Kazakhstan has 
developed a long friendship with Saskatchewan, and we’re very 
pleased about that. I know a couple of years ago, I had a chance 
to meet with some of your representatives on a previous visit 
hosted by STEP, and one of the most amazing stories that I 
heard from talking to a number of the people who have worked 
with Saskatchewan people was about the size of the farms that 
you have in Kazakhstan. And there are farms there that are 
250 000 hectares to even greater, and they come to 
Saskatchewan to buy our machinery because we’re one of the 
few places in the world that has been able to develop machinery 
that can serve a country like Kazakhstan. 
 
And there are many, many other places where our economies 
intermesh. But I think it’s really important that what they value 
about Saskatchewan is our people and our ingenuity. And I 
would say we as well value the people and ingenuity of 

Kazakhstan because many of their ideas, I think, we can use 
here as well. So welcome on behalf of the official opposition. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition calling for greater protection for 
late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know 
in the early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray 
Wiebe was shot two times and died from his injuries. He was 
working at a gas station in Yorkton alone and unprotected from 
intruders. We know, however, that such armed robberies are not 
isolated. We know that we’ve seen them take place in Regina in 
late January this year and also in Saskatoon in mid-March. This 
shows that Jimmy’s law is needed to give workers adequate 
protection in the workplace. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 
law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 
late-night hours. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
Humboldt, Wadena, Lanigan, and Wynyard. I do so present. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from 
across Saskatchewan as it relates to the management and 
accounting of our provincial finances. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 
government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 
true state of our finances by providing appropriate 
summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 
with the rest of Canada in compliance with public sector 
accounting standards and following the independent 
Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 
to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 
financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 
people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 
taxpayers, and businesses. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by the concerned residents of 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 



992 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2012 

petition on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current 
regulations being enforced are creating challenges that are a 
concern for our traditional trappers. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the government to recognize that the experience gained 
through practical experience be valued; and in so doing to 
cause the government to review the current legislation and 
regulations with respect to trapping regulations and 
firearm use in consultation with the traditional resource 
users. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
It is signed by many good people and trappers of northern 
Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Leader. 
 

A Time of Hope and Renewal 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, millions of people across the 
globe consider this coming weekend to be the most significant, 
the most contemplative, and the most joyous weekend of the 
year. Whether celebrated in a religious or secular fashion, each 
of us will take part in our own unique way, emphasizing for us 
the need for reflection, the urgency of peace, and the promise of 
renewal. 
 
Christians, Muslims, Jews, Hindus, and many other religions all 
celebrate in the spring. Jewish Passover celebrates the 
beginning of the liberation of the children of Israel from 
bondage and the preparation for their migration home. For 
people of any religious persuasion, the desire for a homeland 
expressed in the Passover ceremony and the anguished but 
hopeful cry of next year in Jerusalem should lift our spirits. 
 
For Christians the desolation of death leading to the promise of 
rebirth and rejuvenation embodied in the central story reminds 
us that no defeat is final and that hope will triumph. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is on this note that I would like to wish 
members of this Assembly, the staff of the legislature, and all 
the citizens of Saskatchewan a very relaxing weekend filled 
with hope and renewal. Let us take this opportunity to consider 
how fortunate we are to enjoy a holiday with our loved ones in 
relative safety and security. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Happy Easter to you and all members of this 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

Support for Habitat for Humanity 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise in the House to talk about a Habitat for Humanity key 
ceremony that I had the privilege of attending, along with the 
member from Regina Douglas Park, in Regina on April 4th. 
The celebration was about making dreams come true and about 

what can be achieved when our people work together to achieve 
a common goal. 
 
Our government is pleased to have contributed $50,000 to the 
build and to see another Saskatchewan family have a safe place 
to call home. Since March 2011, our government has 
committed 344 million in new initiatives, including the 
affordable home ownership program, the rental construction 
incentive, the Summit Action Fund, Headstart on a Home, and 
the corporate income tax rebate. I am pleased that in 2012-13 
we will be able to provide an additional $1 million to help 
Habitat construct 20 more homes across the province. 
 
We are very proud that Saskatchewan Housing Corporation has 
assisted Habitat for Humanity chapters and affiliates since 2009 
by dedicating a total of 4.5 million in funding to help build 90 
homes across the province. Mr. Speaker, this commitment has 
taken us another step down the road to overcoming our 
challenges in housing availability and affordability. 
 
In closing, I would like to thank Habitat’s staff, volunteers, and 
partners for their commitment to this vision. They work 
tirelessly throughout the year to bring hope and homeownership 
opportunities to Saskatchewan families in housing need. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Sexual Assault Awareness Week 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to take this opportunity today to draw our attention 
to a very serious issue — sexual assault and abuse. According 
to Statistics Canada, 29 per cent of children will be sexually 
assaulted before they turn 18 years of age. That’s almost a third 
of our population, Mr. Speaker. Of all these cases, only a small 
number, 8 per cent, are reported to police. It is also estimated 
that 1 in 4 North American women will be sexually assaulted 
during their lifetime. 
 
This week and running through to Sunday is Sexual Assault 
Awareness Week. It is an opportunity for us all to recognize 
those whose lives have been drastically affected by horrific and 
unacceptable acts of violence and abuse and to stand with them 
to say, this must stop. 
 
Raising awareness and educating the public are key to 
continuing the conversations and actions needed to build a 
society that will ensure everyone is safe from horrible acts of 
abuse. The reality is, if one person in our community is harmed, 
we are all affected. It is incredibly important to remind 
ourselves during Sexual Assault Awareness Week that we all 
have a role to play in demanding that violence in any form is 
stopped. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would ask my colleagues to join with 
me in applauding the efforts of the many organizations and 
individuals working hard to prevent acts of sexual violence and 
abuse while providing necessary support and care to victims. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 



April 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 993 

Team Wins Provincial Championship  
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to 
congratulate the recent accomplishments of the Delisle Prairie 
Wild female hockey team winning the 2011-12 Provincial 
Female Midget AA Championship. 
 
The Prairie Wild team is located within the constituency of 
Biggar, playing out of Delisle, and consists of players from 
Martensville, Conquest, Vanscoy, Asquith, Rosetown, and 
Biggar. The team competes in the North Sask Female Hockey 
League and faces against teams from Saskatoon, Prince Albert, 
Canwood, Melfort-Tisdale, The Battlefords, Canora-Hudson 
Bay, Waldheim, and west central Saskatchewan. 
 
The girls finished the season with a record of 15 wins, 3 losses, 
and 2 ties. Throughout the 20 league games — 6 league playoff 
games, 8 provincial games, and 10 tournament games — the 
talented Prairie Wild team played with heart and drive, 
finishing the season with the big prize, a provincial title. Coach 
Ron Dobchuk, along with assistants Bill Wylie and Rob 
Thorpe, did a fantastic job preparing the girls for the gruelling 
season and great playoff run. 
 
On March 24th, the final game of the provincial final 
best-of-two series was played in Weyburn, with the game going 
into sudden-death overtime to decide the championship. 
Summer Roberts scored with 54.3 seconds left in the first 
overtime period, handing the Prairie Wild the win. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like all members to join me in congratulating 
the Prairie Wild female midget AA hockey team on a 
successful season, and wish them all the best next season. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Northeast. 
 

Optimism for Provincial Economy 
 
Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the House today to speak to the strength and optimism of our 
provincial economy. Optimism for the year ahead among 
Saskatchewan small-business owners is high, with an index of 
72 in March, 4.3 points ahead of the national index of 67.7. 
Fifty-nine per cent of Saskatchewan small-business owners 
rated their overall state of business as good — the highest in 
Canada and well ahead of the national average. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan there were 522,000 people 
employed in the month of March, an increase of 5,200 jobs 
compared to March 2011. Off-reserve Aboriginal employment 
was also up by 4,700, or 13 per cent, for 10 consecutive months 
of year-over-year increases. Aboriginal youth employment was 
also up by 800, or 9.2 per cent, to 9,500 for five consecutive 
months of year-over-year increases. Unemployment in the 
province is the lowest in the country at 4.8 per cent, down from 
5 per cent last month, with Regina having the lowest 
unemployment rate at 3.9 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, saskjobs.ca experienced more than 1 million hits 
in March, the highest ever number of visits in one month since 
the site went live. Following our province’s recent labour 
recruitment mission, Ireland ranked as the country with the 

most international traffic on saskjobs.ca in the month of March, 
with 13,706 visits, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are just some of the indicators showing our 
province’s prosperity. And our government is focused on 
keeping this province on track, keeping the Saskatchewan 
advantage. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Prince Albert Resident Celebrates 90th Birthday 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in this House 
to speak about one of Prince Albert’s first ladies, Phyllis 
MacKay. Phyl will be celebrating her 90th birthday on April 
9th. She is the last living granddaughter of William Miller who, 
in 1873, helped Reverend James Nesbit to build a Presbyterian 
church for what is now known as Prince Albert. 
 
Phyl attended U of S [University of Saskatchewan] to obtain 
her teaching certificate. Her baptism by fire into teaching began 
in 1942 at the age of 20 at Buckland School. For $700 a year, 
she taught 15 pupils from grades 1 to 10. Phyl’s teaching career 
took her to the schools of Hagen, Prince Charles, Prince 
Edward, and then John Diefenbaker School where in 1983 she 
retired after a continuous 41-year career teaching over 1,200 
students. 
 
Phyl’s extracurricular activities are extensive. She was a ladies 
fastball pitcher and helped the Saskatoon Pats win the 
Saskatchewan championship several times and the Western 
Canada Cup in 1944. She is one of only two lady whistlers in 
all of Canada and was a member of the Watsonairs, a 
well-known ladies choral group. She has over 60 years of 
perfect attendance in Beta Sigma Phi and was recently inducted 
into the P.A. [Prince Albert] Council women’s hall of fame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like all members in this Assembly to join 
me in congratulating Phyllis MacKay for all she has done for 
the people of Prince Albert and surrounding area. Phyl has had 
an extraordinary 90 first years, and I wish her many more 
fruitful ones to come. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 

Easter Celebrations 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, this weekend we will celebrate 
Easter. Students will be happy that they have a break from 
school. Families and friends will gather together to enjoy a 
meal and each other’s company. There will be squeals of 
delight as children search for hidden Easter eggs. This is the 
commercial side of the Easter weekend. 
 
There is another side. Tomorrow morning at Good Friday 
services held in our province, across our country, and 
worldwide, millions of people will gather to remember the 
reason we celebrate Easter. At these services, we will be 
reminded again of the tremendous love of a heavenly Father for 
mankind, as we remember the death of his son, Jesus Christ, on 



994 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2012 

the cross. We hear the words of Jesus on the cross, “It is 
finished,” and the response of the Roman centurion, “Truly this 
was the son of God.” 
 
The story didn’t end there. Three days later, a group of women 
went to Christ’s burial place and found an empty tomb guarded 
by heavenly beings who said to the women, “Why seek ye the 
living among the dead? He is not here. He is risen.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Easter story is a message of love, joy, peace, 
and hope. To you, Mr. Speaker, members of this Legislative 
Assembly, staff who work in this building, and the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan, Happy Easter and safe travels. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Electoral Representation 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the public’s had a lot to say to this 
government about their priorities, but I haven’t heard them say 
that they wanted three more politicians. Not only does the Sask 
Party want to exclude all those young people under the age of 
18 when they’re drafting the new constituency boundaries; it 
wants to add three more politicians to this Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Yesterday we gave the Sask Party government a new option. So 
my question is to the Premier: will he and his government 
support our amendment to stop his legislation that spends 
money on politicians instead of people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During the 
province’s past, we have had 61 MLAs [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] for the 1975 and 1978 elections. In 1982 
it was increased to 64. In the 1986 election, it was increased to 
66 MLAs. Mr. Speaker, we are following along with a pattern 
that will ensure that the citizens of our province are well 
represented. 
 
We know that we have made a special provision for the Far 
North to ensure that the geographic obstacles out of the North 
are able to be served by the two MLAs that are up there, and we 
want to ensure that similar accommodations are made for the 
rest of the province so that people do not have to travel 
excessive distances. We have constituencies such as Cypress 
Hills that have over 10 000 square kilometres. We have 
constituencies such as Arm River where you have to travel in 
excess of 160 kilometres from one end of the constituency to 
the other. In some situations, it is as much as two and a half 
hours driving time. 
 
We want to ensure that the people of our province are able to 
access their MLAs in a fair and reasonable manner, and that’s 
the direction we are going to continue to go, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party had lots 

to say to the people of Saskatchewan in the last election but we 
heard nothing about this plan for more politicians. It wasn’t in 
the Premier’s comments during the election. It wasn’t in the 
Sask Party platform. It didn’t even make it into their Throne 
Speech in the fall. Will the Premier admit that he hasn’t talked 
to the people of Saskatchewan about spending millions on three 
more politicians? Will he admit that he has no mandate from 
the people to make this change? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the additional costs for a 
member of the Legislative Assembly is $225,000 per year; total 
costs of the additional MLAs will be $675,000 per year. There 
will be no cost to the Legislative Assembly during this term 
because none of this will happen until after the next election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier has made a commitment to the people 
of this province that that will be absorbed elsewhere at 
executive government. Mr. Speaker, that is a commitment that’s 
taken seriously. And not only that, Mr. Speaker. I can advise 
the members that we have already reduced travel by executive 
government by some three and a half million dollars per year 
and communications by an additional $5 million per year. That 
is an eight and a half million dollar reduction of what happened 
when those members were in government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the excesses that took in place in there 
were far out of line. And we will be careful and prudent with 
the taxpayers’ money. We wish to be very responsible, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the Sask Party 
have a choice to make today. They can admit that they’ve made 
a mistake and pull this legislation. Then, Mr. Speaker, we can 
have a discussion across the province. We can have 
consultation about this proposal in an appropriate fashion like 
has been done in other provinces. 
 
Saskatchewan people have priorities about health care. They 
want to know why seniors have to pay more when there’s more 
money being spent on politicians. They want to know why our 
universities aren’t properly being funded. These should be the 
priorities for our government, not spending millions of dollars 
on more politicians. So, Mr. Speaker, will the Premier admit his 
mistake and pull this legislation? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This 
legislation must be completed so that the work of the 
Boundaries Commission can be undertaken. Mr. Speaker, we 
have huge disparities in the size of our constituencies and we 
want to see those rectified as soon as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member for Saskatoon Centre has 
approximately 7,000 voting members in his constituency. In my 
constituency I have over 16,000. I want to be able to look the 
voters of my constituency in the eye next time and tell them, 



April 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 995 

your vote counts just as much as somebody from Saskatoon 
Centre. We want to have something fair and equitable. We will 
look at the processes carefully and ensure that the electoral 
commission, or the Boundaries Commission, does their work in 
an appropriate manner, and we want to ensure that they have 
adequate time to do that before the next election, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to be able to look my voters in the eye and tell them that 
their vote counts just as much as somebody else’s. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve asked these questions of the 
Premier today and on previous days. I think it’s entirely 
appropriate that the Premier should get up and tell us where this 
idea comes from. He did not raise this during the election. It 
was not in the Throne Speech. There has not been consultation 
with the people of Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Speaker, I ask the 
Premier to clarify for the public where this idea comes from and 
why he’s not the one speaking to the public about why he has 
done this. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the redrawing of electoral 
maps in the province of Saskatchewan ought not to be a 
surprise to that member and ought not to be a surprise to 
anybody in the province of Saskatchewan. It happens every 10 
years. It happens after the census, Mr. Speaker. In a 
representation by population system, sometimes the number of 
MLAs in this place are adjusted for population. 
 
It happens today, Mr. Speaker, that this province is growing 
like it never has before, Mr. Speaker. It’s growing even faster 
than it did in 1979 when the then NDP [New Democratic 
Party], without campaigning on it, increased the number of 
seats and reduced the category of voters to the people of the age 
of majority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people in this province did talk about a lot of 
things this fall. They analyzed the options presented to them in 
that general election. They analyzed $5.5 billion with 
unsustainable promises that would have left this province in 
deficit and destroyed the Saskatchewan advantage. They 
rejected those ideas. They chose to move Saskatchewan 
forward and that’s exactly what we’ll do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Funding for the University of Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve discussed in 
recent days that the Saskatchewan Party has shifted $100 
million of debt to the University of Saskatchewan. Yesterday 
the University of Saskatchewan administration raised additional 
concerns with the media that the Sask Party also provided 
absolutely no funding for the operating of the Health Sciences 
project. To the minister: does he agree with the university 
administration that the Sask Party is providing no funding for 
the operation of the Health Sciences? Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 
Investments Corporation. 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, the commitment that this 
government has made to our universities, our post-secondary 
education, Mr. Speaker, is without question. The member 
responsible, Mr. Speaker, for the universities has spoken with 
the administration at the university as recently as this morning. 
And they are comfortable that the building will continue, that 
the operations will take place, Mr. Speaker, and that the Health 
Sciences centre will be functioning and producing doctors, 
hopefully very quickly, Mr. Speaker, and that operational 
funding is not a problem. 
 
This year’s funding was over $300 million to the university, 
Mr. Speaker. There was an increase in funding to the university, 
and our government, Mr. Speaker, stands behind that 
commitment, the long-term commitment we’ve had to our 
universities over the last four years. And we will continue to 
look forward to those universities and the doctors that will be 
produced out of this facility. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Just to be clear, Mr. Speaker, is the minister 
saying that the university got it wrong? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 
Investments Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMillan: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The University of 
Saskatchewan administration says that because the Sask Party 
has provided no operating funding, the Health Sciences facility 
could very well remain empty and dormant until there is 
actually funding available. To the minister: does he agree with 
the university administration’s assessment that the Health 
Sciences building will remain empty because of the 
government’s failure to provide operating funding? Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to remind the member that the 
Saskatchewan Party does not provide funding to executive 
government and its operations. It’s the government. 
 
I recognize the member for . . . excuse me, the Minister for 
Crown Investments Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, the vice-president of 
finance yesterday, Mr. Speaker, said, “There’s no question 
about the province’s commitment to medical health, education, 
and research.” And, Mr. Speaker, there is also no question 
about this government’s commitment to the post-secondary 
sector. In the last four years, three and a half billion dollars to 
post-secondary, Mr. Speaker; one and a half billion to the 
University of Saskatchewan alone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the questions were, for the members opposite, 
when they announced that there would be a Health Sciences 
centre in 2003 and did nothing. That is, Mr. Speaker, an 
example of a government that talks with their mouth but does 
not follow through with actions. 



996 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2012 

On this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been consistent 
and deliberate. We’ve made commitments to the people of 
Saskatchewan about doctors, doctors in rural Saskatchewan, 
about health care professionals beyond doctors. And this 
facility, Mr. Speaker, we have been very committed to, we’ll 
continue to be committed to, and we look forward to the results 
once it is open. 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s interesting that 
Health Sciences is not the only facility for which the University 
of Saskatchewan has been short funded. We also know that the 
U of S is planning on staging the opening of the InterVac 
[international vaccine centre] facility because of short funding 
as well, so the minister’s rhetoric rings quite hollow. 
 
The University of Saskatchewan is not only being forced to 
max out their debt; they’re also being forced to find ways to 
fund these two vital facilities because the government failed to 
provide any funding. To the minister: why didn’t the Sask Party 
government provide operating funding? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 
Investments Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if the 
members opposite don’t recognize that three and a half billion 
dollars over four years is a commitment to the sector, that one 
and a half billion to this facility, the University of 
Saskatchewan alone, is a large commitment and 
acknowledgment of the great work they do, Mr. Speaker, to 
educate the people that we need to be our researchers, our 
physicians, our nurses, Mr. Speaker. We have seen consistently 
over the last four years increasing the number of nursing 
spaces, Mr. Speaker, from a time where the NDP looked at that 
as easy cuts. We have increased, Mr. Speaker, the funding this 
year by over 2 per cent to the university just in general. 
 
The university, Mr. Speaker, works very hard to give value for 
money and provide a very broad range of services and 
opportunities for the students here in Saskatchewan. And they 
are a partner with our government. Our minister has talked to 
their VP [vice-president] of finance this morning, Mr. Speaker. 
There is a great understanding and appreciation of the work that 
they do and it’s going to continue. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this month the medical 
school at the University of Saskatchewan was warned that it’s 
on the brink of probation. On Monday the Minister of 
Advanced Education admitted that one of the concerns 
impeding the medical school was, and I quote, “the actual state 
and fate of the Health Sciences facility.” So it begs the question 
how the latest news from the University of Saskatchewan is 
going to affect the prospective probation of the medical school. 
 
So my question to the minister is this: if the university 

administration is saying that it’s entirely possible that the 
Health Sciences building will end up sitting empty because they 
can’t afford to operate it, how will that affect the status of the 
College of Medicine? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when the NDP were in 
power, Mr. Speaker, we were in danger of losing our College of 
Medicine. It was put on probation under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
Since that time, we’ve worked diligently with the university, 
with the College of Medicine to make sure that that doesn’t 
happen again, Mr. Speaker. There was a letter of warning which 
just talks about some of the issues that were outstanding from 
the former government that are being addressed. Mr. Speaker, 
the new Academic Health Sciences centre will be a big asset to 
that university and the College of Medicine as we move 
forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would have been a shame to lose the College of 
Medicine, even under the NDP when they only had 60 seats for 
doctors, Mr. Speaker. Our government will not lose that 
College of Medicine, and we’ve increased the number of seats 
to 100 and 120 residency positions, Mr. Speaker. Heaven help 
us if we ever go back to the days under . . . probational College 
of Medicine under the NDP. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 

Tourism Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Well that’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. Seeing 
that it’s Easter weekend and the Sask Party has been so good, 
and the minister, at hiding things from the Saskatchewan 
Tourism sector, maybe it’s good you can help the Easter bunny 
hide the eggs. 
 
But anyway, Mr. Speaker, the tourism industry was completely 
caught off guard with the plans to add politics to Tourism 
Saskatchewan. The Sask Party ignored their own report that 
recommended keeping Tourism Saskatchewan an arm’s-length 
organization. Following the budget, the Saskatchewan Bed and 
Breakfast Association wrote to the minister and said, “[Now] It 
seems that we and all the industry partners of Tourism 
Saskatchewan are being evicted so [our government] your 
government can take full control.” 
 
To the minister: why is this government taking full control of 
Tourism Saskatchewan with no consultation with the tourism 
industry? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 
Culture and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m reminded of a wonderful old quote that bears 
repeating today. I believe it was Mark Twain who said, 
“Everybody wants progress; it’s change that they don’t like.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re fully aware that the transition of Tourism 
Saskatchewan from an independent organization into a Crown 
corporation represents change, but we are also confident that 
the transition represents real progress for Saskatchewan’s 



April 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 997 

tourism industry, and well worth the effort. Mr. Speaker, we 
know that a single point of entry for tourism within 
government, a long-term plan, and a strategy for events will 
strengthen the industry. And we know that better alignment 
with our government’s other economic development initiatives 
will lead to more consistency and more effectiveness. Mr. 
Speaker, the bottom line is it’s all about results and an even 
brighter future for tourism in our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, tourism is about marketing our 
province and celebrating our strengths as a vacation destination. 
It’s no wonder the Sask Party wants to take over Tourism 
Saskatchewan, as they love to market themselves through spin 
and PR [public relations]. 
 
Members of the industry say the minister has failed to provide 
answers. In a letter one member said, “Despite what the 
minister has stated, there has been little to no consultation with 
the actual industry.” Why is the minister more worried about 
marketing his government’s image than working with the 
tourism sector? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 
Culture and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you 
mentioned yesterday, we acknowledge that change always 
causes some concern and hesitation. It’s a perfectly 
understandable human reaction. But as we reminded the 
member yesterday, it also inspires people who are looking 
forward to the positive changes that it can bring. 
 
Here’s what some of the visionary leaders in Saskatchewan’s 
tourism industry have to say about the creation of a new 
tourism Crown. Chris Brewer, president and CEO [chief 
executive officer] of the Saskatchewan Snowmobile 
Association, wrote to say: 
 

I would like to pass along congratulations for the 
development of the new Crown corporation that will host 
Saskatchewan’s tourism industry. This is a very positive 
move forward for Saskatchewan and it’s been a long time 
coming. Keep up the good work [he concludes]. 

 
And this one from Mr. Greg Dionne, chairman of the northern 
tourism Saskatchewan region: 
 

I would like to pledge my support to the Government of 
Saskatchewan for the bold step they have taken and to 
help make tourism in Saskatchewan what it should be, a 
leader in economic growth. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what we’re doing. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has an 
opportunity to listen to the public and listen to the tourism 
industry. In a survey by its members, Tourism Saskatchewan 
found only 7 per cent think this change is good for their 
industry. The minister has an opportunity to take a second look 

at his plans. He can admit his mistakes and work in 
co-operation with members of the tourism community. Will the 
minister today commit to pulling this proposed legislation and 
consult with the industry about how best to ensure growth in 
our province’s tourism sector? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 
Culture and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, as we reminded the 
member the other day, there will of course be further 
consultation with key industry stakeholders and others. But you 
know, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. The NDP are trying very, 
very hard to present themselves as friends of the industry and of 
Tourism Saskatchewan. But you know, Mr. Speaker, history 
tells a different story. They ignored Tourism Saskatchewan, 
underfunded our beautiful provincial parks, and absolutely 
turned their back on our beautiful regional parks as well. 
 
It was the Saskatchewan Party that promised to double the 
province’s investment in the industry. And as we have in many, 
many other cases — more than 100 — we kept that promise, 
Mr. Speaker. Part of that commitment was increasing Tourism 
Saskatchewan’s budget by a full 50 per cent, something the 
NDP would never have done. 
 
Obviously the dramatically increased funding has been a game 
changer for that organization and now we’re about to take 
another bold step by turning it into a Crown corporation that 
will ensure our province’s tourism industry gets to the next 
level of performance. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Property Taxes 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
municipalities were surprised to find out in this year’s budget 
that the discount for early payment for education property tax is 
being eliminated. This was an incentive that many 
municipalities offered to help them collect property taxes in a 
timely and efficient manner. Did the minister consult with the 
municipalities before the decision to eliminate the discount was 
made? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Municipal 
Affairs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, thank you, and thank the 
member for his question. In 2009 a dramatic shift in how the 
population pays for taxes regarding education took place in this 
province under the leadership of this government. There’s less 
of a burden on the sectors right now, Mr. Speaker, than there 
was when the NDP were in government to be sure, to the point 
that, Mr. Speaker, municipalities have the opportunity to still 
discount municipal tax portion on residential properties. 
 
This government saw though that over the last couple of years, 
there was a $16 million shortfall to the provincial treasury 
because the education property tax also had discounts applied to 
it, Mr. Speaker. Simply put, municipalities can still have the 
power to discount their taxes on the municipal portion from 
zero to 15 per cent. This way, Mr. Speaker, on the education 



998 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2012 

property tax, we will not see a shortfall to the school systems 
and have to be backfilled by the Ministry of Education. Again, 
Mr. Speaker, this government listened to the ratepayers in this 
province. Education property taxes are reduced across the 
board, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, not a word about who they 
consulted, but we know one group for sure they didn’t consult 
with — that was the property owners and the homeowners — 
before they eliminated this discount. It wasn’t in their election 
platform and it wasn’t in their Throne Speech. And you know, 
Mr. Speaker, while the discount was in place homeowners, for 
example in Warman, could save as much as 6 per cent. Indian 
Head could save as much as 5 per cent of their property taxes 
depending on when they paid them. Why did the government 
wait until after the election to tell Saskatchewan homeowners, 
families, it was taking away their chance to save money on their 
property taxes? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, under this government 
we’ve seen $165.7 million in reduction of property taxes across 
the province, Mr. Speaker. In the context of the fifth balanced 
budget, Mr. Speaker, we saw revenue sharing go up by $110 
million, property taxes reduced. The burden on the people of 
this province has been reduced for education, Mr. Speaker. We 
believe that it’s our responsibility to take that burden off of 
them. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the municipalities can still do 
their own discounts on what’s their portion of property tax. On 
our portion, Mr. Speaker, the shortfall will not be a backfill on 
the ratepayers in this province. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, 
municipalities still have the power to be autonomous in that 
decision making. 
 
What happened after the budget, Mr. Speaker? The city of 
Weyburn actually changed their stance on discounts. They will 
not be doing any discounts because they saw that as a shortfall 
to their actual revenue stream as well, Mr. Speaker. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, balanced budgets across this province mean for five 
years ratepayers see a reduction in taxes. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, at a time when this government is boasting about 
economic growth, they present a budget that has people paying 
more. Seniors are paying more for prescription drugs and 
ambulance charges. Students are paying more for tuition. 
School divisions are receiving less money, resulting in less 
educational services for children. And families, homeowners, 
the middle class will no longer be able to save money by paying 
their property tax early. 
 
When the government has millions of dollars for three more 
politicians, why is it punishing homeowners by taking away 
their ability to save a bit of money on their property taxes? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 

the entire province looks forward to another Easter weekend, 
it’s interesting that we would end on a bit of a wrap-up here in 
this particular legislative session that members talked a little bit 
about the budget in the province of Saskatchewan, not just 
municipal tax, Mr. Speaker. It’s interesting what he didn’t 
mention. And what we think is very unique is that, as a result of 
this budget tabled by the Minister of Finance with record 
revenue sharing for the municipalities as the minister has 
mentioned, it is, in terms of the provinces and the federal 
government, the only balanced budget in the country. It’s the 
only one. It’s the only one. 
 
Within that balanced budget, we continue to keep the 140 
promises we made for the first term. We’ve kept all the 
promises we made to the people of Saskatchewan in the last 
election, including delivering real education tax relief, 
something that members opposite have the gall to talk about 
year after year and not deliver. I think as we head into Easter, 
the people of this province are pretty happy that they’ve got a 
government that keeps its promises and keeps this province 
moving forward. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Ask for leave to introduce a guest. 
 
The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has asked leave 
to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
[10:45] 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
recognize, behind the bar, Mr. Rick Swenson who is the leader 
of the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. And 
we know that he has served our province over many years in 
many different capacities, including in this legislature, and I ask 
all members to welcome him here. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce a 
guest. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has asked leave to introduce 
guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I noted that during question 
period a friend of mine and the member for Cypress Hills has 
joined us in the galleries. His name is Phillip Entz, and he is 
from the Abbey Hutterite Colony, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 
developed a friendship over the years. Phillip is very keenly 
interested in politics, follows it very, very closely and carefully, 



April 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 999 

and is a source of great counsel for those who are prepared to 
sit down and listen to his advice, Mr. Speaker. And I’m not sure 
I’ve had this opportunity to introduce him in the past, so I do so 
now. I’d ask all members to help me welcome Phillip to his 
Legislative Assembly. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Tourism Saskatchewan Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 
Culture and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that Bill No. 37, The Tourism Saskatchewan Act now be 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport that Bill No. 37, The 
Tourism Saskatchewan Act be now introduced and read a first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, next sitting of the 
House. 
 

Bill No. 38 — The Active Families Benefit 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 
Culture and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
38, The Active Families Benefit Amendment Act, 2012 be now 
introduced and read for a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport that Bill No. 38, The Active 
Families Benefit Amendment Act, 2012 be now introduced and 
read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Financial and Consumer Affairs 

Authority of Saskatchewan Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 39, The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of 
Saskatchewan Act be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 39, The Financial and 
Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Act be introduced 
and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 40 — The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority 

of Saskatchewan Consequential Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 

2012 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée  

The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of 

Saskatchewan Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 40, 
The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of 

Saskatchewan Consequential Amendment Act, 2012 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 40, The Financial and 
Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2012 be introduced and read a first time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 



1000 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2012 

Bill No. 41 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal 

Affairs — Municipal Taxation) Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 41, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Affairs — Municipal 

Taxation) Amendment Act, 2012 be now introduced and read a 
first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Municipal Affairs that Bill No. 41, The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(Municipal Affairs — Municipal Taxation) Amendment Act, 

2012 be now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 295 to 297. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 
questions 295 to 297. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 

Saskatchewan Provincial Budget 
 
Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank you for 
allowing me some time to enter today’s debate. In light of 
worldwide economic conditions and a few other provincial 
budgets that were released recently, it is incumbent of us to 
appreciate our Saskatchewan provincial budget for what it is — 
balanced. 
 
Visiting municipalities these past months, I have heard 
appreciation for their sustainable funding model. This was 
exactly the type of stable, predictable funding model that was 
requested by these and other municipalities, and it was this 
government that delivered the municipal revenue-sharing 
formula. It was last year’s budget that provided over $216 
million, or one full percentage point of the PST [provincial 

sales tax] collected, to the municipal governments. This year’s 
budget builds on this with an increase of nine and a half per 
cent or over $20 million. This will bring the total revenue 
sharing in the coming year to over $237 million for 
municipalities. This amount is 87 per cent higher than it ever 
was under the New Democratic Party. 
 
Through municipal revenue sharing, we are placing one full 
point of the PST collected directly into the hands of our local 
municipal governments. In our constituency, this results in 
tangible increases in funding to communities such as Hafford 
with a 111 per cent increase, a community such as Spiritwood 
with a 96 per cent increase, a community such as Rosthern with 
a 114 per cent increase, or Blaine Lake at a 108 per cent 
increase, and Shellbrook with a 130 per cent increase. This in 
turn improves these communities’ financial ability to respond 
quickly and appropriately to local concerns and challenges that 
we know they face each year. 
 
This budget introduced by the Finance minister laid the 
foundation that will repair over 1200 kilometres of highway to 
keep our commitment to invest $2.2 billion in Saskatchewan 
highways over the next four years. This includes over $70 
million in upgrades through the rural highway strategy. This 
will bring 150 kilometres of rural highway to primary weight. 
 
There’s also been $63 million invested in the gateway corridor 
projects that improve the safety and efficiency of highway 
traffic. A project of significance to Rosthern is the twinning of 
Highway 11 from Saskatoon to Prince Albert which is funded 
in part through this program. 
 
The introduction of the passing lane initiative will add another 
economical option to improve the efficiency and safety of many 
highways that are now experiencing an increase in traffic flow. 
Al Rosseker from the Saskatchewan Trucking Association has 
stated, during the last five years, this government has viewed 
highways as a road to economic prosperity. This government’s 
investment of over $581 million in highways in this budget will 
sustain the Saskatchewan advantage for Saskatchewan people. 
 
As I travel through the 30-plus municipalities in 
Rosthern-Shellbrook, it’s abundantly obvious that agriculture is 
a primary industry and part of the backbone of the economy in 
this province. 
 
I have previously spoken of the importance of funding such 
programs as the AgriInvest, AgriStability, and crop insurance at 
the outset each year to ensure their availability that season. It 
should also be noted that with the introduction of this year’s 
budget, crop insurance investment at $177 million is record 
provincial investment. Crop insurance coverage averaging $174 
an acre is almost double what it ever reached under the previous 
NDP government. With continued investment and productivity 
by Saskatchewan producers, it’s prudent to provide an 
insurance program that meets the changing needs of this 
industry. 
 
The changing needs, Mr. Speaker, that I’m referring to are our 
provincial agricultural exports. In 2007 ag exports totalled $6 
billion. In 2011 our Saskatchewan agricultural exports 
increased by over 60 per cent to over $10 billion. This places 
Saskatchewan at the top of the agri-food exporting provinces in 



April 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1001 

the Dominion of Canada. Canola, or the flower of power, has 
overtaken wheat as the top export in the province of 
Saskatchewan. In the past five years, canola exports have 
increased by over 250 per cent to over 2.1 billion this past year. 
Much of this increase in production and value must be 
attributed to our province’s producers. The producers that we 
have in Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker, are educated in all 
aspects of agronomics, business management, and marketing. 
 
In past decades, limiting crop quality and production factors 
have often been overcome by successful research. Research and 
development of improved agronomic traits with respect to crop 
varieties and best practices have added not only higher 
production but better quality products to sell at the farm gate. 
This government feels it’s prudent to invest over $20 million in 
agricultural research. This represents record investment again 
and includes $2 million for wheat genomic research. Mr. 
Speaker, it is imperative with agriculture being such a 
significant component of our economy that we invest in its 
research and development to ensure continued success of our 
world-class Saskatchewan agricultural products. The 
importance of agriculture to our economy is part of what will 
sustain the Saskatchewan advantage that our producers have 
helped create. 
 
Since 2007 we have increased operating funding to school 
divisions in Saskatchewan by approximately 21 per cent. Since 
2007, Mr. Speaker, we invested approximately $500 million in 
pre-K [pre-kindergarten] to 12 and child care infrastructure. 
This includes 41 major school capital projects throughout the 
province. Over half of the schools in the province have received 
funding for much-needed upgrades or improvements. 
 
As a government we have made a record investment in this area 
since 2007, including 42 per cent increase in the total number 
of child care spaces, and we have allocated funding for 13,240 
licensed child care spaces. The total number of pre-kindergarten 
programs has increased by 85 per cent. We have added 131 
pre-K programs and an additional 2,096 for vulnerable three- 
and four-year-olds. 
 
Today over 4,500 children are benefiting from this invaluable 
learning program. The 2012-13 education budget fulfills the 
Government of Saskatchewan’s commitment to a fair balance 
in funding for school divisions across the province, as well as 
heightened commitment to student achievement with a focus on 
ensuring more equitable outcomes of our First Nation and Métis 
students, a continued commitment to child care spaces, as well 
as pre-kindergarten. Library and literacy programs are also 
included. 
 
This year the increased investment in education will provide 
more equitable support through our province’s educational 
system and an increased commitment to ensuring success for all 
students from early childhood to high school graduation. The 
launch of the new education funding distribution model 
provides a long anticipated and fairer balance in funding for 
school divisions across Saskatchewan. Government’s overall 
funding the school divisions is $1.74 billion, an increase of 5 
per cent, which includes an increase in the operating funding of 
$59 million. 
 
Included in the support this year is a $10 million transition 

funding which is being allocated to mitigate the impact on those 
school divisions who will see notable shifts in funding due to 
the new distribution model. Five hundred thousand dollars is 
also committed to summer literacy camps held in 20 
communities across the province. These camps work to reduce 
summer reading loss by engaging children age 5 to 14 in camp 
activities rooted in literacy and numeracy, an increase of 1.6 per 
cent in funding of libraries and community-based organizations. 
 
Principled, sustainable spending is another way the Ministry of 
Education is committed to ensuring Saskatchewan remains a 
great place to live, grow, and learn. The ministry will focus its 
efforts this year on engaging its partners, initially school 
divisions, in learning and implementing new efficiency 
practices such as shared services and group purchasing. 
 
Well-maintained, efficient school environments are the 
foundation for supporting the achievement and successes of all 
the students. This is also critical to sustaining growth and 
prosperity in our province of Saskatchewan. By keeping the 
Saskatchewan advantage, we will ensure our young people are 
prepared for continued success in their work and in their lives. 
 
[11:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, health investment by the people of Saskatchewan 
will be greater than it has ever been, and more importantly, this 
investment will come with a patient-focused system. Health 
care investment will increase 4.9 per cent to improve access for 
all Saskatchewan residents. This includes investment in areas 
such as infrastructure, professional recruitment and retention, as 
well as continuing the approach to the reduction of surgery wait 
times. 
 
Improving access, Mr. Speaker, is moving forward with design 
and construction of health care facilities in this province. This 
includes funding to continue with the design and construction 
of 13 long-term care facilities as well as continuing funding to a 
completed pilot project with a non-profit organization. The 
Amicus facility is now a place that many Saskatchewan citizens 
call home. Maintaining the Saskatchewan advantage is 
advancing the design and construction phases of the children’s 
hospital in Saskatoon, the Saskatchewan Hospital in North 
Battleford, and the replacement of the Moose Jaw Union 
Hospital in Moose Jaw. 
 
Improving access, Mr. Speaker, is providing $60 million to 
move forward with the Saskatchewan surgical initiative. We are 
continuing with the four-year plan to provide by 2014 all 
Saskatchewan residents with the ability to have necessary 
surgery performed within three months. The Saskatchewan 
surgical initiative is proudly supported again in this budget and 
is producing positive results for patients and their families in 
our province. 
 
Improving access in rural areas continues to be addressed in 
this budget. This budget supports the increase of training seats 
for nurse practitioners and physicians. It continues to support 
the doubling of the residency positions, and available to this 
province as medical grads, as well as creating opportunities for 
placements of medical graduates from other areas of the world. 
Combined with the increase in training opportunities is the 
forgiveness of Saskatchewan student loans of up to $120,000 



1002 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2012 

for physicians and $20,000 for nurses and nurse practitioners 
that choose to work in identified underserved rural locations. 
Mr. Speaker, this incentive will encourage new health care 
professionals to practise in our province. This is yet another 
example of improving access in health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
$1.5 million of this budget will go directly to fund the rural 
locum physician pool. The formation of this locum pool is 
crucial to the continuity of service in rural areas. This was a 
campaign commitment by this party, and now it will be funded 
and implemented by this government. 
 
Improving access, Mr. Speaker, includes five and a half million 
dollars, an increase of five and a half million dollars to the 
Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society, as well as an increase of 
$16 million to the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency to support 
access to cancer services. Five and a half million dollars is 
available to introduce an innovative, team-based approach to 
access sustainable and stable primary health care and thereby 
improving the patient experience. 
 
Four million dollars, Mr. Speaker, has been provided to expand 
the colorectal screening program province wide to increase 
early detection and thereby improve patient outcomes. There’s 
been an increase of $98 million to regional health authorities to 
continue to deliver services to the people of this province. 
 
These are some of the initiatives that will improve access for all 
Saskatchewan residents to their health care system, and this in 
turn contributes to sustaining the Saskatchewan advantage. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, more people call Saskatchewan home than 
ever before. This past January, there was 1,067,612 people 
living in Saskatchewan. This is up year over year by over 
17,000 people and the largest increase since 1953. 
 
This budget, this balanced budget, Mr. Speaker, is for 
municipalities. This balanced budget, Mr. Speaker, is for the 
students of Saskatchewan. It’s for people living with 
disabilities. This budget is for people in need of surgery and 
health care. Mr. Speaker, this balanced budget is for 
Saskatchewan highways and is for Saskatchewan agriculture. 
And, Mr. Speaker, this balanced budget is for the sustainability 
and the quality of life of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with that I would like to make a motion. I would 
like to make the motion: 
 

That this Assembly commend the Saskatchewan Party 
government for passing the only balanced provincial 
budget in the Dominion of Canada for the 2012-2013 
fiscal year. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook: 
 

That this Assembly commend the Saskatchewan Party 
government for passing the only balanced provincial 
budget in the Dominion of Canada for the 2012-13 fiscal 
year. 

 
I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
enter debate and discussion here today. The motion put forward 
by the member suggesting that they’ve somehow put forward a 
balanced budget and doing a lot of patting on the back is 
certainly premature, Mr. Speaker. We know that each year this 
is sort of the same song that we hear from this government at 
budget time. They get up and they speak of budgetary balance, 
and then of course, Mr. Speaker, their record is something very 
much different, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, Saskatchewan people are tuning in to this aspect 
with respect to this government, Mr. Speaker, and they’re 
asking more and more questions on this front. And to be frank, 
Mr. Speaker, I’m hearing in fact a lot more of these questions 
and concerns since the previous election. There was certainly 
question and concern around the management, financial 
management of this government prior to the election, but I’m 
certainly hearing more voices in more communities all across 
Saskatchewan casting question, doubt, and concern as to this 
government’s ability to follow through with what it’s 
suggesting and to balance the books, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s, as I say, you’re not judged in Saskatchewan by what you 
say; you’re judged by what you do, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 
where the problem is, Mr. Speaker, is that each year at budget 
time, this government, Sask Party government comes before the 
people and suggest and say they have a balanced budget. 
They’ve done that in fact, Mr. Speaker, the last . . . Well every 
one of the budgets, they’ve suggested that it was balanced on 
budget day and in the budget day public relations spin, sort of 
in that period of time around that. And then things start to 
change, Mr. Speaker, and the numbers come in, although we 
don’t hear the members speak about the results and the record 
that they have. 
 
But we have other independent groups, Mr. Speaker, to point to 
that record. We have individuals and offices like the 
independent Provincial Auditor’s office, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
pointed out that over the past three years in fact, Mr. Speaker, 
that this government has in fact run deficits. So on budget day, 
this government comes out and sings a song of budgetary 
balance that’s nothing more than public relations spin, and then 
their record suggests something different, Mr. Speaker. And in 
2009 and ’10, that deficit was $173 million. That’s the record of 
this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 2010 and 2011, Mr. Speaker, this government also suggested 
their budget was balanced. And their actual record, their actual 
performance assessed not by myself and the opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, but by chartered accountants and the independent 
provincial — non-partisan — Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker, 
verifies a deficit of $145 million. Members can laugh at their 
inconsistency in what they say and what they do, Mr. Speaker, 
but Saskatchewan people aren’t laughing on this front. In fact 
this speaks to the very core of what’s important to 
Saskatchewan people — being straightforward. Mr. Speaker, 
sharing the full and fair and true picture of their finances is 
something Saskatchewan people deserve. 
 
But it goes on, Mr. Speaker. In 2011-2012, the Finance minister 
and members opposite got up and sang a song of budgetary 
balance, suggesting somehow that this year they would balance 
the budget, Mr. Speaker. And of course this past year they’re 



April 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1003 

running a deficit that’s exceeding $300 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we hear again this year that somehow that this year this 
budget will be different, and this one will be balanced, Mr. 
Speaker. And fingers crossed, Mr. Speaker, I hope that it is. But 
we won’t be holding our breath on this front because we’ve 
seen the record, we’ve seen the outcome, and we’ve seen the 
results of this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we know as well that even in how this government reports 
its finances is out of line with the rest of Canada. And this just 
presents a picture that’s less than fair, less than accurate to 
Saskatchewan people. And quite frankly, Saskatchewan people 
deserve the fair, full, true state of their finances reported to 
them. It’s about being straightforward. It’s about being 
accountable. It’s about being transparent, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
about being able to compare to other jurisdictions in an apples 
to apples sort of fashion, Mr. Speaker. And certainly what we 
see from this government is something less than that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I was reading recently The Globe and Mail, and I had . . . The 
title of the article jumped out at me because it described so well 
the circumstance here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. On March 
17th, 2012, of The Globe and Mail, Jeffrey Simpson’s article 
title is “Conservatives preach the gospel but forget the 
chapters.” Mr. Speaker, “Conservatives preach the gospel but 
forget the chapters.” The byline, Mr. Speaker, they say they 
want smaller government, lower taxes, and balanced budgets. 
And then they don’t deliver. And it’s sort of that notion, Mr. 
Speaker, that Saskatchewan people are starting to identify. 
 
This is a government that went before the people in the fall, and 
they put forward election promises, Mr. Speaker, none of which 
included what we’re seeing from this government at this point 
in time. They suggested they were going to pay down debt, Mr. 
Speaker. Well not the case, Mr. Speaker. Debt’s going up by 
over $1 billion this year alone. And if you look at the charts in 
their own budget summary, debt’s going up by well over 25 per 
cent over the next four years, Mr. Speaker. Not what this 
government ran on. Not what this party ran on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just the same, what we do see coming from this government are 
increases to costs in areas which are certainly not a priority to 
Saskatchewan people. And everyone knows, Mr. Speaker, that 
budgets are about choices. And this government’s choosing to 
spend millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, if you can imagine, to 
increase the number of politicians — something they weren’t 
straight with Saskatchewan people on, something they didn’t 
run on in the election, and certainly something that wasn’t 
included in their Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the 
choices that this government’s making, Mr. Speaker, and doing 
so on the backs of seniors and families all across this province. 
 
It’s an interesting set of priorities and choices in this budget and 
by this government, Mr. Speaker. They’re choosing in fact to 
ask Saskatchewan families and seniors to dig deeper, Mr. 
Speaker, into their pockets at a time where this government 
touts prosperity and record growth, and does so by spending 
millions of dollars on politicians, but at the same it asks seniors 
to ante up some extra expenditure, Mr. Speaker, to the tune of 
hundreds of dollars a year by way of increases to prescription 
drug costs, you know. 

And I know the Premier and others over there they suggest, 
well it’s only a $5 increase, Mr. Speaker. Well they’re failing to 
understand the reality of Saskatchewan seniors, Mr. Speaker. 
That $5 increase, when you put that together, Mr. Speaker, for 
seniors across Saskatchewan, is hundreds of dollars a year in 
increases, Mr. Speaker. And these are the pioneers of our 
province, Mr. Speaker, many of them on fixed incomes and 
certainly shouldn’t be having their costs being increased at a 
time of purported prosperity in their province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just the same, we see property taxes going up for many who 
have accessed the early payment discount, Mr. Speaker, an 
increase for those all across this province that counted on the 
savings from that early payment. We see increases in care home 
fees. We see increases to students, Mr. Speaker, trying to afford 
post-secondary. 
 
And then we see the sad reality, Mr. Speaker, of a time of 
record growth within Saskatchewan that we in fact . . . When I 
say record growth, we see population growth, Mr. Speaker, that 
brings forward challenges and opportunities. And instead what 
we see from this government is a government focused on 
increasing the number of politicians to spend millions of dollars 
there but then to deny the dollars needed to make those 
investments in the classrooms across Saskatchewan, to make 
those improvements in health services in communities all 
across our province, Mr. Speaker. And this is certainly not in 
the best interests of Saskatchewan people. 
 
And it’s left a significant anxiety for Saskatchewan people as 
they look at the health budget and what the education budget 
means for their own community. They know that there’s cuts 
coming, and those decisions are going to be rolled out in the 
days, weeks, and months to come, Mr. Speaker. So sadly we 
have this anxiety that Saskatchewan people have as they’re 
looking across their own neighbourhood and wondering what 
the impact will be in their child’s classroom or as it relates to 
their own job or as it relates to the health services they depend 
on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we see a government with misplaced priorities that’s making 
choices that certainly aren’t in the best interests of 
Saskatchewan people. And, Mr. Speaker, the celebration, I 
would say, of some sort of a budgetary balance that’s suggested 
by the hon. member is very premature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because judging by the record of this government, what we’ve 
seen time and time again is that despite the fact on budget day 
they control the public relations lines and have lots of spin and 
pretend somehow that their budget’s going to be balanced, Mr. 
Speaker, of course their record is something different, verified 
by the Provincial Auditor. Three consecutive deficit budgets, 
Mr. Speaker. Debt on the rise by over a billion dollars this year 
alone, debt on the rise by over 25 per cent over the next four 
years despite the fact that this government suggested that they 
were going to pay down debt in their last election, Mr. Speaker. 
And of course, of course making choices that are costing 
millions of dollars to Saskatchewan people by choosing 
politicians and doing so over people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s fair for me to say, I certainly don’t support 
the motion of the budget. I crossed my fingers, hold my breath 
that this year they may in fact balance the budget, Mr. Speaker. 



1004 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2012 

But we know certainly they’re not balancing to meet the 
priorities of Saskatchewan people and their record, as far as 
meeting a budgetary balance, would suggest something 
different, Mr. Speaker. So I don’t support the motion put 
forward today. It’s been my pleasure to weigh in on debate. 
 
[11:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
join in the debate on this motion put forward by the member 
from Rosthern-Shellbrook commending the Saskatchewan 
Party government for passing the only provincial balanced 
budget in the Dominion of Canada this year, 2012 and ’13. 
And, Mr. Speaker, before I go on with my remarks, I just want 
to maybe expand on that a little bit. 
 
The member opposite, the member from Rosemont, talked 
about us patting ourselves on the back. And although, Mr. 
Speaker, I mean that’s his perception, my take on this whole 
motion, this whole budget is it’s something for the people of the 
province. It’s not our budget. It’s the budget of the people of 
the province. And contrary to what I’ve heard from the 
members opposite, I’ve heard nothing but positive feedback, 
save for a few instances, on this provincial budget. 
 
He also touched on somehow it’s a balanced budget, and I can 
tell you how somehow. It’s by the hard work of the member 
from Canora-Pelly — the Finance minister, Deputy Premier. 
It’s by the hard work of our Treasury Board. It’s by the hard 
work of cabinet and the input of all members on this side of the 
House — our caucus, Mr. Speaker — on how this budget was 
balanced. 
 
He questions if it was really balanced. Well you know, Mr. 
Speaker, as I’ve said before and I’ll say again, I will take the 
guidance and the input from the people around the province, the 
third party input from around the province, on whether it’s a 
balanced budget. Hopefully I’ll get to some of those comments, 
those quotes by the end of my remarks. But time and time 
again, we’ve heard third party quotes speaking of the balanced 
budget and the optimism of this budget for the people of the 
province and the province as a whole. 
 
This budget term keeping the Saskatchewan advantage is truly 
that, Mr. Speaker, a budget of somewhat . . . of measures that 
are difficult sometimes, in order to keep the balanced budget 
but also to keep the Saskatchewan advantage moving forward. 
 
We campaigned, Mr. Speaker, on an election platform that was 
one of sustainability. And I believe this budget reflects those 
responsibilities, those campaign promises, and fulfills them, 
including keeping that economy growing, balancing the 
budgets. Of course we all know that’s dependent on provincial 
income. In fact this budget completes or begins a process for 
most of our platform — responsible spending within our means, 
and not following suit with what some of the other provinces 
have attempted to do in spending their way into an attempted 
balance or an attempt to get out of some of their issues, but 
effectively have spent their way into chaos. 
 
And I know during the budget day, Mr. Speaker, listening to 

some of the comments in the House after the budget address by 
the Deputy Premier, Finance minister, many I talked to were 
quite surprised by the member from Rosemont, the Finance 
critic’s response, and not only his response, but the length of 
his response. And admittedly there’s no budget that anyone 
would claim is perfect. We don’t claim that this budget is 
perfect. You can’t be all things to all people. You have to make 
difficult decisions sometimes. 
 
And admittedly it’s the opposition’s job to point out some of 
these shortcomings. However, many I spoke to on that budget 
day were quite, again quite shocked and taken aback. In fact 
they reflected to me they wondered if that member was actually 
at the same budget speech. It was something I was sort of 
wondering myself. Was he listening to the same budget speech? 
Did he review the same budget? 
 
Or possibly some actually shared with me, Mr. Speaker, did he 
write it or did a staffer write it for him prior to seeing the 
document, prior to hearing the budget speech, and then he just 
didn’t choose to change it to something that might be a little 
more pertinent? Either way it was actually shared by one 
elderly gentleman, to me, out in the lobby in the foyer of this 
fine building that, you know, if the member from Rosemont, 
the Finance critic ever decides to get out of politics into writing, 
he should become a fiction writer because he said he’s got a 
promising career as a fiction writer. And no, I can’t say as I 
disagree with him either. 
 
The NDP promises, Mr. Speaker, from the last election: I want 
to touch on some of those in reflecting on the motion by the 
member from Rosthern-Shellbrook. As many have talked about 
before, our budget commitments, our platform commitments 
were $83 million, which we fulfilled. Our budget platform, our 
platform commitments in the election was 11.25 billion, I 
believe. This budget came in at $11.2 billion, Mr. Speaker, so 
well within the promises and lining right up with the promises 
that were made by our leader, our Premier, and the members of 
this side of the House. 
 
When we look at some of the numbers, we look at their 
game-breaker calculator. The game-changer calculator the NDP 
used, I tell you, Mr. Speaker, could really rack up the numbers. 
Estimates I’ve heard, even independent assessment and that 
these numbers added up to currently $5.5 billion over a 
four-year period, possibly more. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
astronomical. 
 
So what they’re talking about now, they’re upset with the cuts 
we’ve made. They’re upset with some of the choices we’ve 
made — although I haven’t heard that from many people 
around the province — yet they would’ve spent more, possibly 
one and a half, $2 billion per year to fulfill the commitments 
that they were making, spending above and beyond our means. 
And that’s not something that we want to do. And I encourage 
anybody to check it. As of yesterday, I think their platform 
document was still on the website. So that’s something for 
everybody to inform themselves on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our economy remains one of, if not the strongest in the country, 
partly due to the financial leadership of our government. We 
continue to try and create an environment for investment, 
encouraging private investment and, with it, job creation in the 



April 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1005 

province. And we’ve seen some releases as late as today as to 
those numbers. I think 4,000 private sector jobs and high 
averages of First Nations employment, Mr. Speaker, which is 
something very promising. Our growth this year is expected to 
hit 3.1 per cent, which is again leading the country, and that’s 
something that we’re all proud of and not just us as a 
government, Mr. Speaker. We’re proud of our private partners 
that are doing the hard work in creating those jobs as well. 
 
I’ve been asked by some, like you know, it’s kind of an 
oxymoron, you’re . . . They hear that we have a strong 
economy; yes, the government is cutting money. And they 
somehow have a hard time understanding that, Mr. Speaker. 
Well one thing I can point to, the money coming into the 
province does not always line up with the private sector. Many 
things that we’ve undertaken have been tax incentives, tax cuts, 
and many different measures to help encourage people to invest 
in the province, create jobs. And they’re reaping the benefits, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s real time investment creating real time 
dividends. 
 
What we see on the provincial government side, we have many 
different measures for, say, the potash industry where they can 
write off some of their investment against their capital 
investment, creates jobs and with it creates a lot of investment 
in the province. We’re seeing some of those writedowns on the 
resource revenue rates and their income tax. We’re in the final 
years of that. We’re going to be seeing more and more of that 
investment paying off big time. 
 
We see things like the corporate income tax. It has a two-year 
lag before it’s paid back to the provincial government at tax 
time. So what we’re seeing right now on the corporate income 
tax side is a bit of a lag that happens admittedly. That’s 
something that we can’t really do a whole lot about. 
 
But what we’re seeing now is the results of the slower economy 
that we were seeing a couple years ago. The next couple of 
years we’ll be seeing an increase as well as some of the 
payments that get paid back to the Government of 
Saskatchewan in regards to disaster assistance. PDAP 
[provincial disaster assistance program] historically has a 12-, 
18-month, maybe a 24-month window before it comes back 
from the federal government. And we’re well aware of that, and 
we know that money is coming. 
 
This budget again forecasts a 15 million surplus in the summary 
surplus, Mr. Speaker, but a 95 million in the general statement, 
and over $750 million at the end of this budget year in the 
Growth and Financial Security Fund, which is the savings 
account of the people of the province. 
 
The member opposite again, talking about some of the doubt as 
to whether this is a balanced budget and doubting the 
government’s measures in creating a strong economy and 
keeping a healthy economy. I will take the advice and the 
assessment by people, third party people outside of our 
province. And one thing I would point to, Mr. Speaker, is 
Saskatchewan now has a AAA credit rating, something we have 
never seen, if ever, I think, in the history of this province. And 
that is a guide that I would go by to look at how we are doing, 
how the province is doing in addressing, addressing issues in 
the province and also delivering budgets, Mr. Speaker. 

Again, we have increased spending in some key areas. I’ll 
quickly run through some of those. The members from 
Rosemont, Massey Place, you know, during their budget 
addresses did question our priorities. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
point to some of our priorities: capital investments in highways, 
schools, and hospitals, $788 million. We see increases to Health 
of 4.9 per cent; 11.4 per cent in Education including the new 
funding model for schools; 4.1 per cent in Advanced Education, 
Employment and Immigration; 4.7 per cent in Social Services, 
Mr. Speaker; 4.5 per cent in Highways; 9.5 per cent in 
municipal revenue sharing. That’s 20 per cent of our provincial 
PST, Mr. Speaker, goes right to those municipalities to help 
them with some of the costs of their infrastructure and other 
additional costs, and keeping their taxes low . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Thank you, Minister of Municipal Affairs. 
He’s always very helpful. 
 
On budget surpluses, will continue to go towards debt reduction 
and investment and growth in our growth and financial security 
Act, as is pointed out there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, my time is running short here. The member 
previous did touch on a lot of our investments outside of my 
comments. And I’d just like to say that I will be supporting his 
motion put forward by the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well I’d 
like to start off with a word of thanks. I’d like to thank the 
members opposite for clearing something up for us, and that is 
that the members opposite support their own budget. Thank you 
for clearing that up for us and for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d also like to thank them, I guess, for . . . You know, 
whenever there’s a lag in the sort of self-congratulations or the 
kind of adulation that the members like opposite, they’re 
always quite happy to supply it themselves, Mr. Speaker. So 
again, I see this motion in that vein. So you know, they saw a 
deficit; they addressed that in terms of the self-congratulations 
they feel their actions require. 
 
I guess the one thing I wouldn’t thank them for, Mr. Speaker, is 
the fact that when we see this government throwing itself the 
self-congratulation parade, when we see themselves going off 
to the pat themselves on the back festival, it usually means that 
there’s something bad about to happen to the province’s 
finances, Mr. Speaker. I hope that’s not the case. I hope that’s 
not the case, Mr. Speaker, but I’ve been here long enough to see 
budgets put forward by members opposite that were described 
in . . . Oh, I think one year it was about it wasn’t just the best 
budget in Canada. It wasn’t just the best budget in North 
American. I think the term that was used, it was the best budget 
in the universe, was what was used to describe. 
 
And then of course the bottom fell out on their potash 
projections, Mr. Speaker. So when members opposite get into 
this business of patting themselves on the back, of 
self-congratulation, of puffing their chests out and shining 
themselves around to the expense of the real finances of the 
province and to the work that’s done by the people of the 
province, we on this side of the House get very worried, Mr. 



1006 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2012 

Speaker. We get concerned. Because we’ve seen enough of the 
movies played by the members opposite to know that the pride 
cometh before the fall. And when members opposite get into 
such flights of fancy and rhetorical flights around how great 
things are in the province and what a great job they’re doing, 
we see where that winds up. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, we saw not just a couple of years ago 
from the member, I believe, from Carrot River Valley 
describing the budget, not just as the best in Canada — which is 
sort of an alliance of the hubris involved in this piece of debate 
here today, Mr. Speaker — it wasn’t just the best in Canada. It 
wasn’t just the best in North America. It wasn’t just the best in 
the world, but I think he said that it was the best in the universe. 
And of course the bottom then fell out. 
 
So the fact that they’re already into the self-congratulation 
celebration over there, Mr. Speaker, that they’re probably going 
to have to spend some time at the chiropractor, at the massage 
therapist to help themselves out after all that back patting that’s 
gone on. The patting themselves on the back, you know, we 
wish them well in terms of the medical attention that I’m sure 
they’ll require after this week, Mr. Speaker. But again it’s par 
for the course. And that wouldn’t be such a problem if it didn’t 
usually wind up poorly for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Last year’s budget alone, we saw the way that the budget was 
launched and then the way it wound up. And again the distance 
between the way the budget is presented, and what happens 
actually come the final accounting, is often quite stark, Mr. 
Speaker. So last year you saw the situation where, you know, at 
the front end of the budget, pledging that it’d be balanced and 
this, that, and the other thing, that the rainy day fund would be 
going up, and that they wouldn’t take a dividend from 
SaskPower. It was really interesting, Mr. Speaker, the way all 
those things came together at the end of the budget year where 
they had to actually take a dividend from SaskPower to help 
pay for flooding because they didn’t feel adequate enough with 
the rainy day fund. Like how the heck does that work, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
[11:30] 
 
And again we’ve seen this from this side of the House. And any 
time they get throwing the self-congratulation parade and any 
time they get, you know, veering over into the arrogant side of 
the equation, there’s usually a way that the people of 
Saskatchewan will end up paying the price for that. And last 
year’s budget was proof positive in terms of that pattern when it 
comes to the actions of members opposite as relates to the 
finances of this province. 
 
So we’re very hopeful that this is a balanced budget, but history 
would suggest otherwise, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen other 
budgets come forward in this House. The last three, what 
happened with them at the end of the day? And again it’s not 
just our observations, but the member from Yorkton talked 
about the importance of those external validators. And when it 
comes to the finances of the province, Mr. Speaker, we don’t 
have a legislative budgetary officer, as they do federally with 
the parliamentary budget officer, or they do with different sort 
of mechanisms they have in the United States, but we do have a 
Provincial Auditor. And the auditor has a lot of interesting 

things to say about where they’re at with the finances of this 
province. 
 
And again in 2009-10, what was the actual deficit come the end 
of the day? $173 million. 2010-11, there was a deficit of $145 
million. And 2011-12, we’ll see where the deficit really winds 
up, but we think it’s about $300 million. And again these are 
numbers that are all from the Provincial Auditor. 
 
So it’s one thing to hear the hosanna chorus over there, Mr. 
Speaker, about how well they’re doing and their sort of 
camaraderie they like to build saying — with their mutual 
admiration society — and it’s like, you’ve got the best budget; 
no, you’ve got the best budget. And on it goes into, you know, 
sort of the wild party they like to throw for themselves, Mr. 
Speaker. But the problem is, at the end of the day, is that the 
bills come due. And the spin at the front of the thing doesn’t 
add up to the reality at the back end. And we’ve seen that in 
budget after budget after budget from these members. 
 
And I guess again, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve got this motion 
before us here today — here on a red-letter day in the history of 
irony in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — the 
bringing forward of the Bill to nationalize the Tourism 
Saskatchewan agency. You know, that’s kind of ironic. And 
why are they doing that, Mr. Speaker? Well it’s because they 
want to get control of the advertising budget for that province, 
so again they can better calibrate the spin that goes on. Or you 
know, we’ve seen the actions with the film employment tax 
credit that wasn’t campaigned on, that they went forward with 
and then tried to foist on the people of Saskatchewan the notion 
that the balance of the budget hinged upon that one, relatively 
small expenditure in the context of an $11 billion-plus budget, 
Mr. Speaker. That one’s interesting. 
 
But what also is interesting, Mr. Speaker, is that they didn’t 
campaign on the fact that, yes, grandma and grandpa, to balance 
the budget, we’re going to be coming to you to make you pay 
more for prescription drugs. For those medicines that you need 
on a monthly basis, you’re going to be paying more. They 
didn’t say that, Mr. Speaker. They didn’t come forward and 
say, oh and by the way, we’re going to change how we 
construct the constituencies in this province, and what that does 
to messing around with the electoral system in this province. 
They didn’t say that, Mr. Speaker. And they didn’t say, guess 
what, help is on the way; we’ve got three more politicians 
coming for you down at the legislature. 
 
So when they talk about balance, Mr. Speaker, it’s kind of hard 
to take on this side of the House, because we see how that 
balance actually plays out. It’s not just about the finances. 
There’s a balance you have to strike in terms of leadership. 
There’s a balance you have to strike in terms of humility. 
There’s a balance you have to strike in terms of being square 
with the people of Saskatchewan when you go and ask for their 
support. 
 
And on so many fronts, Mr. Speaker, with the more MLAs and 
the millions that’s going to be involved in that expenditure, Mr. 
Speaker; with the more money that they’re going to be asking 
for seniors to pay for prescription drugs, for children to pay for 
prescription drugs, that was nowhere in those members’ 
election campaign. Again, Mr. Speaker, the record doesn’t 



April 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1007 

square with the rhetoric. 
 
And we heard the members in the campaign talk about, the 
leader from the members opposite talking about, the only day 
better in Saskatchewan was tomorrow in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And again and again, you know, they’re very quick to 
throw themselves the self-congratulation parade, Mr. Speaker. 
But I think they should listen to what they’re saying. I think 
they should listen. They should take a good, hard look at what 
they’re actually doing. 
 
And if the only day better in Saskatchewan than today was 
tomorrow, why didn’t they tell people that tomorrow, well 
grandma and grandpa are going to be paying more for your 
prescription drugs, and tomorrow we’re going to have three 
more politicians in the Legislative Assembly, and tomorrow 
we’re going to take measures that will effectively result in the 
death of the film and television industry in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and tomorrow we’re going to — you know, 
irony of ironies — nationalize the Tourism Saskatchewan 
agency, a successful industry-led organization, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again, in terms of all the balances that need to be struck in 
this, we see some glaring deficits when it comes to this budget, 
not just in terms of what we’re worried around summary 
financial statements and how that will add up at the end of the 
day, Mr. Speaker. We see deficits when it comes to the 
leadership that should be provided. We see deficits when it 
comes to being straightforward with the people of 
Saskatchewan. And the people of Saskatchewan can do better. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 
enter into the debate on this balanced budget. Mr. Speaker, the 
people of Coronation Park and the province wanted to see 
themselves reflected in this budget. They want to know that 
they have been heard and that there’s recognition that they’ve 
been heard. This balanced budget is recognition of those 
opinions being heard. 
 
As part of our government’s election platform, a priority was to 
ensure that the quality of life for people with disabilities 
improves in this province. I’m always cognizant of the 
struggles that people are facing with disabilities, and I am 
extremely hopeful that there would be recognition of disability 
enhancements in this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2012-13 budget makes an investment of $26.4 
million for new or enhanced programming and increased 
program utilization. Not only that, but since 2007 the 
government funding for disabilities program has increased 
$308.8 million; an increase of $17.8 million is provided to 
expand the Saskatchewan assured income for disability 
program, the SAID program. Total program will cost $113 
million, 2012-13, and will expand the number of clients from 
7,000 adults. Mr. Speaker, these enhancements are proof of this 
government’s commitment to people with disabilities. 
 
I had the opportunity to talk to and visit constituents in special 
care homes and assisted living residences. They are residences 

for adults with physical disabilities who are living 
independently. They are complaining . . . They are phoning to 
clarify, not to complain. They’re very excited by this budget, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the residents anxiously looked on 
and awaited the budget in hopes that they would see recognition 
of their monthly struggles to make ends meet. They described 
in great detail their struggles to make ends meet and were truly 
struggling month to month. 
 
I still look back fondly when they received the news of 
enhancements to the SAID program. I continue to be proud to 
be able to provide news that there would be enhancements to 
the program, and they thank us as government for this initiative. 
Mr. Speaker, there were tears of joy in that room, and now their 
lives are just a little bit more hopeful. Some of the specifics of 
this budget for people in residential care say they receive an 
additional $40, increasing to $100 per month over the next four 
years. A single individual who’s living independently will 
receive an increase of $200 a month, expanding to an average 
of $350 a month over the next four years. Couples living 
independently will receive a $230 a month increase, expanding 
to an average of $400 a month over four years. 
 
As further evidence of disability enhancements, Saskatchewan 
Aids to Independent Living, SAIL, will receive an increase of 
$1.5 million: $39.4 million in total to maintain these benefits 
for people with long-term disabilities or illnesses. This program 
provides supports such as orthotics, prosthetics, rehab mobility 
equipment, oxygen, and insulin pumps for children. Mr. 
Speaker, these announcements resonated with my constituents 
and the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the child and youth agenda was launched in the 
’11-12 budget and brought together a number of programs from 
across the government under one umbrella. The intention is to 
find new and innovative ways to approach the key social 
determinants of health and well-being at a very early age. 
Starting with an initial investment of $34 million in ’11-12, it’s 
been further enhanced in this budget with another $6 million. 
Mr. Speaker, some of these initiatives include: $1 million 
enhancement for autism spectrum disorder therapies, $47.6 
million in 2012-13; $600,000 increase for fetal alcohol 
spectrum disorder prevention services, bringing the provincial 
total to $3.6 million; $500,000 to continue 20 literacy camps for 
underprivileged youth; $3 million for a new risk assessment 
tool for child protection workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the introduction of the child and youth agenda has 
greatly improved relationships with not only CBOs, but there’s 
a recent announcement of a 1.6 per cent lift for CBOs 
delivering services and First Nations agencies, and it’s built 
new partnerships to improve services to families and children. 
First Nations agencies are provided $3.9 million annually to 
support case management and service delivery for First Nations 
child welfare authorities. Efforts are being taken to find 
placements for children with extended family and with First 
Nations agencies on reserve so that children can remain in their 
community. This approach has contributed to an increase in the 
number of children placed in extended family both on and off 
reserve. The result is a steady decline in the number of children 
that are coming into care in the ministry. 
 
I’d like to reiterate, I was honoured to be in attendance at the 



1008 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2012 

ribbon cutting ceremony of the FoxValley Counseling Services. 
And FoxValley Counseling provides services to assist 
individuals and families based on need. Programs are tailored 
and therefore more meaningful and personal to the individuals 
they’re serving. These services are in response to needs 
identified by First Nation members, and this partnership will 
truly enhance family systems within Regina and the region. Mr. 
Speaker, there are other initiatives and enhancements to the 
child and youth agenda and these include: $1.15 million for 20 
out-of-home residential care spaces and an infant care centre; 
$41 million increase for intensive family supports; $750,000 
increase for home assessments and treatment foster care 
delivered by CBOs [community-based organizations]; $500,000 
increase for visitation and supervision for children delivered by 
CBOs. 
 
Continuing on the subject of youth, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
talking . . . I’d like to talk about another agency, Street Culture 
Kidz . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Completely close to my 
heart. In particular, the funds that have been provided by the 
Ministry of Social Services to Street Culture Kidz project, these 
funds provided are for the operation of the province’s first 
voluntary emergency youth shelter. This 15-bed coed facility 
provides a first stop for youth without an immediate housing 
option and will provide a safe, respectful environment while 
ensuring basic needs for up to 30 days and providing a 
follow-up plan for these services. It’s indeed unfortunate that 
youth find themselves in unsafe and uncertain circumstances, 
but there is a need for such service and Street Culture will help 
to fill this need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2012-13 budget is about keeping the 
Saskatchewan advantage — balanced budgets, growing 
economy, and government services that are affordable and 
sustainable in the long run. Around the world we are seeing the 
chaos caused by governments that do not live within their 
means. Saskatchewan’s economy and our finances are in much 
better shape. That’s the Saskatchewan advantage. This budget 
is keeping the Saskatchewan advantage by keeping our 
balanced budget, by keeping our spending sustainable, by 
keeping our economy strong and growing, and keeping the 
promises we made in the election campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget goes a long way to ensuring that the 
province’s most vulnerable are further assisted. It’s often said 
that a society is measured by how it treats its most vulnerable. 
With that in mind, our government is continuing to take action 
to better meet the needs of people with intellectual disabilities. 
Starting April 1st of this year we changed the way we fund day 
programs to one based on actual needs of each individual. This 
will also allow us to devote more resources to support people 
that have more complex needs. Implementation will cost 
approximately $6.3 million in 2012-13 which includes $4.6 
million for regular day programs and $1.7 million for day 
programs with clients that have complex needs. Through these 
and other programs, we’re working to ensure that Saskatchewan 
is the best place to live in Canada for people with intellectual 
disabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the enhanced commitment to education in this 
province is indeed applauded. These enhancements including 
the new funding formula and recognition of the importance of 
education is truly welcomed by my constituents. When asked if 

this government believes in education, now the answer is a 
resounding yes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the government’s principles is a strong 
safety net which protects those truly in need of support while 
encouraging individuals to become self-sufficient. I’ve already 
touched on that principle and cited examples that are embedded 
in the budget. 
 
[11:45] 
 
I’d also like to talk about the rental incentive that’s in place and 
encouraging the construction of new multi-unit rental housing 
projects the government is introducing as an incentive to 
encourage private sector investment. The incentive has a 
corporate income tax rebate equal to 10 per cent of the rental 
income generated from newly constructed multi-unit rental 
projects for a period of up to 10 years. This rebate, when 
combined with other initiatives, is expected to encourage the 
construction of 10,000 new rental units in the province, 10,000. 
 
In addition, Sask Housing Corp. will provide $1 million to 
Habitat for Humanity to help with the additional 20 low-income 
families achieve home ownership. I’ve talked about this before, 
Mr. Speaker, but all of these components are . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed for debate. Oral questions 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Sorry. I recognize the Leader of 
the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to arise to speak on 
this matter, and I assume you’ll give me a little extra time since 
you intervened. Mr. Speaker, when I looked at this motion from 
the government, it was a pleasure to actually have a chance to 
talk a little bit about part of my life that not a lot of people 
know about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was practising law in Regina, I would 
spend a lot of time working with bankrupt and insolvent 
companies, but especially with companies that were under 
stress. And, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that you recognized 
when you worked with companies that were under financial 
stress is that they were very optimistic, that they were very 
certain in how they organized their budgets for each year. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, when this budget came forward this year 
with the statement that it had a balance to it, I know that my 
reaction and the reaction of quite a number of chartered 
accountants, certified management accountants, others, and 
probably other lawyers like me, was to look at, how did they 
get to that balance? Because, Mr. Speaker, this reminds me of a 
farm machinery sales business, where they start off the year 
with goals of selling lots of machinery and getting lots of 
revenue so that they can do all of the things that they want to do 
in their business. And they know that they have the regular 
expenses of doing business as well as certain capital costs that 
relate to building the business. And, Mr. Speaker, you can’t 
take those steps of capital expansion unless you’ve got a clear 
statement of accounts that shows that you’re paying for your 
day-to-day expenses — that’s your salaries, your utilities, your 
local taxes, and things like that. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
government here did not want to be in a position where they 
were somehow showing that they were still running a deficit 



April 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1009 

number, even though the province is doing very well. 
 
Now we know from the record over the last three years that at 
the end of the year, the auditor says, in ’09-10 there’s a deficit 
of 173 million; ’10-11 there’s a deficit of 145 million; and as of 
March 31, 2012, we don’t have the final number, but it appears 
that it’ll be in excess of 300 million. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s not dissimilar from our local farm 
machinery business where they have anticipated that they’re 
going to make lots of sales of machinery, but at the end of the 
year, they tally everything up and it’s a negative number. And 
so what does that do? Well that eats away at their ability to do 
some of the expansionary things that they want to do. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, accountants know that businesses can fool 
themselves by setting up budgets that have little tricks in them, 
little ways of moving actual costs farther out so that maybe the 
next generation in that business, if it’s a family business, will 
end up having to pay for it. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what 
we’ve seen in this budget is a situation where they went and 
said, to have a budgetary surplus of $16 million, we need to 
work our way back and get out some of these expenses from 
this year’s budget into next year’s budget. 
 
We know that they’ve done that with the universities, both the 
U of S and the U of R [University of Regina], where traditional 
payments of funds for capital expenditures are not there this 
year. These institutions are being told to borrow the money. 
Well that’s not dissimilar to the, you know, the farm machinery 
owner going and saying, well this year I’m not going to buy the 
new cash register system. I’m going to lease it over a longer 
term because I can’t afford to pay for it anymore. And so what 
we end up with in this budget is a number of those kinds of 
moves. We see it by them pushing debt out into other places 
that basically they try to not show on what they’re doing. 
 
They’ve also made some choices in this budget that are going to 
cost us in the long-term. We know from the auditor’s report that 
the Amicus deal, which the Minister of Health is so pleased 
with, is actually going to cost the taxpayers $20 million more 
than if they had actually funded this in the traditional, 
appropriate way. We know that they’re looking at other 
arrangements like that, that once again defer the costs because 
what they can show in the books for this year and next year is 
just the interest or carrying costs and maybe a small portion of 
the capital. They’ve done the same thing with SaskPower in 
their Northland Power deal up in North Battleford, where we 
still don’t know exactly how much that’s going to cost us as 
citizens of the province, as customers of Sask Power. And we 
know that eventually that information is going to be available, 
and we will then see what the government has done. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s quite curious that they do not appear to 
have learned that that’s exactly how we got into the financial 
trouble before in this province. We took a big hit on our credit 
rating. We took a big hit on our reputation. And it took some 
very, very diligent care as managers of the finances of the 
province to get everything back to a balanced budget. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that the signals that are here in this 
budget around making some changes to accounting policy, 
setting up some new funds for doing certain things, and making 

sure that you spread those expenses out over the long term are 
ones that are going to cause difficulty for the province as we 
move forward. 
 
Now one of the challenges for this government is the fact that 
they increased the expenses of the province or the ongoing 
expenditures of the province by 30, 35 per cent almost 
immediately after they came into government. And that cost 
over, now going on five years, means that their flexibility to do 
a lot of things that they’ve planned to do is limited. As so we 
have a budget here which still is expending lots of money, but it 
also then has to include some of these accounting manoeuvres 
to get them to a balanced line. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are practical people. They 
know that what they can do is to look at how this government 
spends money, how they look at the revenues. They also know 
that we’ve got a record of three deficits that have not been 
acknowledged by the government. And we also know that the 
changes that they seem to make each year to somehow adjust or 
deal with these things are not bypassing common sense 
Saskatchewan people. They know if you spend more money 
than you have coming in, year after year after year, that 
eventually you’re going to have to pay the bills. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what this budget is about. They’ve set 
out a plan which is going to be similar to the last three. It’ll end 
up in deficit. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not good for the province 
of Saskatchewan. More importantly, they have added three 
more MLAs, expenditures that people don’t want at the same 
time as . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Time for debate has elapsed. Okay. I 
recognize the member for Prince Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Mr. Speaker, this year’s budget contains $1.74 
billion in total school operating funding as well as $38.6 
million to begin construction of six new school projects. The 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, and I quote, “welcomed 
the provincial government’s pledge that pre-K to 12 education 
is a priority in this provincial budget.” 
 
Yet, Mr. Speaker, those members voted against these 
investments in our children’s education. To the member from 
Regina Rosemont: why did you vote against making pre-K to 
12 [pre-kindergarten to grade 12] education a priority? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to take this important question about education on this 
topic. What we know is that the funding that’s been put forward 
by this government, and the funding formula is in fact 
inadequate, and what this means is that many classrooms and 
many boards all across Saskatchewan are faced with cuts right 
now. And there is a real anxiety right now, Mr. Speaker, as to 
where those cuts will be. And I know people are looking across 
their own neighbourhood, wondering about what that cut will 
be in their own classroom. 
 
And I know the member who asked the question was from 
Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, and I would advise that member to 



1010 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2012 

go and consult with her own boards on this front, Mr. Speaker, 
because there’s many concerns in Prince Albert itself, 
specifically how this funding formula really doesn’t fit one of 
her local schools — being Carlton, a great big comprehensive 
that is not well served by the new formula put forward. 
 
So we stand opposed to this budget in part because of its 
inadequate education funding, which means cuts in the 
classroom, Mr. Speaker, all at the same time this government 
chooses to spend millions on more politicians. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A 
question for the member from Yorkton. Certainly there’s a lot 
of great tourism activity takes place in east central. Yorkton 
itself knows a lot of this to be true. Part of this budget though 
was the bringing forward of means to turn Tourism 
Saskatchewan, which has been very successful, from an 
industry-led organization into a Crown corporation. Can the 
member from Yorkton tell us, in the preparations for this 
budget, did he consult with a single member from Tourism 
Saskatchewan in this plan that they totally disagree with? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 
member for the question. As has been quite often answered by 
the Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport in this 
Assembly, there was the 2009 consultations that went on that 
told the government the direction that was needed to go. 
 
There was basically two entities in this province that are 
handling tourism. We were asked, are you in or are you out? 
Definitely the government is in. When you look at best 
practices across this fine country, it’s aptly pointed out that the 
governments across this country do handle tourism through 
either a Crown corporation — a Treasury Board Crown — or 
through the ministry. And it was a direction that was pointed 
out we should go. 
 
Much of the information we’ve heard since, post this 
announcement this budget, from very important stakeholders in 
the tourism industry in this province, our biggest tourism draw 
in the province is snowmobiling in the wintertime, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re onside. Fishing, fishing camps, and the fishing groups 
. . . 
 
[12:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This year’s 
balanced budget takes responsible action to ensure that life is 
more affordable for the soon-to-be homeowners and renters. 
The rental housing construction initiative and the Saskatoon 
first-time homebuyers tax credit contained in this balanced 
budget represents responsible measures to address the housing 
challenges in this province. In fact the mayors of both Regina 
and Saskatoon applauded the efforts in no uncertain terms. 
 

To the member from Regina Lakeview: given the near 
unanimous support of our housing measures contained in this 
balanced budget, how could you and your fellow opposition 
members vote against this balanced budget? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this government does things, as it 
relates to the residential issues, piecemeal. This program in and 
of itself has some good features, but there’s no comprehensive 
housing plan for this province. There’s no recognition of 
dealing with the rental issues that are atop of mind for people 
across the province. And, Mr. Speaker, there isn’t a housing 
strategy that sets out where we’re going on this particular issue. 
The suggestion that’s come around changes to The Residential 
Tenancies Act are once again piecemeal. So, Mr. Speaker, let’s 
have something that’s got a comprehensiveness to it and let’s 
make sure that people understand what we’re doing. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we have a very 
important industry in this province — the film industry — 
that’s been attacked and damaged by this government. It’s sent 
investment, jobs, and entrepreneurs packing outside the 
province, Mr. Speaker. It leaves big questions around the sound 
stage in Regina and all the employment for those families all 
across Saskatchewan and the drive it has within the economy. It 
also represents a cultural loss. 
 
None of this, Mr. Speaker, was in the election platform of this 
government or the Throne Speech. None of it was in the 
member from Coronation Park’s election material as he went 
door to door in the fall, Mr. Speaker. And I guess my question 
to the member from Coronation Park as it relates to the 
damaging cut to the film industry, the tax credit, Mr. Speaker: 
does the member from Coronation Park support that cut? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the member 
from Rosemont for the question. Number one, this is in 
reflection of a balanced budget and this is a reflection to 
sustainability. And both of these concepts are absolutely 
embedded in the budget. 
 
Now there was a response, there was a response from this 
government to the film tax credit, and that was an extension. A 
three-month extension was added in. We are supportive of the 
film industry. And we are going to, we are going to sit and sit 
with the film industry and discuss options and the future. And 
so I absolutely am in support of this and I believe that we’ve 
done a very good job. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party 
government just passed a balanced budget for a growing 
economy, which includes better access to health care, provides 
an improved quality of life, and makes life more affordable for 
the people of this province. In fact BMO’s [Bank of Montreal] 



April 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1011 

analysis of our budget concluded with, and I quote, “With 
strong growth, a rare surplus and low debt levels, all remains 
well on the economic and fiscal fronts in Saskatchewan.” 
 
Now with that situation where we have improved quality of life 
or where we have better access to health care, can the member 
of Regina Elphinstone-Centre answer why doesn’t the 
opposition support a budget that provides better access to health 
care and makes life more affordable for the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — I’ll tell you what we don’t support, Mr. 
Speaker. We don’t support shining around during an election 
campaign, talking to the seniors and saying, you know 
everything’s going to be better; the only day better than today 
in Saskatchewan is going to be tomorrow. And then when 
tomorrow arrives, Mr. Speaker, they tell those same seniors that 
you’re going to pay more for prescription drugs. You know, I 
talked about hubris earlier on, Mr. Speaker. I talked about 
arrogance. There’s no better display of that arrogance than what 
we’ve seen just now. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Leader. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the member 
from Rosthern. And the question is this: did that member know 
that the Premier would be coming forward with the proposal to 
add three more MLAs when he was asked to run for the Sask 
Party, or is this a surprise to the members of the caucus as well? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Moe: — I’d like to thank, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank 
the member opposite for the question. I would also like to 
remind the member opposite that at the time of the election, the 
census was not out yet. 
 
I would like to talk a little bit about what I do support in this 
budget, Mr. Speaker. And I do support municipalities and the 
municipal funding in this budget, Mr. Speaker. This is a model 
that was requested . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed for the 75-minute debate. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 601 — The Jimmy’s Law Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 
pleasure to rise today and enter into the debate on Bill 601, 
Jimmy’s law, a Bill that will ensure greater protection for 
late-night retail workers who work by themselves in 
unprotected areas. 
 
And at the end of my remarks I’ll be moving the second reading 
of Bill 601, Jimmy’s law, but first I’d like to give some reasons 

on this Bill because it is very, very important for the workers 
who find themselves in these unfortunate circumstances of 
either working alone or having no protection when they do 
work alone at late-night hours, in early morning hours. 
 
I first introduced this Bill on December 15th last year but, Mr. 
Speaker, this story goes back to June of 2011 and, for many 
others, years before. But this initiative really is dedicated to 
Jimmy Ray Wiebe, who we know, in June of last year, Jimmy 
was shot and killed while working the late-night shift alone at a 
Yorkton Shell station. 
 
Aaron Nagy, a close friend of Jimmy’s, began a campaign to 
promise better safety and security for those working late at 
night. And the NDP, the opposition, is very proud to give 
Aaron our support and to do whatever we can do to see that 
there is greater protection for retail workers who find 
themselves alone at night. And if there is a way that we can 
expand this out to any other worker who’s working alone at 
night, that would be also a very good by-product of this. 
 
And I know, for many who are watching this develop in the 
legislature this spring, people are wondering what about others, 
whether they be home care workers coming home, leaving 
people’s homes late at night because of their duties, or taxi 
drivers or other people who find themselves where their shift 
ends at midnight and they cannot, they do not feel safe waiting 
for a bus or waiting for the ride home. So this Bill is really 
quite important and I am very delighted to be part of this, and I 
hope that we can reach some good understandings of how we 
can move this Bill forward. 
 
Of course the long title of the Bill, An Act to amend The 
Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1993 to ensure greater 
safety for retail workers who work late night hours. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, if this Bill becomes law, it will amend The 
Occupational Health and Safety Act to require that employers 
schedule at least two workers for shifts between 11 p.m. and 6 
a.m. or — and I underline or — provide a secure barrier or 
locked doors between a worker and the public. 
 
I just want to take a minute to review the context in which we 
have brought this forward because it’s very important that we 
understand this is a story about people. This is not some 
obscure, abstract idea. These are real people that we’re talking 
about, real issues. And quite often we fail to recognize that. 
And here is a story that has captured the support, the 
imagination, the goodwill of many who say, we should do 
more, we should do more. And the reason is because many of 
us know people like Jimmy. Many of us know the 
circumstances in which this kind of thing happens, and we 
should be able to do better. We should be able to do better. 
 
So I’d like to read into the record the story of what happened in 
Yorkton last year, and I quote. This is from the Leader-Post, 
December 9th, 2011, “Push for Jimmy’s Law gains traction”: 
 

While the criminal case is over in the shooting death of a 
Yorkton gas station attendant, the fight continues to get 
legislation that his supporters hope will spare other lives 
in similar situations. 
 
“(Jimmy Ray Wiebe) was one of the best friends I ever 



1012 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2012 

had . . .” Aaron Nagy said Thursday, a day after Wiebe’s 
killer was sent for prison for murder. 
 
Nagy is pushing for “Jimmy’s Law,” — ensuring [that] 
there’s always two workers on duty, or failing that, other 
safety precautions, such as protective glass barriers or 
pre-pay systems. He’s left to wonder if such measures, 
which now have the support of the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour, might have saved his longtime 
friend. 
 
Wiebe died after he was shot twice in the head during his 
night shift at a Shell gas station in Yorkton, a community 
of about 17,700. 
 
His killer Kyle Braeden Furness was given a life sentence 
when he appeared this week in Court of Queen’s Bench. 
Furness was originally charged with first-degree murder 
but pleaded guilty last month to the lesser offence of 
second-degree murder, which carries a mandatory 
minimum life sentence with no parole eligibility before 10 
years. In Furness’s case, Justice Janet McMurtry set 
eligibility at 12 years. 

 
And I go on. I’ll end that one. I just want to read the next 
couple of paragraphs. 
 

Wiebe was working alone around 5 a.m. on June 20 when 
Furness entered the store. 
 
The 50-year-old worker was shot in the head as he reached 
for the phone, according to court coverage by Yorkton 
This Week. The Crown prosecutor was unavailable for 
comment Thursday. [But] a second shot was fired by 
Furness, a then 20-year-old morphine addict in need of 
cash, as Wiebe lay on the floor. After slaying Wiebe, 
Furness fled with cash and cigarettes. He was arrested four 
days later, after RCMP went public with a photograph 
taken from the business’s video surveillance. 

 
I go on: 
 

The friendship between Wiebe and Nagy, who had met the 
older man through his father, was cemented about nine 
years ago when they both worked the night shift. Nagy, 
then employed at a Yorkton radio station, often met 
Wiebe, working at the gas station, for breakfast after they 
both finished their shifts. Nagy remembered how his 
jokester buddy, who had a knack for impersonating 
voices, called him one night, and in a pretty convincing 
falsetto voice pretended to be a female fan, who wanted to 
meet Nagy for breakfast. They both had a good laugh 
when “Tina” turned out to be a no-show that morning — 
and Nagy finally realized he’d been pranked by Wiebe. 
 
It was that close friendship which spurred Nagy to start his 
petition. It’s [gathered] . . . about 4,000 signatures on 
paper, and about 920 on the online version . . . In addition, 
[there’s] the Facebook group for Jimmy’s Law [which] 
has about 1,350 supporters. 

 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s in this context that we move forward 
with this Bill because it’s a real story about a real situation that 

happens in Saskatchewan. And unfortunately when this does 
happen, we do have the power, we do have the power to do 
something about it. And I think that it’s critical that we do take 
the opportunity to do something. 
 
And I’ve said this when I’ve stood on my feet and presented 
petitions every day, that we know this happened in Regina. 
There was a string of four robberies at gas stations in January. 
And then there was one in my own riding in March, March 
13th, where someone walked in after midnight with a shotgun 
into a service station on Avenue H. And so this is not an 
isolated situation. This is a real situation. 
 
And we do have the real tools to do something about it. And so 
I really do want to encourage us all to give some thought to this 
because it is an important piece of legislation and a lot of 
people are watching what we do with Jimmy’s law. 
 
[12:15] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said, you know, there has been 
circumstances here in Saskatchewan since that time. And this 
was reported in The StarPhoenix, and I’ve talked about it at 
length about a suspect. And I quote the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, 
March 14th, 2012, “Station robbed at gunpoint”: 
 

A suspect wielding a shotgun robbed a gas station just 
after midnight Tuesday, Saskatoon police say. 
 
The lone man, masked and carrying a gun, demanded 
money and merchandise from a store employee at a gas 
station on the 300 block of Avenue H . . .  
 
The suspect fled on foot and due to the involvement of a 
gun, police conducted a “high risk” canine track. They 
didn’t find the suspect . . . [but they’re asking for 
information].  
 

So this is out there. And of course, as I said earlier, the police 
hunt armed robbers after four incidents here in Regina in 
January. 
 
[12:15] 
 
So it really is something that we need to do, we need to address. 
And, Mr. Speaker, just this morning, we saw the release of the 
Workers’ Compensation Board. And as I was reading it, I was 
caught by the title. It’s about believe in Mission: Zero. And I 
support this mission. I think we should all do whatever we can 
to get it down. The accident rate, the death, mortality rate when 
people are working in their workplace, we need to get that 
down to zero, and we need to do all we can. 
 
And I just read the front page of this. And I’m struck by the 
comments from the Workers’ Compensation Board and the 
folks there who say the key is to be on preventative side, not on 
the reactive side: do whatever we can do to make sure no one is 
hurt at work. And this page is pretty impressive, I have to say. 
It caught my eye. And I’ll just read the quotes into the record. 
Workers’ Compensation Board says: 
 

Even one workplace injury is too many. If someone gets 
hurt, it hurts everybody. My job is to make sure our 



April 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1013 

people go home safe every day. Safety is not optional. I 
believe in Mission: Zero. There’s no such thing as an 
accident. Zero is the only number that makes sense. I take 
nothing for granted. I’m committed to doing everything I 
can. This is a cultural change. 

 
I think this speaks volumes, this speaks volumes about the 
commitment we should have and this government seems to 
have in terms of workplace injuries and deaths that occur at the 
workplace. And we can do something, we can do something. 
 
And Jimmy’s law is urging us to take a look at the tools that we 
have to make a difference for people like Jimmy. We just hope 
that Jimmy’s death is not in vain but in fact that we can learn 
from it and say, this is not an isolated situation. This happens, 
happens too much in our community. What can we do about? 
And I think the Workers’ Compensation Board, when they say 
this is a cultural change, it is. But it starts for everyone 
including those who work late night in retail stores or gas 
stations, who we often don’t see. Many of us are not up at that 
time of night to see what happens in these stores. And I’ll talk a 
little bit about that in a minute. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, where did the idea of Jimmy’s law come 
from, and where did Aaron get the information about what to 
do here? Well Aaron talks about Grant’s law. Grant’s law is a 
law that was passed, a series of regulations I understand, under 
the Workers Compensation Act in BC [British Columbia], 
where it talks about a fellow, a young person, Grant DePatie, 
was killed in 2005 while trying to stop someone from stealing 
$12 worth of gas. He was working alone late at night at a Maple 
Ridge gas station. And clearly, clearly that’s . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask leave to introduce a 
guest. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Moose Jaw Wakamow has 
asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to 
the members of the legislature, I’d like to introduce my better 
half, Marjorie. She has come to the legislature today to watch 
the proceedings. And I’d like all members here to welcome her 
to her legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 601 — The Jimmy’s Law Act 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. So I just 
want to take a minute to review the Bill that is before us right 

now. It’s a relatively straightforward Bill. It has four sections, 
and the fifth of course is coming into assent. 
 
But the idea is that what do we mean by late-night hours? This 
is an amendment to The Occupational Health and Safety Act, 
1993 and how we amend it. Section 3 talks about what does late 
night hours mean. It “means any time between 11:00 p.m. and 
6:00 a.m.” That’s what we’re talking about. And what does 
late-night retail premises mean? It “means a gas station or other 
retail fueling outlet, convenience store or any other retail store 
where good are sold directly to consumers that is open to the 
public during late night hours.” 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll talk a little bit about this because when 
we did our midnight tour we had . . . It’s interesting when you 
get out and about after midnight. And this is the new section 
that we want to add after section 14: 
 

Late night retail premises safety requirements 
14.1(1) If a worker is assigned to work alone or in 
isolation in late night retail premises, then, in addition to 
any other obligations the employer has under this and 
other Acts, regulations or collective agreements the 
employer must also do either or both of the following 
when an individual worker is assigned to work late 
night hours. 

 
So there’s an option there to do one or the other, but the key 
thing is if they’re assigned to work . . . [inaudible] . . . that shift 
between 11 and 6. So here’s the two options: 

 
(a) assign one or more other workers to work with the 
individual worker during any late night hours; 
 
(b) ensure the individual worker is physically separated 
from the public by a locked door or barrier that prevents 
physical contact with or direct access to the individual 
worker. 

 
Now it goes on: 
 

(2) An employer operating a late night retail premises 
must develop and implement a written procedure to ensure 
a worker’s safety in handling money. 

 
So we have a section talking about money: 
 

(3) A worker described in subsection (1) must be trained 
in the written procedure referred to in subsection(2). 

 
So that’s straightforward. And: 
 

(4) An employer of a gas station or retail fueling outlet 
must require that customers prepay for fuel sold at those 
facilities during late night hours.” 

 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you will know that many, many 
late-night retail outlets already have this kind of thing 
happening, and so it’s straightforward. So that’s what the Bill 
is, and I may get an opportunity to talk more specifically about 
that Bill. 
 



1014 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2012 

But I do want to talk a little bit about these midnight tours that 
I’ve been on that I have found very interesting. And I want to 
share with the House some of the results. And I just want to 
share . . . It’s interesting, you never know where the media 
comes from in terms of interest in this story. In fact last Friday 
afternoon when I was in my office, we got a call from 
somebody from Toronto. Somebody from Toronto had been 
following this, and actually it had been printed in the Toronto 
Star paper that . . . And the headline is, “Saskatchewan pair 
lobby for safety on midnight shift.” And it goes on: 
 

A New Democrat MLA and the best friend of a murdered 
gas station clerk are travelling across Saskatchewan to 
meet with workers on the graveyard shift. 

 
And so this is what was happening, and people in Toronto even 
called us which was very, very interesting. 
 
But I want to say that, you know, this is not an isolated 
situation, so we want to get out and about and see first-hand 
what’s happening in our communities, what’s happening after 
midnight, after 11 p.m., and what do the workers have to say? 
 
So I put together the results, and I’d like to share that with the 
House right now. Of course our first stop was in Yorkton on 
February 22nd. We visited six stores. We started after midnight. 
There were three gas stations, a couple of doughnut shops, and 
one convenience store actually, and we also . . . The Shell 
service station also serves as a Mac’s, so essentially that was a 
combination store. So we saw six sites. Four of the six were 
working in pairs. Two were working alone, but the two that 
were working alone had the locked door system or the 
protective glass or the protective barrier system. 
 
So what we saw, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Yorkton was in fact a 
very good situation. We would give all the stores that night a 
passing grade. They were all there, and in fact we had a chance 
to visit with 10 workers that night to talk about what they felt 
about what was really important to give them a sense of 
protection. Now we had to do this in a very sensitive way 
because we are not . . . We told everybody, we are not 
inspectors. We’re not going in there to . . . And we tried not to 
get into passing judgment on businesses because we don’t 
know the full story. This is just a snapshot of what was 
happening in that store after midnight. 
 
But it was very interesting to talk to some of the people. And 
some were very concerned. One right beside the casino, they 
had two people there. And they talked about sometimes it’s 
challenging after the casino closes down, but they’re ready for 
it, and they felt secure because they had two people in place. 
One had . . . Well they, as I said, two had the locked doors, 
protective barriers, and they felt okay about it. But it was 
interesting for me because I think it’s been a long time since 
I’ve been in for example a 7-Eleven store at 1:30 in the 
morning. I actually can’t remember the last time I was in a 
7-Eleven store at 1:30 in the morning. But this is where I’ve 
been finding myself, Aaron and myself, visiting these places to 
find out, so what’s it like to be there? 
 
Now I do have to share one emotional moment. We did get 
back to the store, the gas station where Jimmy was shot. And it 
was interesting that we ended up there about 1:30 in the 

morning, and Aaron had not been back to that gas station. And 
as we know, the gas station has changed hands and a lot more 
work has been done in terms of protection. We know the video 
camera photos resulted in a conviction. But now they’ve done 
much more work in terms of barriers and locked doors. And we 
had a good discussion with the person who was in the Shell 
service station, and he was very well aware that there had been 
a murder just some seven, eight months earlier. And the fellow 
was actually from Toronto, and we had a good discussion about 
how things are done there, how it’s done there. They’ve got that 
locked drop box, and it’s working very well. And so that was 
very, very interesting, and so it was really worthwhile to do 
that. 
 
And we went over to Moose Jaw last week on Wednesday 
night. We visited eight sites, started out with Tim Hortons. It 
seems that we were getting into a habit that we started out at 
Tim Hortons in every city. And there again, this Tim Horton’s 
is open 24 hours and they of course have many people working 
there . . . [inaudible] . . . But there’s several people that work 
there. And for a short period of time on Sunday, there’s only 
one, but for a very short period of time. 
 
So out of the eight stores or eight places we visited, four had 
two people working in it. Actually two closed at midnight. We 
stopped in because we started at 11, and we talked to the 
people, but their shifts were ending at midnight so wouldn’t fall 
into this category. But it was interesting to talk to one of the . . . 
It was a woman at one of the gas stations that was closing at 
midnight, and her concern was not so much what was 
happening inside the store. But when she left the service station 
at midnight and walking to her car or to the bus, was there some 
way that we could get better protection there because she felt 
very vulnerable in those few minutes leaving the gas station to 
go to her car or whatever. 
 
In the end, when we talked about eight stores, we actually 
ended up talking to about 12 workers. And I have to tell you 
that again, two were working alone. And the two that were 
working alone, one had all the precautions in place, and it was 
doing quite well. The other one, I wouldn’t know. I couldn’t 
give you a definitive answer whether they had issues or not. 
The person wasn’t very sharing. And they may have had. And I 
would suspect that actually they were well-prepared, but I can’t 
say yea or nay because, as I said, I can’t really push this. We 
don’t want to be pretending like we’re casing the joint or 
anything too. That’s not what we meant to do. So I can’t ask 
where are all the protective things was. If they’re outgoing, then 
that’s a good thing. But if they’re not, then what can you do? 
 
So one question mark in Moose Jaw, but generally . . . But I do 
have to say this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was very impressed by 
the business sense that many business owners have in terms of 
combining different things together. So if you’re open 
late-night hours . . . And I think of Mac’s, for example, in 
Moose Jaw. I was so impressed. They had somebody working 
the counter but they also had somebody working the Subway, 
you know, Subway sandwich. So you had two people in there 
both doing things that they would be doing over, it was a full 
shift, and they were working very hard. 
 
[12:30] 
 



April 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1015 

And in fact people talked about not only is it better in terms of 
safety against violence, but it’s also better for all those medical 
reasons, whether you have a heart attack or asthma attack, but 
also in terms of productivity. You can get a lot done when you 
have a couple people working together. But if you have one 
person, sometimes that stretch between 1 or 2 in the morning to 
4 or 5 in the morning can be a long time. And if you don’t 
really have work for the employees to do, it can be really a 
problem. 
 
So there again, Moose Jaw we had eight people, eight stores we 
visited. 
 
In Saskatoon, now Saskatoon of course we didn’t get to every 
place because there’s actually quite a few. You know, you can 
imagine. I would suspect there’s probably 20 to 30 stores that 
are open after midnight, and of course the ones I visited were 
the ones . . . We were downtown. There was actually a group of 
five of us who were travelling around together, and we saw 
some really interesting places. 
 
So of the eight situations we saw, six had at least two people 
working. One of them actually had three. And one had, I have 
to say there was a question mark about, because clearly there 
are some questions. And there was another one, the first one we 
went to was one by themselves, but they had all the safety 
precautions. They had the drop box. They had the locked doors. 
They had everything, and so the fellow felt really safe. He was 
quite happy. He had no concerns, and that was good to hear. 
 
And then we visited six places where there was two people 
working. Again the convenience stores that seemed to match up 
food and gas, very good planning because it made the place 
busy, made the place busy. A lot of stuff happening, and so that 
was very good. 
 
I did happen to visit the gas station where the holdup was in 
March. And in fact the guy working there, and some of you 
may have actually seen him on CTV [Canadian Television 
Network Ltd.] — we have a video of him — because he really 
wanted to talk about this. He said, what do you do when 
somebody walks through the front door with a shotgun, you 
know? And he was very open about it. He was very open about 
the circumstance. And now there’s two people working there. 
 
But you should see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the protection they 
have. It’s not good. In terms of the gate that they have to protect 
themselves from anybody coming in, it’s like a cheap garden 
gate. Anybody who can kick anything over, that would be down 
in a second. And it would not stop any bullets at all. I mean that 
would be . . . It’s crazy. And so I have to say, we had some 
serious concerns about that. And as I said, I presented a petition 
earlier this week where he was very happy to sign it. And at 
least the employer brought another person in, but he was 
working by himself that night earlier in March where a fellow 
walked in off 20th Street with a shotgun. And so, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s an issue. 
 
But the other, there was some that I just want to say take full 
marks, that take full marks for being prepared. Fire Creek Gas 
station at the corner of Avenue P and 20th Street is owned by 
One Arrow First Nations — great work, great work. They 
actually had three people working. They use a drop box. They 

have people lining up, people accept that, you know. People are 
buying cigarettes. People working there are very firm about 
how they take safety very seriously. They take it very seriously. 
And so I have to give them full marks. 
 
And the one that I had the question mark about, I have to say I 
have some real question marks about it because, you know, it’s 
in my riding, and I have a sense of how much traffic goes 
through that part of town. And why that gas station is open 
between 1 and 5 in the morning, I have no idea. I have no idea, 
you know, and I really have to say that because it’s out of the 
. . . It’s not on one of the main streets. It’s way back in a corner. 
And why it’s open, I don’t know. And apparently it was held up 
just a couple weeks ago with somebody brandishing a machete. 
Now I didn’t see that in the news, but again, a serious question. 
 
And again the business people have to make their minds up 
about their business case, why they want it open. But as 
Workers’ Comp said so eloquently, we have to have a cultural, 
a cultural change here about workers’ safety. I can tell you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, if I were to predict today where the next 
holdup or injury might be, that gas station would be right up 
there. There’s a lot of issues, and I’ll talk a little bit more about 
some of the issues. 
 
But we went on to Prince Albert, three stores . . . They have 
four stores that are open between midnight and 6. And we only 
stopped at three because the other one was very similar to one 
of the three. We didn’t need to check it because I had to get to 
North Battleford that night still. And everything was good. 
Everything was good. There was one person working alone, but 
it had all the protective barriers. And the other three had 2’s 
working in pairs. So thumbs up to that community. 
 
And I said that in the paper, that clearly they’ve done their 
homework and they value their employees. And you know 
what’s really good to see? The businesses were thriving. They 
were not dying businesses. Clearly there’s a need in Prince 
Albert to have late-night retails, and this was very good. So we 
saw five workers there. 
 
North Battleford, we got to North Battleford about 1:30 in the 
morning as we did the swing. I don’t usually do that. Usually 
when we’re out campaigning, we do this during the day, but 
this time we did it at night. We got into North Battleford about 
1:30 in the morning. There were only two retail outlets that 
were open. One had a pair and one didn’t. And again I have 
some question marks about that, and he felt . . . he asked some 
very good questions, the worker. He doesn’t get a lunch break. 
He doesn’t get a coffee break. The bathroom’s open. There’s no 
locked doors. But I have to tell you, the business was very brisk 
there. When I was there, just for about 20 minutes, he probably 
sold $100 worth of gas. Five or six people walked in, bought 
some coffee or stuff to take home. So it’s not a slow store. So I 
don’t know. And I also have to say that if you go into that 
bathroom, they could probably use another person working 
there. And I wouldn’t want to see that bathroom come 5 or 6 in 
the morning. 
 
So I think, well, another person working and they . . . You 
know, sort of the opposite of what was happening in Saskatoon 
where you had one person, no business here; one person, lots of 
business, lots of business. So I have some question marks about 



1016 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2012 

that. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I had found is we had visited 25 
stores, so I think that gives us a good indication, in five 
different communities. Seventeen of them had two people 
working. Eight were alone but they were okay, you know. And 
three, I had some question marks. And I can’t really say 
convincingly because there might be other information I’m 
missing. But I can tell you that I felt pretty good about 22 of the 
situations where I walked in. I felt comfortable as a customer. 
The service rep was very good with us. You know, you could 
talk with them. They weren’t nervous. They weren’t, you know, 
what are you going to do to me, type of thing. It was very, very 
good. 
 
So in the end, Aaron and I had talked with 45 workers so far 
and these are the things, by far, most businesses are doing the 
right thing. So I think by adapting Bill 601 we’re not hurting 
anybody. We’re bringing some people who should be brought 
along, and there’s always those outliers who should be brought 
along, but it’s by far not going to be a huge deal. This is not 
going to revolutionize the late-night retail in Saskatchewan. 
Late-night retail Saskatchewan is way out there already. We’re 
in fact playing catch-up to them. But we don’t want to slide 
back. We do not want to slide back. 
 
So we have a few more places to go. We have not checked out 
Regina, Estevan or Weyburn or Swift Current. And of course 
there may be smaller stations. For example, I don’t know 
what’s happening in Meadow Lake or Glaslyn. But I don’t 
think I’m going to be driving up to Meadow Lake for 2 o’clock 
in the morning and driving home. But I just want to say that 
we’ve learned a lot, and I think as MLAs we don’t get out an 
awful lot to actually see what happens during the night. And it 
was a real eye-opener for me and I’m really glad that I did it. 
It’s a very important thing that we do get out. And when there 
are issues like this, it was really an eye-opener for me. You 
know, it’s funny just talking to some of the clerks. They have 
people who they expect to see about two or three in the 
morning for a cup of coffee or to come in and buy their lottery 
ticket. It’s just, that’s their lifestyle. They’re night owls and this 
is what they do. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what I want to do is just take a moment, and I 
have said that in Saskatchewan this is not an isolated situation, 
and clearly across Canada this has been a topic of debate about 
what do you do about this issue. What do you do? I talked a 
while ago about the situation in BC where they created Grant’s 
law. And there is now some debate about that they may in fact 
weaken it. We’re concerned about what signal that means, 
especially when we see the good work that’s done by workers’ 
comp here on their Mission: Zero, and we should be as strong 
as we can be in making sure we bring people along with us. 
 
But I want to just read into the record some of the issues from 
across Canada. And here’s one from the Calgary Herald from 
Saturday, February 19th, 2000. And the headline is, “The 
coward must have attacked her from behind: Dad mourns as 
manhunt is launched.” 
 

A 25-year-old Calgary woman beaten to death during a 
late-night robbery at a southeast Subway restaurant had 
dreamed of protecting the city in which she was killed. 

And I quote: 
 

“She was kind, loving, giving and forgiving,” Bob 
McDonald said Friday after learning of the savage murder 
of his daughter Tara Ann McDonald. “(Being a police 
officer) was one of her dreams, but circumstances 
prevented her from doing so.” 

 
So it’s just a tragic situation in that circumstance. 
 
And here’s one from Antigonish, Nova Scotia, Friday, March 
18th, 2001, “The stabbing death of young store clerk here this 
week has people once again questioning the wisdom of having 
staff work alone overnight.” And the mayor is quoted as saying: 
 

“People should not have their stores open from midnight 
until 6 a.m.” . . . he believes that the community in 
northern Nova Scotia should bring in a bylaw to force 
store owners to close their stores during the late [night] 
hour, or have two people on staff. 

 
And what was . . . This again, tragic. The fellow’s name was 
Yancy Meyer, 19 years old, was working on his fifth shift at 
Needs convenience store on James Street when someone 
entered the store and tried to get money out of the cash register. 
I quote: 
 

The young man tried to defend himself but the robber, 
who wore a disguise, stabbed him in the abdomen and 
chest and then fled. 
 
RCMP spokesman, Sgt. Wayne Noonan confirmed Meyer 
managed to stagger to his own nearby apartment and his 
roommate called for assistance. 
 
He died late Tuesday night in a Halifax hospital. 

 
So again, somebody’s son. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here is one from the Vancouver Sun, Saturday, 
March 12th, 2005. I quote, “It’s just after 2 a.m. and Sebit Dada 
is not even halfway through his regular shift at a Whalley gas 
station and convenience store.” And it goes on to talk about the 
death that happened at that gas station and that’s the experience 
that this person had in terms of working there. And it’s just not 
easy doing that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, here’s one from The Telegram, St. John’s, 
January 26th, 2006. Again and I quote, “Teen cashier slain on 
first night shift.” And I quote: 
 

A teenage girl found murdered in a back room of a gas 
station early Wednesday was working her first solo 
overnight shift. 
 
This 17-year-old’s death has renewed concerns about the 
safety of employees working late- and all-night shifts, 
particularly young people. 

 
And so here we go. And then they talk about: 
 

Last fall an Ottawa teen was found murdered after she 
disappeared on her way home from a late night shift at a 



April 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1017 

Wendy’s restaurant. 
 
The body of Jennifer Teague, 18, was found along a 
hiking trail 11 days after she went missing. 

 
So this is something else, again another example. So, Mr. 
Speaker, the examples are just really something else here. 
 
Here we have one talking about the murder of Grant DePatie 
and what happened to him. Again and the issue of a . . . Here’s 
one from, actually the incident, it’s from the Montreal Gazette: 
 

Teenage clerk killed working late-night shift: Manitoba 
death [because it’s something that happened in Montreal, I 
understand] Manitoba death is echo of Quebec case. 
Several provinces . . . grappled with how to ensure safety 
of employees working alone. 

 
And here this is one that I believe that happened in Winnipeg, 
and I quote: 
 

A 19-year-old convenience store clerk was shot and killed 
in a struggle with an armed gunman late Monday. 
 
[And] the incident marks the second time in a month that a 
teenage late-night worker has died on the job. 
 
Winnipeg Police say the incident occurred just after 10 
p.m. at a Main St. food store. 

 
And so this and the one that they were referring to, the one in 
Montreal, was when, and I quote, “Last month 17-year-old 
Brigitte Serre was stabbed to death at a suburban Montreal gas 
station while she was working her first overnight shift alone.” 
And a former worker at the gas station was apparently the one 
charged with it. 
 
[12:45] 
 
But again these just go on. And yet this is not an isolated 
situation. We’ve had two, well, four robberies in Regina in 
January. And then the one that I know of for sure in Saskatoon, 
and we haven’t talked about the machete incident yet. 
 
And so this is really . . . And this one here is a tragic one that 
happened. From The Daily Gleaner, and it talks about a gas 
station in Halifax, and this is September 1st, 2007: “On Aug. 
21, 44-year-old Delores Reynolds had her throat slashed from 
ear to ear and was raped during a robbery while working the 
graveyard shift at a Halifax gas station.” And so this is really 
. . . you know, the list goes on and on. 
 
And here we have the one about Hanley again. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, these are significant issues and significant people to 
their families. And we should be learning from what happens 
here because this kind of thing should not happen, should not 
happen. And if we’re taking to heart what Workers’ 
Compensation is saying about Mission: Zero, then I think that 
we should learn from this. We should learn from this. And I 
have some real, real concerns that we need to act as quickly as 
we can. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been reading from newspapers, but I 

want to take a minute to talk about some of the research that’s 
been going on in this area. And probably what we’re really 
talking about, in many ways, is what they call CPTED, another 
acronym, but what it is is the crime prevention through 
environmental design. And I read this with a lot of interest 
because, you know, there is no system that’s completely 
foolproof. There’s always issues with whatever solution you 
come up with. But it’s, I think, our responsibility to do the very 
best that we can, the very best we can, knowing what’s 
happening out in the world — i.e., these press stories that I have 
raised — but also the research that a lot of people have put into 
this. 
 
So I want to read some sections of this for the House because I 
think that it really does speak volumes about the kind of work 
that has been done. And you think about what we’re talking 
about here in Saskatchewan and especially the challenges. We 
see this economic boom, and we know people generally are 
doing better. But there’s people who are feeling disconnected 
and for whatever reasons. The situation in Yorkton where I just 
read into the record that the fellow was dealing with an 
addiction, serious issues here. So I think we can learn a lot from 
our research. 
 
So I want to read into the record some, I think some key points 
from the American Journal of Preventive Medicine, and this is 
from the year 2000. And I would hope, and maybe, you know, 
if I had the staff of Minister of Labour, maybe I could get some 
more current research. But I think this stuff is very relevant, and 
so I’ll read it. And the title of the article is “Effectiveness of 
Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design in Reducing 
Robberies.”And in the introduction he says: 
 

In the last several years, much has been learned about the 
incidence, risk factors, and industries and occupations at 
risk for workplace violence. Workplace violence accounts 
for approximately 20% of workplace deaths and ranks 
second after transportation as the leading cause of 
workplace death each year. 
 

Now I’m not sure if that applies specifically to Canada, but this 
is an American study. 
 

The annual number of nonfatal assaults in the workplace 
has been estimated by the National Crime Victimization 
Survey to be as high as 2 million workers. The highest 
rates of workplace homicide are in the industries of 
transportation, retail, services, and security, and in the 
workplaces of taxicabs, liquor stores, gas stations, 
protective agencies, and restaurants/bars. Industries at 
high risk of nonfatal events include health care, social 
service, law enforcement, and education. 

 
It’s interesting that law enforcement has a high risk of nonfatal 
events. But you know, and actually I just want to flip back to 
when I was doing my midnight work. We didn’t do the pizza 
joints. We didn’t do the taxicab people because how far do you 
extend this out, and we wanted to focus solely on the retail . . . 
[inaudible]. 
 
But to continue on: 
 

Approximately 80% of workplace homicides and as many 



1018 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2012 

as 60% of nonfatal assaults occur in the course of a 
robbery or other criminal act. These events are 
concentrated in the service and retail industries, and 
research addressing these events has been primarily 
focused on convenience stores. Prevention efforts began in 
the 1970s in response to a rising number of robberies. 
Although the primary goal of these programs was to 
reduce the risk of robbery, they also included approaches 
that focused on preventing injury to workers, such as 
training employees in how to respond . . . [to] a robbery. 

 
So this is, you know, it’s interesting how we see that kind of 
trend happening in Saskatchewan. But I need to say though, as 
I’ve been saying every day or many days, we’ve seen a 
reduction in robberies in Saskatchewan actually because many 
of the places are already doing this kind of thing through 
environmental design and having two people. They’re looking 
at this. So business is ahead of us on this. 
 

A basic tenet for robbery prevention programs is Jeffrey’s 
Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design . . . 
[and] recognizes that much of the risk for robbery can be 
modified through controlling the business environment. 

 
And it goes on and talks about that. So there’s a whole host of 
different things that you can do to ensure that your workplace is 
in fact safe. 
 
And it goes through . . . And it’s quite a thorough, very 
academic report. I won’t read it all. I just want to talk about 
some of the findings that they did, and it may be of interest to 
people in the House and people reading this. But they did talk 
about . . . Now a lot of this was based on Florida. And in 1988, 
they passed a two-clerk ordinance. It was adopted December 
1989. And it talks about how they cut the number of robberies 
by 60 per cent and in fact, in one year there were no robberies, 
if I read this right. 
 
And in Citrus County, the local ordinance included the 
two-clerk provision and the rate went down by 82 per cent. In 
Ohio, a city convenience store ordinances provision for 
employee training, cash handling, visibility, lighting, further 
includes two-clerk requirements. The effectiveness results were 
a decrease of 74 per cent. So clearly there is some impact here, 
and so I found this very interesting. And overall, one thing you 
must do, if you do only one thing and you have the two-clerk, 
you can see a reduction of some 65 per cent. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, clearly I think we should be looking at this 
crime prevention through environmental design. I think there is 
actually a lot there to look at, and I think that’s a very important 
piece that we need to have. 
 
Now I know, and the minister has raised, what happens if you 
have two people; you can still have murders happening. And 
the minister has talked about the circumstance in Kyle. And I 
do want to address that just briefly because I think the 
circumstance in Kyle was tragic. And in fact that case, when the 
Esso was held up, it was during the afternoon and two women 
were killed. And the town was just reeling from that. And I 
probably would think that many members here know the 
situation even better than I do. But that happened in May of 
1997, and two middle-aged women were killed. And of course 

it just left the town just reeling because of what had happened 
here. 
 
And what happened, even more so, was the fact that one of the 
suspects had the murder charges dropped. He wasn’t aware, 
understand what was going on. And the town of Kyle really felt 
in many ways very confused about how justice was served. And 
in fact I understand there was a significant petition raised about 
that, asking that the government take another look at how do we 
best serve justice in this kind of circumstance. And of course 
when you read the more recent newspapers, articles about how 
the fallout in Kyle, it just speaks volumes to the type of, what 
impact this kind of thing has on a town. So I think that this is a 
huge, huge issue, and we need to address it. 
 
I just want to take a minute and say also that I did meet the 
family, Jimmy Ray Wiebe’s family, in Yorkton. They were the 
first to sign the new legislative petition, and we look forward to 
presenting that at a very special time. I met Jimmy’s mom. 
She’s a great woman. And she and Jimmy’s sister were both 
there, and his niece. And they felt very committed that Jimmy’s 
tragic death would not be in vain and that this government 
would look to or this legislature would look to doing the very 
best, the very most they could do to make sure that nobody, 
nobody would be in that circumstance again where they had so 
little protection, so little protection and being in such a 
vulnerable circumstance. 
 
We don’t know when this’ll happen again, and we don’t want 
to have it happen again. And if we think about the workplace, 
Workers’ Compensation, Mission: Zero, I don’t think we have 
to see that happen again. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to just say to the family that 
we’re working as hard as we can to make sure it’s a reality that 
there are new rules, new laws, whatever it takes to make sure 
late-night retail workers are protected when they work that 
graveyard shift, that late shift from 11 to 6 in the morning, that 
we really take to heart what Workers’ Compensation Board 
says about their Mission: Zero. And I believe in Mission: Zero. 
I know people on this side believe in Mission: Zero, and I 
believe many of the folks over there do as well. 
 
I know this Legislative Assembly has a history of working in a 
bipartisan manner. We’ve done it on both sides. In fact, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, you and I have worked on a bipartisan issue 
around reservists legislation. And I was very proud of the fact 
that we could work together on that. We know that happened 
with the service animals, and I worked with the Minister of 
Agriculture with on. I’m very proud to be part of that, be part of 
that. Because we want to say the intent, and so I think this will 
be a very, very good opportunity for us to show yet again. 
 
I was very happy, around the respectful languages piece, to see 
that we could make a difference together as a legislature. I think 
that was very good. And as well, we’ve done it with firefighters 
when we know the kind of toxins they deal with, and the 
member from Fairview brought together a private member’s 
Bill a couple of years ago. The Minister of Labour did that and 
took that under his wing, and we were very, very happy to see 
that go. Because what’s really important, what I’ve said in the 
media, it’s not about getting the Bill passed; it’s about getting 
the intent passed. It’s the intent that’s really important, that 



April 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1019 

retail workers have greater protection when they go to work, 
not because they’re coming home at the end of the night; 
they’re coming home in the morning and people know that 
they’ll be coming home. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that this is the right thing 
to do. And when I’ve talked to the 45 workers and to the family 
and many others, people are looking to us for real leadership in 
this area, real leadership. And I think we can do the right thing. 
It’s an issue right across the world. We’ve talked, I’ve talked 
about situations in the United States, situations across Canada, 
situations here in Saskatchewan. And we can do the right thing. 
And so I would urge us to do all we can to make sure Bill 601 
is passed. And I would urge that the minister do all that he can 
to make sure the Bill is passed or that the intent is passed, the 
intent. Because we don’t want to see anyone get hurt. We don’t 
want to see anyone die at work. We want to do all that we can 
to make sure that safety is not an option, but it’s a real thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this is a very important issue, and in a few 
seconds I’ll be wrapping . . . And so I just want to say that, let’s 
do the right thing. Let’s make sure that we all put Mission: Zero 
into reality for everyone, including late-night retail workers. So, 
Mr. Speaker, at this time now, I now move Bill 601, Jimmy’s 
law be read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved second reading of Bill No. 601, The Jimmy’s Law 
Act. 
 
Members, we have now reached the normal time of 
adjournment, but before this House adjourns I would simply 
wish members a restful and happy Easter and the week that we 
have off, and that we all return rested and refreshed to do the 
good work of the people of this province. 
 
So members, this House stands adjourned till Monday, April 
16th at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 
 
  



1020 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2012 

CORRIGENDUM 

 
On page 652 of Hansard, No. 17B Monday, March 19, 2012, in 
the right column, first paragraph spoken by Mr. McCall, the 
paragraph should read: 
 
Moving further on in the page, Mr. Speaker, page 370, “the 
Ministry should undertake more complete analysis of 
non-compliance and its causes” and “the ministry should 
require more consistent use of Ministry policies and better 
follow up of non-compliant workplaces.” 
 
The online transcript for March 19, 2012, has been corrected. 
 
We apologize for this error. 
 
 
 



 

 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .................................................................................................................................................................................... 991, 998 
  Nilson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 991, 998 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1013 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 991 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 991 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 991 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 A Time of Hope and Renewal 
  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 992 
 Support for Habitat for Humanity 
  Makowsky.................................................................................................................................................................................. 992 
 Sexual Assault Awareness Week 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 992 
 Team Wins Provincial Championship  
  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 993 
 Optimism for Provincial Economy 
  Doherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 993 
 Prince Albert Resident Celebrates 90th Birthday 
  Jurgens ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 993 
 Easter Celebrations 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 993 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Electoral Representation 
  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 994 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 994 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 995 
 Funding for the University of Saskatchewan 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 995 
  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................... 995 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 996 
 Tourism Saskatchewan 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 996 
  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 996 
 Property Taxes 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 997 
  Hickie ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 997 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 998 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 37 — The Tourism Saskatchewan Act 
  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 999 
 Bill No. 38 — The Active Families Benefit Amendment Act, 2012 
  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 999 
 Bill No. 39 — The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Act 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 999 
 Bill No. 40 — The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Consequential Amendment Act, 2012 

 Loi de 2012 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Financial and Consumer Affairs  

 Authority of Saskatchewan Act 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 999 
 Bill No. 41 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Affairs — Municipal Taxation) Amendment Act, 2012 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1000 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1000 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Saskatchewan Provincial Budget 
  Moe ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1000, 1011 
  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 1002, 1009 
  Ottenbreit ...................................................................................................................................................................... 1004, 1010 
  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1005, 1010 
  Docherty ........................................................................................................................................................................ 1007, 1010 



 

  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1008, 1010 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1009 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1010 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1010 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 601 — The Jimmy’s Law Act 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1011 
CORRIGENDUM .......................................................................................................................................................................... 1020 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 
 

 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Crop Insurance Corporation 

 
Hon. Bill Boyd 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. June Draude 

Minister of Social Services 
Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Enterprise 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 
Hon. Darryl Hickie 

Minister of Municipal Affairs 
 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

 
Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 

Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 
Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 
Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 
 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 
Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 
 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 
Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


