




















































Hansard: March 14, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 15A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 14, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 539 

 March 14, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you, I’d like to introduce a group of 

individuals who are guests in a couple of our galleries today. 

But first, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to preface this introduction by 

officially proclaiming March 9th until March 25th Les 

Rendez-vous de la Francophonie 2012 in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to all the members of 

the Legislative Assembly a group of French immersion students 

from École St. Andrew and from Campbell Collegiate. I think 

the St. Andrew group are over here and the Campbell 

Collegiate group are up in your gallery. And we also have a 

special representative from the francophone community who is 

with us today as part of these celebrations. Mr. Paul Heppelle is 

the president of the Assemblée communautaire fransaskoise, 

known as the ACF, an organization which has just recently 

celebrated its 100th anniversary, and has continued to build and 

strengthen the francophone community here in the great 

province of Saskatchewan. Would our honoured guests please 

stand and be recognized. 

 

We welcome all of our guests to their Legislative Assembly this 

afternoon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Monsieur le Président [Translation: Mr. 

Speaker], I want to join with the Provincial Secretary in 

welcoming the guests from L’Assemblée communautaire 

fransaskoise to their Assembly. Certainly in this, the 100th 

anniversary of the ACF [l’Assemblée communautaire 

fransaskoise], the proclamation of the Year of the Fransaskois, 

it brings an extra mood of excitement to Rendez-vous, which is 

always a great time. 

 

So I want to say to Mr. Heppelle, Monsieur Simard, and 

everyone here with the ACF, the French immersion students as 

well, bienvenue à votre Assemblée legislative, et vive les 

Fransaskois et vive la francophonie. Merci, Monsieur le 

Président. [Translation: welcome to your Legislative Assembly, 

and long live the Fransaskois and long live the francophonie. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all the members of the Assembly, it gives me 

great pleasure to introduce 36 grade 8 students from the Regina 

Christian School in the heart of Regina Douglas Park. It’s 

important for me to note that they . . . to point out to everyone 

that Regina Christian School is in my old alma mater, Campion 

College high school. And I was there visiting the other day, and 

our crest prominent in the hall is still very prominent. They are 

accompanied by their grade 8 teachers, Mr. Geoff Glasspell and 

Ms. Karen Wiens. If we might all welcome them to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Aussi, aussi, Monsieur le Président, while I have the floor, je 

vous présente 48 students, quarante-huit étudiants de l’École St. 

Andrew’s elementary school, qui sont ici pour la célébration de 

la semaine de la francophonie. 

 

[Translation: Also, Mr. Speaker, while I have the floor, I 

present to you 48 students from L’École St. Andrew’s 

elementary school, who are here for the celebration of the week 

of the francophonie.] 

 

If I may ask, I’d like to point out another significant event and 

initiative that Tracy Parrott and Ms. Cruikshank are undertaking 

with their students, and that is their hall of heroes. You know 

the Highway of Heroes that we celebrate in Saskatchewan that 

recognizes the contributions of fallen soldiers and veterans who 

have participated in many conflicts. The hall of heroes at St. 

Andrew School has done a great deal of work to bring to reality 

the great contributions of our veterans. And these grade 4 and 5 

students are learning this first-hand, and we thank you for that 

initiative. 

 

Monsieur le Président, if we might welcome all of our students 

to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — At this time I would like to introduce Ms. 

Colette Langlois who is with us today in the Speaker’s gallery. 

If Ms. Langlois could please rise? There she is. 

 

Ms. Langlois is the director of research, library, and 

information services at the Legislative Assembly in the 

Northwest Territories. Ms. Langlois is here to learn about the 

organization of our Hansard branch and the production methods 

utilized to put together our daily verbatim reports. With Ms. 

Langlois is Lenni Frohman, director for parliamentary 

publications of our own Legislative Assembly Service. Please 

join with me in welcoming Ms. Langlois to Saskatchewan. 

 

At this time, I would like to remind our guests not to participate 

in events on the floor of the Assembly, which includes 

applause. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for protection for late-night 

retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. We know that in the 

early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray Wiebe was 

shot two times and died from his injuries. He was working at a 

gas station in Yorkton alone and unprotected from intruders. 

 

And we know that armed robberies, such as the one that took 

place in Regina on January 23rd, 24th of this year, show that 

Jimmy’s law is needed to give workers added protection in his 



540 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2012 

workplace. And just this morning, Mr. Speaker, I read of 

another headline, “Station robbed at gunpoint,” in my own 

riding on Avenue H last night just after midnight. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

the city of Saskatoon and Moose Jaw. I do so present. Thank 

you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition from Saskatchewan people calling for the 

Sask Party government to support the Saskatchewan seniors’ 

bill of rights. The petition notes: 

 

That many Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed incomes 

and are victims of physical, emotional, and financial 

abuse; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to social 

and economic security and a right to live free from 

poverty; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights which will 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current 

regulations being enforced are creating challenges that are a 

concern to our traditional trappers. 

 

The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued; and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation and 

regulations with respect to trapping regulations and 

firearm use in consultation with the traditional resource 

users. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many good trappers of northern Saskatchewan. I 

so present. 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 

 

Les Rendez-vous de la Francophonie Week 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to congratulate our Fransaskois citizens on having 

March 9th to 25th designated as Les Rendez-vous de la 

Francophonie Week in the province of Saskatchewan. During 

this time of recognition, Saskatchewan’s 17,000 francophones 

and 35,000 francophiles will join 9.5 million of their 

counterparts nationwide in a showcase of the vitality of 

francophone culture and heritage. For more than 100 years we 

have benefited from the presence of French culture and 

language in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, francophone organizations provide employment, 

immigration, and community development programs within the 

province, as well as immigration and interprovincial migration 

services. This year one of those organizations, L’Assemblée 

communautaire fransaskoise, celebrated their 100th anniversary 

as acting as spokesperson for the Fransaskois community. 

Greater interaction leads to greater understanding. All 

Saskatchewan residents are invited to attend the numerous 

activities taking place across the province during this time of 

celebration. 

 

Festivities are held in March throughout Canada to promote 

French language and francophone culture and coincide with the 

International Day of the Francophonie on March the 20th. 

 

I would encourage everyone, no matter what their heritage, to 

take part in this cultural celebration. I’m pleased to be able to 

rise today to highlight the importance of the francophone 

community in our great province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Luther Invitational Basketball Tournament 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, today I am pleased to 

recognize the 60th anniversary of the Luther Invitational 

Basketball Tournament. This event is one of the longest 

running tournaments in Western Canada and always provides 

excitement and entertainment for those attending. 

 

This year was no different. In the final game, Regina’s own 

Riffel Royals narrowly defeated the Kelvin Clippers with a 

67-65 win. The game went back and forth and both teams gave 

valiant efforts, but in the end, it was Riffel who secured their 

first win at the LIT [Luther Invitational Tournament]. 

 

Drew Hunter had coached the Luther Lions for many seasons. 

This year, he passed the torch on to his brothers Adam and Joel. 

With their work, combined with that of event organizer Dave 

Hall, one-third of the student body, faculty, alumni, parents, 

volunteers, fans, and friends, the event was a tremendous 

success. Sixty years is a long time, Mr. Speaker, and I believe 

the lasting success of this tournament reflects the leadership of 

students, staff, and alumni, and the sportsmanship displayed by 

players, coaches, and fans. May these facets continue for many 



March 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 541 

years to come. 

 

Please join me in thanking all those involved to help make the 

60th LIT so outstanding. It is an exceptionally proud sporting 

tradition in our province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 

 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities 

Convention 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

today to speak about the 107th annual Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities convention on in Regina 

this week. And I would like to welcome all convention 

delegates to the Queen City. 

 

Our government understands the great economic, cultural, and 

social contributions the rural areas have made to Saskatchewan. 

Our government is committed to rural success. Our government 

has invested a record $2.2 billion in our first four years to repair 

our highways and improve nearly 6000 kilometres of road. 

We’ve created the first ever rolling five-year capital plan to 

address the provincial infrastructure deficit, and increased 

revenue sharing to rural municipalities by 86 per cent. This 

funding is unconditional, based on economic growth, and 

allows municipalities to determine local priorities and fund 

projects accordingly. 

 

This morning, 1.8 million was announced for animal control 

under the going forward agreement as well as 210,000 for the 

grain bag recycling pilot program. 

 

Rural Saskatchewan is going to continue to be a great driver of 

our economy. Industry and agriculture require world-class 

infrastructure. Business and government require predictable and 

stable sources of revenue. Our government is committed to 

continuing to provide these necessities to our rural 

municipalities. 

 

I would ask all members to join me in welcoming our SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 

representatives to Regina and thank them for the great work 

they do. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Building a Better Future 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this spring, February 

22nd, I attended the annual youth conference, Building a Better 

Future, sponsored by Lac La Ronge Indian Band health services 

and Senator Myles Venne School youth council. 

 

At that gathering, Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity to address 

the youth that were in attendance. I spoke about the importance 

of staying in school, the impact of drug and alcohol abuse in 

our communities, and I also praised them for their participation 

in the gathering. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the conference offered a mixture of information: 

motivational speakers, workshops, fun events, and 

entertainment, and of course, a celebration of Aboriginal 

culture. The workshop included such topics as suicide 

prevention — a very serious issue in our northern communities 

— leadership development, healthy relationships, FASD [fetal 

alcohol spectrum disorder], and addictions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

Lac La Ronge Indian Band health services group, in particular 

the prevention and recovery unit, in sponsoring this worthwhile 

activity for our First Nations youth. Thank you. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Farm Family of the Year Award 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

proud to recognize the Ross family of the Estevan area. The 

Ross L-7 Ranch was awarded the 47th annual Farm Family of 

the Year Award, an event that both the Minister of Agriculture 

and I attended. 

 

Lester Ross and his brothers moved to the Estevan area in 1906. 

The hearts of Lester’s son and daughter-in-law, Cyril and 

Helen, were always in the livestock business. They crossbred 

their stock with imported cattle, had an artificial insemination 

business, and raised and trained quarter horses. Cyril won his 

team penning event at Agribition in 2008 at the age of 86, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Brian Ross currently heads the Ross L-7 Ranch. Brian married 

Rosalie Viken in 1970. He is an entrepreneur who attended the 

North Dakota State University and worked for the Department 

of Agriculture. The Rosses took over an artificial insemination 

project and raised cattle. 

 

Brian has been president of the Saskatchewan Stock Growers 

Association and a founding director of the Saskatchewan 

Cattlemen’s Association. Brian and Rosalie have three sons, 

Chad, Michael, and Jeremy. Chad and his wife, Crystal, own a 

cow herd and feedlot while Michael and his wife, Zoe, and 

Jeremy and his wife, Carol, are all veterinarians. The ranch is 

still busy. The Ross grandchildren are involved in cattle and 

horse activities and a new generation of ranchers are busy 

learning the ropes. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 

congratulating the Ross family on winning the Farm Family of 

the Year Award. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Prince Albert Council of Women’s Hall of Fame 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. March 8th, 2012 

marks the 47th year the United Nations celebrated International 

Women’s Day. Mr. Speaker, the MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] from Sask Rivers and I had the pleasure 

of attending this year’s International Women’s Day celebration 

hosted by the Prince Albert Council of Women. This year 

women from Prince Albert and area joined together to celebrate 

by inducting three worthy women into the P.A. [Prince Albert] 

Council of Women’s Hall of Fame. 

 



542 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2012 

Christine Taylor was inducted in the adult mentor category 

followed by Melissa Menzies in the youth role model, 

community, and school volunteer category. Lastly, Marjorie 

Naanair was inducted posthumously. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the honour of knowing Marj personally. She 

was selfless, caring, vibrant, empathetic, and a dedicated 

volunteer. I first met with Marj when we were colleagues on the 

race relations and social issues committee now known as the 

social infrastructure committee in the city of Prince Albert. 

 

Marj was always looking out for people and was very 

outspoken for those that could not or would not speak for 

themselves. Her loss is deeply felt by our community. 

 

I would like this Assembly to join me in recognizing Christine 

Taylor, Melissa Menzies, and my friend Marjorie Naanair for 

their induction into the Prince Albert Council of Women’s Hall 

of Fame. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 

Music Educator Honoured 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to take this opportunity to applaud the tireless efforts of 

Batoche constituent Ann Mueller and congratulate her on the 

recent honour that she has been bestowed. Ann, the retired 

executive director of the Saskatchewan Music Educators 

Association, the SMEA, was recently awarded the highest 

tribute a music educator can receive. The internationally 

renowned Canadian composer Stephen Hatfield was 

commissioned by the board of directors of the SMEA to write a 

song for Ann in recognition of her contribution to music 

education in Saskatchewan. 

 

Her composition, “The Gentle Rain from Heaven,” was 

performed in Ann’s honour by the Saskatchewan Honour Choir 

and conducted by Stephen Hatfield himself. This touching, 

emotional tribute was shared by her colleagues, friends, and 

family at the music conference in Regina. In her introduction of 

the world premiere of Ann’s song, Phoebe Voigts, the artistic 

director of the world-famous Saskatoon Children’s Choir spoke 

of Ann’s special touch in all the ongoing work and special 

projects in the music community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to join me in thanking 

Ann for her 28 years of dedicated service to the SMEA and 

congratulate her on her recent honour. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Representation 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier has had sufficient 

time to rethink his decision to introduce legislation that will 

change the electoral process in Saskatchewan and not count 

young people under the age of 18 in the drawing of the 

constituency boundaries. My question is to the Premier: is he 

prepared to pull Bill 36 and then introduce new legislation that 

will include everyone in this aspect of the electoral process? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The practice 

that this Bill will follow is that adopted in Quebec, Prince 

Edward Island, Nova Scotia, and Yukon. In those provinces, 

they deal with registered voters only. In Saskatchewan we will 

be dealing with people over 18. It is a fair and reasoned 

approach. That is how electoral costs are borne. That is how 

you determine the various things that are paid for by the 

government or the allowances that are there. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that is how we deal with elections, but that is 

not how we deal with children. And that is not how we deal 

with vulnerable people . . . [inaudible] . . . We move resources 

around and we allocate them where the needs are, Mr. Speaker, 

and we will continue to do that. Where there is a high number 

of children in one area, we will commit resources to schools, 

social services, and everything else that is required regardless 

of how many MLAs represent a specific area or which party 

those MLAs belong to, Mr. Speaker. Our commitment is 

towards the citizens and the children of our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier continues to talk out 

of both sides of his mouth. On one hand, he says he represents 

everyone in the province. And the next sentence he says that 

it’s fair to exclude future voters under the age of 18 in this 

aspect of the electoral process. 

 

So my question is to the Premier: where was this in your 

electoral platform? Where was this in the Throne Speech? Why 

the change? If the government represents everyone in the 

province, why is he excluding young people under the age of 18 

in this important part of the electoral process? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, no one is excluded. This 

government will continue to represent all the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. People of the age of majority vote. 

That’s the method of election as well, and it’ll be the method 

for drawing maps. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there is a precedent for it. In 1979 under the 

NDP [New Democratic Party], the number of constituencies 

were set at 65 — 63 in the South, 3 in the North — and it was 

based on the voters list, Mr. Speaker. Now is it that member’s 

contention that the Blakeney government did not represent 

young people? Is it that member’s contention that the Blakeney 

government did not provide a voice for families? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the argument doesn’t hold any water. This 

government will continue to represent all of the province of 

Saskatchewan. We’ll give voice to everyone’s concerns, young 

and old alike, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier said, “Elections are 

about people 18 years and over, but the services and 

representation that governments provide and oppositions 



March 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 543 

provide are about everyone.” 

 

The Premier has it only half right. Elections are about everyone. 

Young people under 18 count, and they need to be included in 

the equation that is used to draw constituency boundaries. 

Many young people that won’t be counted in this redistribution 

that we’re going into will be voting in the next election. Seven 

provinces and the federal government count everyone in the 

formula. In this day and age, we make sure that we include 

everyone right across the board. 

 

So my question to the Premier is this: elections affect everyone 

in the province and the changes affect everyone. Will the 

Premier agree today to pull Bill 36 and hold public 

consultations before he takes the step of excluding young 

people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the Blakeney 

NDP government excluded young people. Clearly, Mr. Speaker, 

clearly, Mr. Speaker, the process for electing members of the 

Assembly, the process, the election process is about people who 

are of voting age. Election issues are about families. Election 

issues are about seniors. And then the government’s keeping of 

promises made in a campaign are also about families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government will continue to represent 

everybody in the province. The electoral maps, the electoral 

map in the province — as is done in Quebec, as is done in 

Prince Edward Island I think, and as is done in the territory — 

will be based on a count of people who could vote. So you have 

electoral districts of people who can vote based on a count of 

people who can vote, Mr. Speaker. I think that makes some 

sense. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Injectable Drug Supply 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s currently a 

nationwide shortage of a number of injectable drugs due to 

significant challenges at a plant in Quebec. The Canadian 

Medical Association has said the situation is very serious, has 

actually said if something is not done, we actually look at going 

back to an 1890s style of medicine. Local health care 

professionals in Saskatchewan are also concerned especially as 

this relates to cancer patients and patients in palliative care. We 

know that health professionals are sounding the alarms, as this 

is a very serious matter. 

 

My question to the minister: what is he doing to ensure that 

patients suffering with battling cancer and individuals in 

palliative care, what is he doing to ensure that they have the 

necessary medications that they need? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we’re very aware of the fire that happened in the 

Quebec plant back on March the 4th that has affected the 

production of certain injectable drugs for cancer to offset some 

illness that they may face. So we have been very aware of that. 

We’ve followed through. We’ve worked with the federal 

government and governments across the country, but more 

importantly with the health regions, directly with the health 

regions, the 12 health regions and the Saskatchewan Cancer 

Agency. 

 

We are faring fairly well in the province right now. We have an 

adequate supply to cover off the next week or two. If we 

continue to get the supply that we have received, Mr. Speaker, 

we don’t see a big effect affecting our residents here in 

Saskatchewan. Some of the steps that are being taken is 

removing patients off the injectable drug into an oral 

application, Mr. Speaker. So the precautions are certainly being 

taken by our government, by the health regions. And I can say 

that we are in contact with other governments as well as the 

federal government on a really, quite frankly, probably on a 

daily basis to monitor this as it moves forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the minister 

for that information. Many cancer and palliative care patients 

require injections of fentanyl to manage their pain. Dr. Ken 

Stakiw was the medical director of palliative care in the 

Saskatoon Health Region, and he informs me, as the minister 

just stated in his answer, that fentanyl in some cases can be 

given orally as well with a syringe. I’m told, however, though 

that it can be very uncomfortable and very problematic for 

patients. Also it often requires a number of doses in order for 

the individual to receive the appropriate amount of medication. 

For many patients also in palliative care, the provision of 

fentanyl orally simply isn’t an option for them. 

 

Dr. Stakiw says that a suitable substitute drug for fentanyl is 

Abstral, which is a dissolvable tablet that is placed under the 

patient’s tongue. I’m told that it costs around $10 per tablet. It’s 

been approved by Health Canada, but it is not currently covered 

by the Saskatchewan drug plan. 

 

My question to the minister: is government willing to add 

Abstral to the Saskatchewan formulary, especially in light of 

the shortage of injectable drugs that we are seeing across the 

country? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in my previous 

answer, we are working with the health regions and the 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency to manage through this. Right 

now we feel that the adequate care is being given. We have, as I 

said, moving from the injectable to the oral, that’s not possible 

for all patients, but by doing that we’re extending the injectable 

supply that much longer out because we have transferred 

patients off of that. We’re looking at it as we speak today, and 

it’s manageable. And as long as we continue to receive a 

reduced amount from Sandoz, but the amount that we feel will 

be allotted, Mr. Speaker, we feel that we can meet the demand 

and the need. But in the event that that is not possible, we’ll be 

looking at all options. 

 

As I said, I was on a conference call with the prairie provinces 

http://www.ratemds.com/doctor-ratings/52022


544 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2012 

as well as Ontario. And we are putting together a game plan, 

Mr. Speaker, and lobbying the federal government to make sure 

that all options are looked at in the event that the supply is not 

adequate for Saskatchewan. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate that the 

shortage of injectable drugs is beyond the minister’s direct 

control, and I appreciate that there’s a formal process for adding 

drugs to the provincial formulary, but I hope that the minister 

will agree that this is a very unique situation. He’s expressed 

some of his opinions about that, and I hope that he will agree 

that there is more to do. And he just talked about considering 

other options. The last thing patients need, especially when they 

are battling cancer or in palliative care, is to worry about their 

medications, worry about chasing down the necessary 

medications in order to deal with their pain. 

 

My question to the minister: given the shortage of injectable 

drugs at this time, at least on an interim basis, will he consider 

and will he approve the addition of Abstral to the formulary so 

that doctors, physicians like Dr. Stakiw are able to deal with the 

pain associated with the treatments that their patients are 

undergoing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I have said in my 

previous two answers, we are monitoring the situation. We feel 

comfortable in the province right now. Having said that though, 

that doesn’t mean that we’re not on a daily basis working with 

the health regions and the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency to 

meet the needs and the demands of our citizens. And in the 

event that we see that supply starting to shorten significantly, 

we’ll look at other options, led by the federal government and 

certainly lobbied to by the provincial government. 

 

I won’t, Mr. Speaker, go any further than that because it wasn’t 

only a few years ago that there was a shortage of an injectable 

drug for H1N1. And I remember what the opposition had to say 

on what we should have been doing at that time, Mr. Speaker, 

was the exact wrong thing, Mr. Speaker. We took the advice 

from the experts here in Saskatchewan and across Canada, Mr. 

Speaker, managed H1N1 very, very well. And, Mr. Speaker, 

I’m taking that advice from the experts again. And I think we’ll 

handle this one very well without the advice of the opposition. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I heard the minister’s response 

talking about the advice of experts. And the point that I would 

like to make to the minister is that it’s physicians and it’s care 

providers in the province who are concerned. It’s those 

individuals in a national and a provincial context who are 

raising alarms. The addition of this, this additional drug is an 

option available. And I think that for the minister to say that it 

is simply an issue that he doesn’t need to pay attention to is a 

concern. 

My question to the minister: will he give it serious 

consideration, based on the requests coming from health 

professionals, that this additional drug be added? Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what in the 

previous three answers would have given that member opposite 

the idea that I’m not taking this issue seriously, that we’re not 

looking at every option, Mr. Speaker. I have said that in the 

previous three answers. Mr. Speaker, he’ll have one physician 

that would like to see us move in one direction. We have the 

Ministry of Health and physicians, our chief medical officer 

and others within the ministry, as well as a federal ministry, Mr. 

Speaker, that are on top of this, are looking at every option, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I will take my advice from those professionals as we move 

forward, not the opposition, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen what they 

wanted to do with H1N1; it was completely the wrong 

direction, Mr. Speaker. We will take the advice of our 

professionals and make sure that the citizens of Saskatchewan 

receive the care they so deserve. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Identification and Removal of Asbestos 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we know that last week it was uncovered that seniors 

at St. Mary’s Villa were subjected not only to the removal from 

their homes but also, also possible exposure to asbestos. We 

also know that this dangerous insulation material has been used 

in buildings throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

To the minister: what is this government’s plan regarding 

asbestos in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the 

members will be aware, asbestos was used for many, many 

years as an insulation and for a variety of different uses and was 

a legal substance to be used. Mr. Speaker, in the last number of 

years, it’s determined that asbestos causes enormous health 

hazards when it is moved or becomes airborne — mesothelioma 

and a number of things that have affected firefighters in our 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have moved forward to try and protect 

firefighters and give them additional coverage through the 

Workers’ Compensation Board. We have, in the situation at St. 

Mary’s, ensured that through our occupational health and safety 

unit that the asbestos that is in that building has been removed 

in complete compliance with the existing regulations so that no 

threat was posed either to workers that were working on the 

facility or to people that were in the building at the time. Mr. 

Speaker, that is the plan that we have, and that is the plan we’ll 

continue to have. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 



March 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 545 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, people may be 

exposed to asbestos in their workplace, in their communities, or 

in their homes. And we know recently, Mr. Speaker, a 

Saskatchewan man has made national headlines because of his 

fight with terrible effects of asbestos exposure. Howard 

Willems of Saskatoon, contracted mesothelioma while 

inspecting a number of older food plants here in the province. 

He argues, and I quote that, “Everyone has a right to know 

when they go into a workplace or when they’re going into a 

building, it is safe.” 

 

To the minister: is this government willing to take the necessary 

steps to develop an asbestos registry here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the experts at occupational 

health and safety have told us that asbestos, when contained or 

when not being moved, does not pose a risk. Mr. Speaker, it is 

when asbestos is removed or in the process of reconstruction 

that it becomes airborne and becomes a risk for people that are 

working in and around it. It is necessary that steps are taken 

during those types of reconstruction process, and those steps are 

always carefully supervised by the experts and the officials at 

occupational health and safety. 

 

To the extent that asbestos already exists in buildings, where it 

is not moved or not subject to human exposure, human contact, 

it does not pose a risk. And, Mr. Speaker, that is the practice 

that is adopted in most other jurisdictions. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we will continue to look at it. We’ll continue to adopt best 

practices. 

 

We do not have a recommendation from our experts at OH & S 

[occupational health and safety] that a registry would provide 

any additional benefit and might in fact alarm people 

unnecessarily or cause the asbestos to be moved or disturbed. 

The goal should be that it remains as it is, where it is, and we 

will deal with it appropriately. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — I think that answer provides cold comfort to 

many people such as Howard after the fact because he just 

didn’t know. We know that this product has been used in 

schools, hospitals, and senior care homes, as well as countless 

other buildings. And people need more than a registry, more 

than the guarantees of when it’s just being moved. They 

deserve increased regulation and enforcement of asbestos 

disposal or usage here in Saskatchewan. To the minister: will 

this government commit to not just a registry, but also increased 

regulation and enforcement designed to protect Saskatchewan 

people from asbestos? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, last year we introduced 

legislation that expanded the coverage in the presumptive 

cancers that may well be caused by asbestos or by other toxins 

that exist for firefighters. We will continue to ensure that 

asbestos does not become an increased or an additional hazard 

anywhere in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are following in our province, best practices. 

Those best practices exist throughout the nation. We are 

following those practices. We are in continual comparison with 

what is taking place in other jurisdictions. We will continue to 

do that. We will not go looking for problems, but we will 

monitor carefully and see that when problems do arise that they 

are dealt with. 

 

The methodology that is used for removal of asbestos and 

identification of asbestos now is serving the province well and 

does not pose a risk, Mr. Speaker, as long as the asbestos is left 

where it is and is kept contained. And, Mr. Speaker, that is the 

advice we received from the expert at OH & S and we will 

continue to follow that advice. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Federal Crime Legislation 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Other 

provinces have concerns about the federal crime Bill, 

specifically because of the costs that are so high and placed 

directly on provinces. Some estimates have put the cost of that 

Bill at hundreds of millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, all 

off-loaded onto the provinces. 

 

Yesterday the Minister of Justice stood in this House and 

informed us, I quote, “. . . it is impossible at this point in time to 

make any kind of realistic assessment” with regard to the cost 

of this Bill. My question to the Minister of Finance: does he 

share this view? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Federal Bill 

C-10 goes a long ways to protect Canadians. We believe that 

we need to protect our children from sex predators. We need to 

protect people from Internet stalking. Mr. Speaker, we will 

continue to support those provisions of the Bill. We know that 

this Bill will likely result in some increase in incarceration; a lot 

of the people that would be prosecuted in our nation now would 

be prosecuted under this Bill or would be prosecuted in any 

event. Mr. Speaker, we will continue to ensure that those people 

are prosecuted, as they should be. We know that it may well 

have an increase on the number of people that are in our 

correctional facilities. 

 

I can advise the House, Mr. Speaker, that we have, since we 

formed government, increased our facilities to hold an 

additional 90 male offenders and additional 36 female 

offenders. The facilities that we’ve added for female offenders 

could be double-bunked so that they could hold an additional 

72. Mr. Speaker, during the time that the members opposite 

were in government, they replaced facilities that they were in, 

but they did not add one single additional correctional space. 

Mr. Speaker, we will work to do what’s right. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 



546 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2012 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, as I listened to the start of 

that answer, I thought Mr. Toews had joined us in the 

Assembly here today for a moment there, Mr. Speaker. You 

know, the budget’s coming down in just a mere few days, but 

they’ve had this Bill for months, Mr. Speaker. It defies belief 

that this government hasn’t budgeted for this cost. Mr. Speaker, 

either this reflects incompetence or it’s a matter of not being 

straight to Saskatchewan people. Question to the minister: 

which is it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we know that our 

correctional facilities are at capacity now. We know that they 

will have to be increased in the next short period of time. We 

will be working towards doing that. We will not want to go 

forward with a bunch of speculation as to the number of spaces 

that will be required till we know exactly the impact of that. 

The folks in Corrections, Public Safety and Policing are looking 

at a variety of different options to try and increase our capacity, 

and we will see what the impact of this Bill has. 

 

The estimates from across the country vary greatly, and we’re 

not going to participate in that type of speculation other than to 

say, Mr. Speaker, we anticipate that there will be an increase. 

Mr. Speaker, we support the things that are in this Bill, which 

include protecting our children. And I think, Mr. Speaker, 

everyone in our country wants to see that happen, including the 

members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill will get rid of things like house arrest. 

This Bill will deal with organized crime. It will deal with other 

things. It will keep people safe. It will prevent the traffic, abuse, 

and exploitation of vulnerable immigrants. We will work 

towards those ends, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Provincial Budget and Relationship with Federal 

Government 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that answer is way off the 

mark. The question is about the budget itself and the finances of 

the province and about responsible government. The expensive 

crime Bill unfortunately is but one example. The examples of 

federal off-loading continue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Down the road we see health care transfers and OAS [Old Age 

Security] retirement security payments offering the same trend. 

It’s a rubber stamp signature from this government when the 

cheques are coming directly out of the pockets of Saskatchewan 

people. As I stated yesterday, the costs this province bears in 

social services, justice, and health from the underfunded First 

Nations education system is also excessive off-loading, Mr. 

Speaker. Another example’s in municipalities in the 

circumstance with the stroke of a pen, we have municipalities 

that are incurring hundreds of millions of dollars of increased 

costs. Mr. Speaker, off-loading once again. Why does this 

minister accept this off-loading from the federal government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we know how important it 

is to ensure that there is sound fiscal probity. And, Mr. Speaker, 

as a government under the leadership of our Premier and under 

the leadership of the Minister of Finance, that’s what’s been 

demonstrated, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen that, not simply in a 

variety of public policy areas, Mr. Speaker — for example in 

post-secondary education, record investments of $2.8 billion — 

we’ve also seen it in debt reduction, more than 44 per cent of 

the debt paid down. Mr. Speaker, $3 billion, $3 billion paid 

down, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we look, as we look next week into the budget, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s that kind of ethos of fiscal responsibility on 

behalf of the people of this province that this government is 

going to continue to offer. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it seems that there is no 

bill from the feds that this government is unwilling to pay, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We’re witnessing massive off-loading from the federal 

government onto our provincial books in file after file. The 

consequences will be felt by Saskatchewan people. We have a 

government that’s now talking about cuts to core services in the 

classroom and in health, Mr. Speaker. To the minister: when 

will this government do the right thing? When will this 

government stand up for Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I might draw reference to 

one specific file. And that is, Mr. Speaker, when the federal 

government pulled its money out of First Nations University, 

following the lead of this government as reforms were put in 

place, Mr. Speaker, and the provincial dollars went back in, we 

met with Ottawa. Ottawa put those dollars back in, Mr. 

Speaker. I think the member opposite mischaracterizes the 

relationship with Ottawa. It’s professional and it’s based on the 

interests of the people of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 

feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Please state your point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This being 

the first opportunity that I’ve had to review Hansard from 

yesterday, I’d like to draw your attention, Mr. Speaker, to page 

505 of Hansard and quote particularly rule 50(c) and (o) which 

refers to the use of a member’s proper name in the House. The 

member for Nutana was speaking to Bill 36 yesterday. And I’ll 



March 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 547 

quote, Mr. Speaker, from page 505. The quote is, “Brad Wall 

hates kids.” Mr. Speaker, if you could perhaps review and if the 

point of order is found to be well taken, remind the member 

from Nutana that the use of proper names is not permitted. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do apologize for 

the use of a name in the House and I did do that yesterday as 

well. So again I apologize. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you very much. The member for 

Saskatoon Nutana has apologized for her error. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 27 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 27 — The 

Education Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la 

Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After a busy question 

period, it’s nice to have a chance to enter into debate on Bill 

No. 27. And this is a continuation of remarks that I made last 

evening, Mr. Speaker, on Bill No. 27, The Education 

Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

And for individuals who weren’t watching the legislative 

channel last night around 10:20 p.m., this discussion occurred 

towards the end of the evening, as I was the last speaker, and I 

covered a number of topics in my earlier remarks. The topics 

that I covered, Mr. Speaker, basically talked about the 

importance of education for our society. As parents, as 

grandparents, as friends and neighbours, aunts and uncles, we 

do know that children are in fact what is most important to us in 

society, and that the education system has a huge role, a huge 

impact on the development of children and how well they are 

doing in life. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, as I said last night, whenever we’re 

looking at changes to The Education Amendment Act, it’s 

important to keep that in mind. It’s important to come to it with 

that world view and that type of understanding because it 

allows us to ask the questions and allows us to do the thinking 

and the proper examination that is required on any piece of 

legislation. It’s important, Mr. Speaker, that we be grounded in 

what is important, why we’re doing something, what something 

is all about. And it’s about the kids, Mr. Speaker. So looking at 

changes to The Education Act and the proposed amendments 

brought forward by the minister in Bill No. 27, I want to say 

from the very beginning that is what needs to be the main goal 

and objective in what we are doing. 

 

Last night, Mr. Speaker, I touched on a bit how this piece of 

legislation addresses the school year — the start of the school 

— that it would begin after Labour Day, Mr. Speaker. This was 

something that members opposite talked about in the election, 

and so the public knew about it. There wasn’t a great deal of 

consultation, or any consultation, with families or with school 

boards or teachers but, Mr. Speaker, that is the course of action 

that the members opposite chose to take and is now why we 

have the amendments before us here, in order to allow the 

school year to start after Labour Day. It states that the minimum 

number of days will be 200 days or less and that it would begin 

after Labour Day. And there was a number of changes there to 

the section repealing sections 164 through 167. 

 

The next section, Mr. Speaker, that I addressed last night on 

this piece of legislation, touched on a number of areas. The first 

one I described more generally as housekeeping- and 

modernization-type initiatives. It looked at things like repealing 

some obsolete provisions and making some changes and, for 

example, eliminating the education council as it had been 

dormant for some time — at least according to the minister’s 

second reading speech — merging two boards into one, the 

teacher classification and teacher certification boards into one, 

given the amount of overlap, and also some adjustments that 

were required in order to be in compliance with federal 

legislation such as the Copyright Act. 

 

Now the next portion, Mr. Speaker, that I addressed and 

touched on had to do with the case of educational funding, and 

in this section, Mr. Speaker, I talked about how it was within 

the members opposite’s role as government to make changes to 

the way that schooling is funded. But I also stated that they 

need to be fully upfront and fully clear with Saskatchewan 

people that they are the primary funders for education, and as a 

consequence there are a number of changes that need to take 

place, I think, within their own thinking but also in the actions. 

The one is that there will be a tabling of documents from the 

divisions to the Assembly, recognizing that the financial 

responsibility ultimately rests with the provincial government. 

 

We also had a very interesting discussion last night about how 

their decision around the funding has had implications for the 

relevance, the autonomy, and the ability of boards to make 

decisions as they see fit, based on their expertise and based on 

the role that they have been elected to serve in. And the 

example that I gave, Mr. Speaker, was how the moving of 

portable classrooms or relocatables now needs to have authority 

— or approval, excuse me — from the ministry, from the 

provincial government, which is a change because I think most 

people that have a bit of knowledge of what school boards do 

would think that deciding on things like relocatable classrooms 

would be more or less routine business for a school board. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that has changed. 

 

And I also talked about last night how that presents a number of 

problems and concerns for the public because now that the 

ministry has a say and final say and can determine and 

influence what boards are doing with respect to decisions such 

as the purchase of relocatable classrooms . . . I brought up the 

puzzling and somewhat and fairly disturbing situation of how 

the ministry was pushing a company in Swift Current to supply 



548 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2012 

portable classrooms throughout the province even though 

school boards have clearly said they can do it for tens of 

thousands of dollars less. They can do it faster and in many 

cases more efficiently. 

 

And so the changes that the government has made, they’re able 

to make those changes and they have made those changes, but it 

opens up a number of questions and has presented a number of 

concerns that we’ve seen in the time since they have made the 

changes. And I think that’s an important thing to state on the 

record. 

 

We also had a discussion last night on the topic of educational 

funding and how it is up to the province to provide funding now 

for institutions — the buck stops with them, so to speak — and 

I talked about how, for that reason, I’ve been presenting a 

petition for Hampton Village on behalf of my constituents who 

live in Hampton Village and Dundonald, who need a new 

school in this area, and how the existing Dundonald and St. 

Peter’s schools are packed, are adding more relocatables every 

single summer. And it’s a concern that many, many parents in 

the area have, and something that I hear about very often from 

people. 

 

I had a bit of a problem, though, with some of the statements 

that the minister said in her second reading speech, and then 

that actually got into a bit of a discussion with the Finance 

minister last night who was very, very eager last night to enter 

in on the debate or on the issue of educational funding. And it 

was specifically on the issue of the new proposed schools in 

Willowgrove. And as I said last night, Mr. Speaker, members 

opposite approved the Willowgrove project, I believe it was in 

2010, and gave an indication that it would be funded and 

supported. And the plan is, for those who don’t live in the 

Willowgrove neighbourhood . . . I believe it belongs to the 

member from Silver Springs, so this should be of concern to 

him as well. But for individuals living in Willowgrove, 

expecting a school to be there, while the funding announcement 

was made in 2010, what I’ve heard, Mr. Speaker, is that some 

initial funding has been provided for the planning, but the final 

sign-off on the plans by the ministry has not occurred nor has 

funding flowed to allow the process to go ahead. 

 

And as I said that last night, the Finance minister was very 

worked up. And he said, well they were sitting on it. And he 

said that the school board was sitting on the process to get the 

new schools in Willowgrove moving along. And I was 

surprised by that because the school board trustees that I know 

in Saskatoon, whether they be Catholic or public, are very eager 

to get the project going, understand the need and the urgency 

around it. So for the Finance minister to say that the school 

boards are the problem and sitting on it, I found that to be an 

odd statement. 

 

So last night at the end of the debate, I sent a tweet, and it was 

an at-mention, Mr. Speaker. And it was something along the 

lines of, I said, interesting discussion tonight in the Assembly; 

as I talked about schools, the Finance minister heckled that the 

holdup is due to boards “sitting on it.” And, Mr. Speaker, I do 

confess that’s not a verbatim quote of the tweet, because I think 

that was more than 140 characters. But that was the tweet that I 

sent out. And I at-mentioned Ray Morrison, who is the Chair of 

the Saskatoon public school board. 

So I found that puzzling. Perhaps this is a discussion that they 

will be able to follow up on. But then just before question 

period, the Chair of the Saskatoon school board at-mentioned 

me. And this is in public domain, so it’s not like I’m relaying 

private correspondence here between the two of us. He 

at-mentioned, and what he said, quote, is: “Interesting. We are 

ready to go to tender and have asked for the ministry’s approval 

to do so. Still hoping to open in fall 2013.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, good news that he still expects it to be able to 

open in 2013. But according to the Saskatoon public school 

board, the holdup is on the ministry side of things, waiting for 

sign-off and waiting for the cheque in the mail, so to speak. So 

an interesting position and perhaps something that either the 

member from Silver Springs or the Finance minister or the 

Education minister would like to clear up for the people in the 

Willowgrove neighbourhood waiting for a school. 

 

The last portion, Mr. Speaker, of the piece of legislation that I 

will touch and address on, it was in the final section. And it had 

to do with changes that were being made with respect to how 

divisions may be allowed to borrow from financial institutions 

with the portion that divisions have to provide for projects, not 

having access to a tax base. And as I said before, that’s a 

decision that members opposite have every right to make if they 

want to change the way that it is structured. But it’s going to 

have implications for school divisions. 

 

So they’re basically ruling out sinking funds which, as I 

understand it, were funds where school divisions could hive off 

money over a period of time in order to build up a supply and 

co-operate in projects with the ministry. That’s been eliminated, 

but divisions are allowed to go to financial institutions, I would 

assume regular banks or credit unions, and seek financing for 

their project. 

 

Two concerns here, Mr. Speaker, the one being that I think it’s 

important, if divisions are having to table their documents, I 

think it’s important to recognize that this is part of overall 

provincial debt. And I think it’s important for members 

opposite, the provincial government, the Sask Party 

government, to be upfront and clear with what the true debt 

levels are and what the burdens are around debt and what is the 

burden on the total, on the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. That’s 

one concern. 

 

The second concern with this approach that I identify, and 

members on my side of the House have spoken about this, is 

the possibility here that the minister’s suggesting that school 

divisions go down a path of educational financing that could be 

more expensive than allowing borrowing through the province 

and thereby benefiting from a preferential borrowing rate. So 

that’s a possibility, a real concern here that I think is an honest 

one. 

 

My question is, if that is the situation, why is the government 

suggesting that, if they know they could save taxpayers of the 

province money, if there is a cheaper and a better way to do it, 

my question is why they would want to create a system that is 

more complicated and indeed more expensive for Saskatchewan 

people and probably not in the best interest of our children 

which, as I said at the beginning, is the guiding principle that 

should be used when talking about issues of education. 



March 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 549 

[14:30] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I have appreciated the opportunity to speak to 

Bill No. 27 over the course of a couple of days, commencing 

remarks yesterday evening and then finishing them at this time. 

And I would hope that I’ve been able to identify some of the 

issues that I see as most obvious and concerning with this piece 

of legislation. As I said, some are a consequence of changes 

that the Sask Party has chosen to make around the school year, 

and so we know why that is there. Some of them, the changes 

proposed, are more routine in nature with respect to how boards 

may be structured and compliance with federal Acts. But, Mr. 

Speaker, there are also concerning aspects, and that has to do 

with education funding and that has to do with education 

financing, and I have sought to shine some light on that as well. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I do thank members for the 

opportunity to speak to this piece of legislation, and I would 

move to adjourn debate. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of the 

debate of Bill No. 27, The Education Amendment Act, 2011. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 28 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 28 — The 

Education Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This piece of 

legislation of course dovetails with the previous piece of 

legislation. And the dead giveaway, of course, is the title of the 

legislation and the Bill No. 28, An Act to make consequential 

amendments resulting from the enactment of The Education 

Act, 2011. So this piece of legislation obviously has to be 

viewed as married to the previous piece of legislation that I just 

spoke extensively to. 

 

As I said before, Mr. Speaker, over the course of two days I 

identified many of the main concerns and problems that I see 

with this legislation. As I said, when looking at pieces of 

legislation that affect children, it’s important to always keep the 

children in mind and keep them as our top priority. Decisions 

that we make around education legislation must keep the 

children in mind. 

 

So when we look at the different components of Bill 27 that I 

talked about, whether it’s the school year, whether it is more 

routine business such as the organization and structure of 

boards, or whether it is the issue of how education is financed, 

this has huge relevance on the students — sometimes not in a 

major way that will affect the type of education in the 

classroom, but sometimes, Mr. Speaker, the implications and 

the results are felt in the long term. And that, Mr. Speaker, has 

to do around the issue of, I think most clearly in this issue of 

education financing and borrowing and some of the costs 

associated. 

 

If, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are going down a path 

that costs Saskatchewan people more in the long run, I think 

that’s a negative thing for children. So while it may not be felt 

in the classroom tomorrow, it will be felt by children or the 

children’s children down the road. So I think that is an 

important concern. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, the piece of legislation, at least in the 

minister’s remarks, she talked a lot about different progress that 

had been made on building projects. And I recognize that some 

progress has been made. But I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that 

on many occasions, the level of progress that has been 

identified by the members opposite is overstated and not an 

accurate reflection of what is actually occurring on different 

projects. And I use the example of the Willowgrove school as 

one such piece. And I know that’s a concern for people in 

Willowgrove, Mr. Speaker, but it’s also a concern for people in 

other neighbourhoods like mine in Hampton Village who are 

waiting for the school and wondering when in fact pieces may 

fall into place. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with those remarks, I’ve appreciated the 

chance to speak to Bill 27. I’ve appreciated the chance to speak 

to Bill 28. They have to be viewed together, as one is the 

consequential amendments flowing out of the other, and many 

of the comments are the same. So my remarks on Bill 28 won’t 

be as lengthy as 27. But I will not be sending 28 to committee 

at this time because I think the two pieces of legislation need to 

stay together, and I know I have many colleagues who want to 

and wish to speak to Bill No. 27. So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I 

would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 28. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 28, The Education Consequential Amendments Act, 2011. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 29 

 

[The Assembly resumed debate on the proposed motion of the 

Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 29 — The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 

modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances 

alimentaires be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is an 

honour to stand and get into this discussion on Bill No. 29, An 

Act to amend The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 

1997. 

 

It’s a critical piece, and as reviewing my colleague’s remarks 

and the minister’s remarks, I think the office of maintenance 

enforcement orders has done an amazing job since its creation 



550 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2012 

in 1986. But it’s one that is fraught with a lot of sensitivities 

because, you know, when I’ve been out knocking on doors, you 

never know when you knock on a door, sometimes there’s an 

angry person behind it who has some issues with government, 

and quite often it’s around maintenance. 

 

And you know, as I’ve talked earlier this week about some of 

the other issues, this one is a tough one. It’s a tough one. But 

it’s really good to see that it has an enforcement rate of 91 per 

cent, I understand, and $35 million collected annually. That 

means an awful lot to families who . . . When you’re in a single 

parent situation, it’s a tough go, and it really is a good thing in 

terms of making sure both parents step up to the plate. But I 

know sometimes it’s hard and we get into discussions with 

some parents who feel that it’s not quite right, and they have 

real issues with maintenance orders. And I just have to say to 

the folks who work in this office, I think hats off to them 

because they do a phenomenal job. 

 

But I do want to say — this is something like I said last night 

about the Ombudsman and all of these Bills that come before us 

— has the government taken some time to actually talk to the 

people who use the services to say, how can we do this better? 

Now this is a particularly tough one to do that because clearly, 

more often than not, these folks are not happy campers. 

Because when you’re being told that you have to pay your 

maintenance orders and it’s being enforced, I can imagine 

there’s a lot of frustration and anger and a lot of emotions rise 

to the surface. So it’s hard for them to say, so how could we 

have done this better? 

 

And likewise on the other side when things do go well, you 

kind of have two biases there. But if there is a way of finding 

out how can we do this better, I think that would have been of 

interest to me as part of the background notes here for the 

minister’s remarks, because quite often when we have the 

office’s perspective . . . And they are professional people who 

really know quite often what they’re talking about. This is their 

sphere of work and their experience is phenomenal. So I do 

have to say I respect their opinions an awful lot, but it would 

have been interesting to see, because I think sometimes we need 

to reach out to those groups that we don’t often ask. We provide 

a service and then they go away and we don’t really say, so 

how did it go? How did it work? How are things? How can we 

help you better in terms of legislation? I’d be interested to know 

that, and I think that it would be of interest to many of our 

colleagues on the floor about, so how are things? How are 

things going? 

 

The other issue that I have and I would like to raise with all of 

these pieces of legislation that’s coming before us is around the 

issue of a lean government. And while many of us can say, well 

it’s an admirable goal, a good thing we are trying to do, you 

know, if we can do more, more efficiently with less, then that 

would be not a bad idea. But quite often we don’t fully 

understand what’s happening in the government’s inner 

workings and so when you have an office like the maintenance 

enforcement office orders, are they going to be subject to the 

same lean expectations and are they also part of the 16 per cent 

reduction over four years? I hope not, because these folks 

provide very important services. And if they are going to be 

asked to do more with less, and we know that there is a trend in 

our society that actually is marital breakdown happens more 

and more, and yet we’ve got to turn to families to say to both 

parents, you’ve got to step up to the plate, this makes it a tough 

situation, a very tough situation. 

 

And so I’m curious to know and will be asking that question in 

committee about, is this office that we hear such good results 

from — a 91 per cent enforcement rate and collecting some $35 

million — are they going to be part of the lean process? Are 

they losing some 16 per cent of the workforce? Now I imagine 

it’s not a big workplace. I don’t know what the full-time 

equivalents are in that office, but I’ve got to imagine there are a 

few. I’ve got to imagine that this not easy work, and you’ve got 

to have professionals, and if you’re telling some that just 

because of an ideology that 16 per cent of the workforce has to 

go and your office is included, this is going to be a hardship on 

families, and one that they weren’t really counting on. And one 

that, if you can look at their numbers you say, wow, they’re 

really providing a service, and they’re with it; they’re doing 

good work. 

 

So I do have a question. We’ll be raising that question in the 

committee when we get to it. But I think that in many ways this 

is a piece of work that I think has a lot of merit. I mean there 

will be questions. I think that there are some things as we 

modernize language . . . It’s always good so people know what 

you’re talking about and the Act doesn’t become a historic 

document but a living document, because clearly people can’t 

afford to have things misunderstood. 

 

So I think there are some things. I’d like to ask some questions, 

you know, and I’ll pose them now. And so the minister, I know, 

he may actually read these remarks or somebody may in his 

office. I hope they do so they can prepare for committee and 

they don’t come in: I’ve never heard of it. 

 

But I think this is an interesting thing about a new customized 

computer system to keep track of maintenance orders and 

payments owing and received. So that’s very good. I think 

that’s a sharp thing. And whenever we can use technology, 

that’s an absolutely excellent thing. I know, for example, I have 

often asked this question for Social Services around the seniors’ 

income plan where they’re using a program or system that’s 

outdated, and they really need to get up to date. And I really do 

think that if there are ways of making technology work for us, 

that’s a huge thing, a huge thing. 

 

I think that also I want to talk just a minute about this. The Bill 

adds a new provision to allow the court to order suspension of 

certain enforcement actions for periods of up to six months. 

And the minister talks about the payer’s circumstances change 

and they’re no longer able to meet their obligation. So the 

support order can be changed through agreement or a new court 

order. But in some times, some cases, the payer may be unable 

to meet his or her obligations only for a short period of time. So 

this is a bit of flexibility, and that’s I think an appropriate thing 

as long as it’s not abused, and we don’t get into, I think, being 

too fluid. Because it must be hard on the family. And if there 

seems to be some pressure to accept these temporary orders, 

that would become a problem as well. So we’ll monitor that and 

just see how that goes. 

 

I see it will not affect the enforcement already in place with 

respect to driver’s licence suspension, federal garnishment or 



March 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 551 

federal licence suspension or a registration in land titles or 

personal property registry. So it doesn’t go too far. It’s just a 

temporary thing, but I think that it speaks to some common 

sense. So that has something that we’d like to know more 

about, but I think it’s an important thing. 

 

Also talks about maintenance, enforcing maintenance orders 

against assets located in Saskatchewan in cases where the payer 

lives elsewhere. That seems straightforward. 

 

The confidentiality provision with respect to the release of 

information retained in a maintenance enforcement office, I 

think that sounds somewhat interesting that, especially in terms 

of the recipient, that the director of MEO [maintenance 

enforcement office] may complete a demand for information 

with respect to the recipient. I think that’s interesting that how 

we can lose track of people, it seems. Occasionally the 

maintenance enforcement office may require information about 

a recipient such as a new mailing address. So I guess things are 

pretty . . . Things happen out there. And I shouldn’t be 

surprised, you know, in a province of over 1 million people, 

that life — especially when you’re at that age when you’re 

having children and you’re working and you’re trying to find 

jobs throughout the province — you may end up having to 

move and so . . . But it is interesting that somebody would not 

know the recipient’s mailing address. So to me it makes 

common sense that actually this would be something that we 

would want to do. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So I think this is relatively straightforward. But I do want to 

just reiterate that I think this is an important piece of legislation 

in terms of just being on the record that these folks do a good 

job and that it’s important that whatever tools we can provide 

for that office, that if it’s something that works and it’s within 

reason, we should do all we can to help them out. And it seems 

that with, you know, in partnership with that collaborative law 

initiatives that the minister’s taken, that it makes sense to pull 

this all together. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that this seems relatively 

straightforward and I don’t have too many more comments. I 

think that, as I said, we’ll be watching how the lean initiative 

impacts on, I think, all of government, but particularly those 

who are in vulnerable situations such as families who’ve gone 

through a separation and there’s children involved. We want to 

make sure that their services are there and there in a timely 

matter, that they’re not caught in a bind because the services 

have been reduced.  

 

So I hope that takes some account, especially when you have 

. . . and I think a lot of credit goes to the MEO for the work that 

they’ve been doing. If they can achieve a 91 per cent collection 

enforcement rate, $35 million into families, that’s a huge, huge 

amount. But this also speaks to the common sense of when 

families, both partners are under a lot of stress. And they need 

to be brought together, both through that collaborative law and 

this idea of suspension, temporary suspension of payments, I 

think is very important. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve made my comments 

clear. And I think that Bill 29 is one that I know many of my 

colleagues will have a few comments to make as well. But I’d 

like to move adjournment of Bill 29 now. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 29, The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment 

Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 26 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 26 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure this 

afternoon to rise and speak about Bill No. 26, An Act to repeal 

miscellaneous obsolete Statutes. And, Mr. Speaker, I will be 

looking at this from the perspective of a legislator who has been 

here a number of years but also looking at it as to the use of the 

word obsolete. Because clearly the word obsolete is defined by 

the government of the day, and we will look at that word as we 

look at the various pieces of legislation that are being repealed. 

 

So for the public, when they see a Bill that’s called a Bill, or An 

Act to repeal miscellaneous obsolete Statutes, there’s an 

assumption that these are old laws that serve no purpose and 

should just be deleted. Now there’s sometimes that’s true. But 

let me read the list of the ones that we’re going to talk about 

this afternoon, and let the public be the people who decide what 

should happen with these particular Bills. 

 

The first one is The Collective Bargaining Agreement Expiry 

Date Exception Act. And then we’re going to talk about The 

Communications Network Corporation Act, then The On-farm 

Quality Assurance Programs Act, and then The Soil Drifting 

Control Act, and then finally The Special Payment (Dependent 

Spouses) Act. And we’re going to examine whether these 

particular pieces of legislation are obsolete and therefore 

meriting being repealed by the legislature. 

 

So let’s start with the first Act, which is called The Collective 

Bargaining Agreement Expiry Date Exception Act. This 

particular piece of legislation went into effect in December of 

2005, and it was actually legislation that came back a number 

of different times to effectively make sure that when IPSCO 

was dealing with the United Steelworkers that they could enter 

into longer term agreements than The Trade Union Act at that 

point would allow. It also applied to Shaw Pipe Protection, 

which is another company that works together with IPSCO in 

producing pipe for the oil and gas industry. Because of the 

relationship between the union and these particular companies, 

over the years they made a special request which was a joint 

company request and a union request to have this legislation 

passed, which effectively gave an exemption to the particular 

agreement that they would have entered into. 

 



552 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2012 

And so what’s happened since this last piece of legislation that 

has allowed for the exemption is that there have been some 

amendments to the labour legislation which allow for this type 

of agreement to be within the law of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on the first Bill that’s included in An Act to 

repeal miscellaneous obsolete Statutes, I think there’s 

agreement that it’s obsolete. So that’s one that doesn’t make 

any sense anymore because the provision that it provides is 

included in other legislation in the province. 

 

Now the second item listed in the Bill is called The 

Communications Network Corporation Act, and I think it’s 

appropriate to think a little bit about the history. The particular 

Act that’s in effect right now in the legislation was passed and 

became effective in June 1990. And at that point this was an 

important part of the communications within the province. It 

dealt with a number of issues related to the education network 

that had been developed, and it basically created the provincial 

television station for our province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it was something that was, I think, of great 

pride to the government of the day — Premier Devine, and I’m 

fairly certain Mr. Gary Lane and others — because it was a 

further enhancement of the important things that could be done 

with SaskTel and with the other telecommunications issues that 

were happening in the province. 

 

When the government changed in 1991, that particular 

legislation was left relatively the same way that it was and used 

I think very effectively to build on the history that had been 

developed to set up SCN [Saskatchewan Communications 

Network], basically our provincial television system which had 

many aspects of the education, but it also had aspects of 

entertainment. But the most important thing that SCN did was 

that it told the Saskatchewan stories to us. It told stories to all 

parts of the province about who we were and what we did. 

 

Part of that ability to tell the story came from the fact that they 

had a relatively modest budget which they could use to be 

partners in developing shows for the television station. And 

because of the quality of the filmmakers in our province and the 

actors and the writers and all of the technical people, many of 

those films have travelled around the world telling others about 

what kind of a place Saskatchewan is. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the hopes and the dreams of the previous 

governments, and then the Romanow government and the 

Calvert government, around SCN were based in this particular 

legislation. We know that the development of the film industry 

in Saskatchewan was very much dependent on the kind of 

leverage that came from SCN. And, Mr. Speaker, this particular 

legislation has been brought today to be declared obsolete. I 

fundamentally object to that perspective on dealing with the 

legislation because the government of the day has made a 

political decision to sell the people’s network of the province of 

Saskatchewan. There were many who objected, but it was sold. 

And guess what? It was sold again. It was sold again. Now we 

have Citytv, which is Toronto-based, as our provincial network. 

Now they make some little bows here and there to it being SCN 

in Saskatchewan. But even if you look at the programming 

documents that they put out or their screen, they got SCN in a 

little place. But it’s Citytv is the big, big emblem on this one. 

And so, Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of legislation, even 

though it’s only one page long, what it includes, this, the 

declaration that SCN or the Communications Network 

Corporation of Saskatchewan is obsolete, I think that’s not 

right. It’s something that should not have happened. And we 

know it’s causing a great deal of difficulty for our film industry. 

We know that four years ago we had probably 8 or 900 people 

who were the technical background — young, important jobs 

that were available to make films in Saskatchewan. And that 

was effectively maybe three or four full crews, maybe that. 

Now we’re down to 250 to 300, and people are saying, we can’t 

make a living doing that in Saskatchewan any more. 

 

I know many of the people in the film industry are watching 

very carefully what happens next Wednesday in the budget 

because there’s questions about the commitment to 

Saskatchewan people of this government as it relates to what 

has been a very important industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

I think I can say without a doubt that shows that have played in 

Saskatchewan came from the skills developed at SCN. So 

Corner Gas or Little Mosque on the Prairie or all of those 

shows, they wouldn’t have been created without the technical 

skills and the writing and everything else that came from the 

SCN corporation. So, Mr. Speaker, when they say that this 

piece of legislation is obsolete, what they’re trying to do is push 

the scraps under the rug or hide away the fact that they’ve 

destroyed an important institution in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s that kind of decision that this government has 

made in quite a number of areas which the people remember. 

And they see what happens now on Citytv. It’s just like any 

other channel that has some various shows. You know, we have 

hundreds of channels if you want to chose now, but we don’t 

have SCN, which we felt was our station which told our stories 

to us but also to the world. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on that second one, The Communications 

Network Corporation Act, I fundamentally disagree that it’s 

obsolete. I fundamentally disagree with the decision of this 

government. And unfortunately with some of these kinds of 

decisions that are made, it’s very hard to put the white and the 

yolk back in the egg once you’ve smashed it. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, here it is, a Premier Devine pride that’s 

been destroyed by this Premier. And so we don’t understand 

that one, and we will continue to say that it was a mistake. Now 

it’s unfortunate that that political decision was made, but we 

know that especially the people who have lost their jobs in this 

whole area know why they’ve lost their jobs. And they will not 

forget. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the next item on this list is called The 

On-farm Quality Assurance Programs Act, and this is a more 

interesting one. And it’s declared to be obsolete because it 

hasn’t been used. But in some ways, this may be the piece of 

legislation that 10 years or 20 years from now, we go retrieve it 

and bring it back and pass it again. And let me explain why. 

 

This was a Bill from 1998, and it basically sets out a system of 

quality assurance for all types of food. And it was at a point 

where there weren’t pieces of legislation like this in very many 



March 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 553 

places. And so the plan was — and I guess still is, from some of 

the people, although they’re not in the majority any more — to 

set up a system whereby we as consumers could know what the 

quality was. 

 

I’ll give you an example. Many of us go to the store to buy 

wine. And one of the things that, if you’re a discerning wine 

buyer, you will look for VQA, vintners quality assurance. Well 

that’s the same words here, on-farm quality assurance. 

 

The whole idea was for farmers in Saskatchewan, whether they 

were large grain, lentil, canola farmers, or whether they had 

berries or whether they had vegetables, that they would be able 

to develop a system within their area of production that could 

give them a VQA or an OQA [on-farm quality assurance], we 

would have probably called it here, or OFQA [on-farm quality 

assurance] assurance. So when one went to the store, you could 

say, well I see these berries, but I want ones that have the 

quality assurance from Saskatchewan, certified by the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we know that when you buy wine, you’ll 

always pay a little more for the VQA wines because you can 

know where the grapes were grown and how the wine was 

produced. 

 

Well there’s a similar concept behind this Bill that has been 

lost. Now the minister, when he was presenting this Bill last 

week — I think it was the Minister of Justice, not the Minister 

of Agriculture — basically presented the information that he 

had. But I don’t think he totally understood what the ultimate 

goal of this particular legislation was. And that was to make 

sure that, in Saskatchewan, we could go worldwide and say, 

well that’s a quality assured food from Saskatchewan and it has 

the endorsement of a program under legislation of the 

Saskatchewan legislature, and that it’s a very good product to 

buy. And probably that one would pay a little bit more for it 

because of that particular concern, or that particular 

characteristic of the food. 

 

Now we have producers in Saskatchewan who have developed 

systems that are not under a provincial registry system that 

allow you to go, and go to a website and actually see the 

produce and where it’s grown, if it’s a plant or vegetable. Or 

you could also see where your beef comes from or your bison 

or other things. And so there are some methods of doing that. 

But they don’t have the kind of designation that you would 

have in British Columbia or California or in France or Germany 

or Australia where it says, well that particular food product 

comes from Redvers and surrounding areas and it has the 

quality and . . . I guess the word is terroir. It’s the special 

ingredients in the growing of the food that make a difference. 

 

Now probably 14, 15 years ago when this legislation was 

introduced, there wasn’t the same kind of discussion about this 

in Saskatchewan. But now we know we have a mustard festival 

in Regina to celebrate the fact that most of the mustard in the 

world is grown in Saskatchewan. And it’s the kind of product 

that would have benefit from this kind of a program. 

 

The minister says that, well we don’t need this any more 

because the Canadian national food and agriculture department 

has a method of dealing with some of the safety issues. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s good. We all would like to know that our 

food is safe. But this had an added aspect that was specifically 

from Saskatchewan, which would have benefited all of us. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think on this particular legislation we 

may see it come back again either in this . . . It could go in this 

form or it could go in a similar form to give our Saskatchewan 

products that special quality assurance mark, but more 

importantly to assist us in distinguishing the kinds of foods, 

grains, canola, all the different things that we produce here that 

others are quite interested in receiving. 

 

So on this particular Bill, the third one, we accepted that the 

first, collective bargaining agreement expiry date exemption 

Act, well that one’s obsolete. On the second one, we absolutely 

disagreed with the destruction of SCN, the communications 

network corporation. On this on-farm quality assurance 

program, we think this is a missed opportunity that shouldn’t be 

just thrown out at this point but should be remembered as the 

first step in developing something very special for 

Saskatchewan which a number of people have been asking for, 

and which was there and now is being tossed out. 

 

Now the next Bill is called The Soil Drifting Control Act, and 

this is clearly legislation that was developed in response to the 

problems of the 1930s in Saskatchewan. And if we can describe 

it like the historian would describe it, this is maybe some of our 

first climate change legislation in Saskatchewan because it was 

a response that allowed for a rural municipality to override 

some of the property rights to deal with a soil drifting issue and 

on the request of a number of the local people where the 

problem had arisen. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, what would happen would be that there 

would be a request that came from I think it was 40 people, to 

end up creating some special land use bylaws that would deal 

with the climate change issue of drought and the drifting soil. 

And as a result, then they could end up developing various 

orders that were very specific to the area where they lived. And 

these orders would sometimes implement the types of soil 

conservation methods that we have now but also some, I think, 

probably ingenious solutions that people had at that point. 

 

But if you look to see what kinds of orders that could be made, 

listen to the list. It’s pretty interesting. This is section 3(1) of 

this Bill that we’re tossing out, a municipal bylaw, an RM 

[rural municipality] bylaw. It’s appropriate we talk about it 

today when SARM’s meeting. A bylaw may contain provisions 

requiring adoption of the practice of strip farming. That’s 

something we know, or the growing of cover crops. That’s, I 

think, probably called no-till now, and the providing of trash 

cover or the spreading of straw or other refuse on cultivated 

lands. Well that’s another way of a straw spreader or something 

to put an extra layer to prevent the blowing of soil. They also 

could make an order prohibiting the burning of stubble. And 

that’s something which still causes problems today for lots of 

different reasons in addition to the soil drifting issue. 

 

Another order they could do is either prohibit the cutting of 

trees or requiring the planting of trees, and that would be a 

decision made on a municipal basis that would override the 

local property rights. Another thing they could do is they could 

require people to use certain types of machinery, or they could 



554 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2012 

prohibit other kinds of machinery that would cause problems 

with the drifting. And overall they could govern how people 

tilled their soil, and they also could regulate or prohibit the 

growing of certain crops in special areas. So obviously on some 

particular high places or hilltops where the soil was sandier, 

they would end up requiring there be special remedies to deal 

with the possible soil drifting. 

 

So when you look at the subtitle of the Act in the legislation 

we’re looking at, it’s called The Soil Drifting Control Act, but 

when you actually look at the Act, chapter S-54, it’s called An 

Act respecting the Control of Tillage Operations. And so what 

it is recognizing is that there’s a responsibility to your 

neighbours to do appropriate tillage of your soil and there’s also 

a responsibility of the community to keep track of what you’re 

doing. 

 

Now that’s not necessarily the type of legislation that the 

present government would be interested in. But I think it does 

go to the point of talking about, well what are the things that we 

need to do in the 21st century to respond to both flooding issues 

and the drought issues? This is a particular piece of legislation 

that was dealing with drought. And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

possible that it’s obsolete, but I think that there are questions 

about some of the practical solutions that are in this legislation 

as it relates to the control of tillage operations, as it relates to 

the control of tillage operations, as it relates to our long-term 

concern here on the prairies about both drought and flooding. 

And if you think about it, on the flooding issue, if you had the 

ability to tell people what kind of machinery they would use, 

well you could deal with some of the trenching that goes on and 

other things that actually cause more troubles than they’re 

worth. Now we have some other pieces of legislation that 

attempt to do that, but I would say this particular piece of 

legislation is about as direct and as simple as it comes because 

it gives the responsibility to the local rural municipality. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think this one is quite obsolete. It’s 

clearly from a different time period in how it was written, but 

the ideas and the concerns are still valid concerns today, and in 

some ways may even be bigger concerns than they were after 

the and during the ’30s when that particular drought was here. 

So, Mr. Speaker, on that one I would say it’s not . . . The 

wording in some parts may be obsolete, but the concept of 

legislating and providing tools to deal with climate change is as 

modern as they come. And what we should want to see is, well 

what is replacing legislation like this so that we can deal with 

the issues of the 21st century? So, Mr. Speaker, that’s The Soil 

Drifting Control Act. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Now the final Act in this particular piece of legislation, the final 

Act that’s going to be repealed is called The Special Payment 

(Dependent Spouses) Act. And this legislation is, relates to The 

Workers’ Compensation Act and some of the deadlines that 

were in the legislation and how widows were treated in — well 

widows or widowers were treated — when the legislation was 

changed. 

 

And so effectively what this particular piece of legislation did 

in 1999 was address some of the concerns that were raised by 

women who were left out, and inappropriately left out. And so 

that’s a time when a piece of legislation will fix a problem 

that’s been identified, and that’s a good thing. But I think also 

it’s clear that those particular problems have all now been 

identified and those issues dealt with, and so this is a piece of 

obsolete legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, let’s do a little scorecard here on the Bills that 

are included in Bill No. 26, an Act to repeal miscellaneous 

“obsolete” statutes. The Collective Bargaining Agreement 

Expiry Date Exception Act, I think that’s obsolete. It’s function 

has been taken over by another piece of legislation. 

 

The Communications Network Corporation Act, repealing that 

is a mistake. Doing what the government has done to our 

television station, our communications station, our film 

producing partner is wrong. And to repeal the Act is wrong 

when you don’t have anything to replace it. So that one, I 

disagree with this particular Bill. 

 

The On-farm Quality Assurance Programs Act. It’s legislation 

that maybe was too far ahead of the producers in Saskatchewan. 

But, as we can see, there are more and more people concerned 

about exactly where their food comes from, and this was 

legislation that would allow that type of designation, similar to 

a wine with the vintners quality assurance program. So I don’t 

think it’s obsolete legislation; it may be just legislation that was 

ahead of its time. So I would suggest that the Department of 

Justice keeps that one handy, and we can bring it back when 

there’s a few more people that are really concerned about where 

their food comes from. 

 

The Soil Drifting Control Act, the language in this one may be 

obsolete, but the concept of legislating in a very practical way 

on a local basis to deal with climate change issues, in this case 

it was drought but also on the flooding and water issues, I think 

that concept is still there. And so we need to understand, and 

maybe we’ll find out in committee, what’s going to be 

replacing the kinds of remedies that are here because they’re 

quite practical, local remedies to solve problems. 

 

Then the final Bill that’s being repealed is The Special Payment 

(Dependent Spouses) Act, and that Act has served its purpose 

and it’s no longer necessary, so that clearly is obsolete. 

 

So two out of five, I guess, are obsolete. And I disagree with 

the comments on the others. Now I know many of my 

colleagues also want to speak about these Bills, and so I move 

to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 26, The Miscellaneous 

Statutes Repeal Act, 2011. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 35 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi 

de 2007 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 



March 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 555 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

today to wade into the debate on Bill No. 35, An Act to amend 

The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2007. 

 

Basically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill has come forward in 

light of a conflict between upcoming elections in 2015 and 

conflict of the writ period for the federal election which would 

fall on October 19th, 2015 and to the provincial election which 

was scheduled to fall, now that we have set election dates, on 

November 2nd, 2015. So this piece of legislation comes out of 

that particular conflict, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And what it’s 

proposing is that where the writ period for a fixed date federal 

election would conflict with the writ period for a fixed date 

provincial general election, the provincial election would be 

moved to the first Monday in the following April. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the fall when this piece of 

legislation was introduced, we heard the Premier express some 

concerns about the overlap of the writ period. And he had said 

he was writing a letter to the Prime Minister to urge or 

encourage the Prime Minister to change the federal set date. We 

haven’t heard yet what that response has been, so we’re 

debating a piece of legislation and we’re not quite sure where 

the Prime Minister falls on his willingness to look at a different 

set date for the federal election. 

 

But I would agree that overlapping writ periods is problematic. 

I know even with the federal election last year in the spring of 

2011 and then the election in the fall of 2011, there was some 

serious voter fatigue. So I believe that it would be problematic 

to have these writ periods overlapped. 

 

The one thing that the minister did, when he spoke to the Bill 

for the first time, the one thing the minister did say the goal of 

this Bill is to avoid, quote . . . Actually I won’t quote him. I’ll 

just paraphrase the minister. He said it was to end gaming, or so 

we don’t have gamesmanship in the choice of an election date, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well I would argue that we should be 

avoiding gamesmanship in the whole entire electoral process, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. Gamesmanship in the electoral process, 

whether it’s around election date or anything else, should be 

avoided at all costs. 

 

And I would point to perhaps some gamesmanship that’s 

happening with another piece of legislation, Bill No. 36, that’s 

in front of us right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s proposing 

two particular things. It’s proposing that we add three more 

MLAs here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well this 

side of the House, the opposition, is not in favour of this. 

 

I find it interesting that in one sentence that the Premier has 

said, that one of his new MLAs, he was basically giving one of 

his new MLAs permission at one point in time to be able to do 

two jobs. And so I don’t know what MLAs on that side of the 

House do. I’ve never been a backbench government MLA. But 

I know the work that goes on in my constituency and the work 

that I have to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and this is not a 

part-time job. 

 

So I find it ironic, when we’re talking about the electoral 

process, that the Premier, again out of one side of his mouth, 

could be talking about being willing to let one of his MLAs 

serve in a part-time capacity, but telling the rest of 

Saskatchewan that we do need three more MLAs. I think that is 

incredibly problematic, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I said, I know 

what my day looks like, and there is not room to do this job 

part-time. But the Premier seems to think that there was the 

possibility to do that. So it flies in the face of the need to add 

three more MLAs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The other piece of Bill 36 that’s problematic is the fact that 

citizens under 18 will not be included in the count when it 

comes to establishing boundaries, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 

know, I have a 14-year-old daughter myself. She follows 

politics in large measure because her mother’s in politics, but 

she’s quite upset about this idea. By the time the next election 

rolls . . . By the time we have the next provincial election in 

April of 19 . . . of 2016 — I was almost a century back there, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker; there’s too much noise here going on in 

the House — but by the time the next election rolls around here, 

she will be 18, Mr. Deputy Speaker. She will be 18 years old, 

and she will not have been included in the boundary 

redistribution count and in terms of determining . . . 

 

The Premier at one point said, this is about voters. Well it isn’t 

just about voters, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is about citizens. 

And the next election will be held in 2016, and there will be 

many people not included in the boundary count who will be of 

age to vote. So just to be the devil’s advocate, it is in fact about 

voters. There’s a whole bunch of voters who will not be 

included in the count. The next election after that, if it’s in 

April 2020 or in 2019, my daughter will be 22, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Members, there seems to be quite a 

few conversations across the floor. I would ask that members 

take their conversations behind the bar so that I can hear the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale and so that she has an 

opportunity to put her, make her comments. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I was 

saying, people like my daughter, citizens like my daughter, will 

not be included in this count. And despite that, they will be 

eligible to vote in the next two provincial elections, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. That’s absolutely reprehensible that we’re not . . . It 

was interesting today in question period today too, when the 

Premier said, well in 1979 this is what the NDP did when they 

were in government. Well in 1979, is that how far back we have 

to go, Mr. Deputy Speaker? This is 2012. This is 2012. 

 

Let’s go back to 1979. Let’s find out how many women were 

sitting in this Legislative Chamber, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There 

sure as heck weren’t very many; that’s not to say that there are 

nearly enough now. So let’s go back to 1979 and see what that 

looks like. Well, quite frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t 

want to go there. This is 2012. This is about democracy. This is 

about making sure that citizens are counted and my child, my 

two children count, especially though the one that will be 

eligible to vote in the next two elections where this will be 

impacting her life and her cohorts. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that gamesmanship is a 

problem when it comes to, definitely to the choice of an 



556 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2012 

election date, but it is a problem when it comes to any part of 

the electoral process, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That is an incredible 

problem. 

 

So I know that I do have colleagues who are interested in 

wading into this debate at a later time and have much to say 

about this as well. We talked a little bit about the overlap of the 

federal and provincial election dates. And yes, that is 

problematic, definitely that is. But there are things that this 

government is doing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again related to 

gamesmanship that are problematic as well. So I’d like to leave 

it for my colleagues to also enter into the debate here in the next 

few days and over the course of this session. And with that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I would like to move to adjourn debate. Thank 

you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 35, The 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 

2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 36 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 36 — The 

Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont and looking forward to hearing his comments. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

it’s nice to see you sitting in that chair here today, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

When we’re looking here, I’m pleased to enter in on debate on 

Bill No. 36, An Act to amend The Constituency Boundaries Act, 

1993, but I’m disappointed that we have this piece of legislation 

before this Assembly. And you know, sometimes we talk about 

the intended consequences that we need to analyze and then the 

unintended consequences that we need to make sure we’ve had 

proper consultation on. On this piece of legislation, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it’s in fact the intended consequences that worry me 

most, and it’s the intentions of this government as it relates to 

misplaced priorities and as well to their treatment of the voting 

public. And this Bill follows suit after many, many changes or 

many, many acts of this government that haven’t been in the 

best interests of the electoral process here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

[15:30] 

 

We need to have recognized that under this broader context. 

This is the same government that, just before the last election in 

fact, brought forward changes that reduced, aimed at reducing 

— if you can imagine, Mr. Deputy Speaker — the number of 

young people that were going to be able to vote in the last 

election, suppressing the vote of young people, suppressing the 

vote of First Nations and Métis, and suppressing the vote of 

seniors across this province. So we need to look at this in that 

broader context. 

 

This is the same government that doesn’t have the best interests 

of Saskatchewan people in mind. And when I say that, the best 

interests of Saskatchewan people are best served when all 

people in the province have the ability to engage in the 

democratic process and are encouraged to engage in the 

democratic process. And it’s been disappointing to watch a 

government, on many fronts, thwart and step in the way and 

suppress and eliminate or reduce that opportunity for far too 

many people in this province. And we should in fact be 

focusing our energies on the very opposite of that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and that’s increasing voter participation of all 

Saskatchewan people, regardless of demographics or age. 

 

So certainly with this piece of legislation, that does a couple of 

things, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It eliminates the counting of youth, 

people under 18 years of age in constituency boundaries, 

discounts their voice, discounts their needs, eliminates them 

from that process. We find that wrong. 

 

We also find it to be incredibly misplaced priorities to be 

expanding the number of elected officials in this Assembly at a 

time where this government’s going to be cutting front-line 

services for Saskatchewan people across this province, core 

services that have been there for many years — making cuts in 

the classroom, making cuts in health care, making cuts that 

impact people’s lives, reductions in retirement security in all 

constituencies of this province coming down the pike by way of 

changes at the federal level. And instead of responding to the 

needs of a growing Saskatchewan, we see a government more 

interested in cutting the programs and services that are received 

to Saskatchewan people, and in fact increasing the number of 

politicians. And this is offside with the voting public and it’s 

certainly not in the best interests of Saskatchewan people. 

 

We have an exciting opportunity here in the province where 

we’re growing as a province, where we have a young, vibrant 

First Nations and Métis population in this province, where we 

see many new Canadians that are coming into our province 

building their lives in Saskatchewan, thus influencing who we 

are as a province. But with all of this, there’s also a need for 

planning — long-term planning, short-term planning — and 

making sure that we’re meeting the needs of Saskatchewan 

people. And it speaks to questions of quality of life and 

well-being and our broader focus of what public policy should 

be all about. And it’s disappointing that instead of taking this 

tremendous opportunity and putting forward a vision and a plan 

that addresses the needs of Saskatchewan people and that puts 

communities in better positions as they move forward, enables 

young people and families, we see a government that’s instead 

interested in their own electoral interests ahead of that of 

Saskatchewan people’s interests. 

 

So we’re very disappointed with what’s been put forward here 

on this front, disappointed to see the elimination of those under 

the age of 18 from being counted in the electoral counter within 

constituencies. And I find it really hypocritical of this 

government who, like we all do, we have constituents come and 

join us in the Assembly, often school groups, Mr. Speaker, and 

I believe typically we introduce those students and do so with 

pride, and I would say that on both sides of the Assembly. But 



March 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 557 

the double-talk, Mr. Speaker, is squarely on the side of the Sask 

Party government, Mr. Speaker, on this front, because they 

introduce those students and welcome them into their 

Assembly, to your Assembly. These are the words that we 

should be using. These are the words that I utilize. It’s the kind 

of words we should all be utilizing. But then we see the sort of 

double-talk, Mr. Speaker, when we see a government then 

that’s discounting that voice across this province, the voice of 

young people when they’re not going to count them in the 

electoral boundaries. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m sure you can imagine that there 

are specific needs of young communities, specific needs for 

young families, specific needs for First Nations and Métis 

communities, and I say that specifically because this is where 

we see a burgeoning young population occurring within this 

province. And there’s specific needs and policies that we need 

to be putting as a top priority to be advancing the best interests 

of Saskatchewan people and making sure that we’re improving 

the lives of Saskatchewan people. This is from an economic 

perspective, from a social perspective. It’s about doing the right 

thing to improve the lives of Saskatchewan people. And 

awfully disappointed to see a government choose to 

deliberately discount that voice, to deliberately exclude the 

voice of young constituencies across this province, of young 

people with specific needs that are going to be so vital to the 

future of this province, to the success of this province, to the 

bright future that we must all be pushing for, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s a huge disappointment. 

 

Not only is the Sask Party offside with the public on this 

legislation, they’re offside, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the 

research. They’re offside with the evidence. There’s nothing to 

support what this government’s doing. The changes have been 

described as gerrymandering, Mr. Speaker, which is incredibly 

unfortunate. We see a government that’s more interested in 

their electoral fortunes than they are in serving Saskatchewan 

people and fulfilling the better tomorrow that we should be, for 

all Saskatchewan people, making sure that young people are 

part of the bright future that we must be working towards here 

in this province. 

 

I know there’s been specific data that’s come out on eliminating 

those youth under the age of 18 from this, from constituencies, 

eliminating those voices. I might just read into the record and 

share a little bit of that discourse with you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and with the public. We have some information that 

was received by a leading academic, Canadian academic, 

political science academic, Dr. Dennis Pilon, professor of 

political science at York University. I quote: “Further to this, 

one of my colleagues suggested that the impact on First Nations 

communities could be negative as well, given their larger 

proportion of youth.” 

 

These are the points that I’m making, Mr. Speaker, and I often 

think of constituencies like my good friend from up in 

Cumberland or from Athabasca or from all across southern and 

central Saskatchewan on this front, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But 

here we are with the deliberate actions of government to 

discount the voice of these young communities, these young 

communities who we need to find better ways, Mr. Speaker, 

where we need to find ways to engage and reach out and to find 

solutions that bring us a better economic and social future, not 

only for the lives of those individual children but for our future. 

 

I’ll read a little bit more from Dr. Dennis Pilon. I quote, “While 

these people are not voters, they nonetheless draw on services 

of MPs or MLAs.” So this is the whole point, that these, of 

course, aren’t voters. But there’s specific needs of young 

communities, and certainly that’s not in their best interest to see 

young communities’ voices discounted. So whether we’re 

talking about child care or whether we’re talking about tuition 

or whether we’re talking about employment opportunities and 

skills training and education — all of those aspects are 

discounted through the deliberate actions of a government 

who’s looking out for their own electoral interests and not the 

best interests of Saskatchewan people. 

 

I go on, and quote, “The Bill will advantage the Sask Party.” So 

it’s pretty deliberate what we see here is that this Bill, as I will 

quote again here from Dr. Dennis Pilon of York University, a 

leading academic in political science in Canada, political 

studies in Canada, I quote, “The Bill will advantage the Sask 

Party.” Disappointing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that at a time 

where we have a growing population, at a time where we have 

many challenges and opportunities that exist across this 

province, that we have a government that’s more interested in 

their electoral prospects than they are in Saskatchewan people’s 

best interests. So that’s but a few examples as it relates to the 

unacceptable, disappointing discounting of youth in this 

province through the electoral process. 

 

When we’re looking at the need with the government pushing 

forward an agenda to increase the number of MLAs in this 

province, we stand opposed to this. We have to put this in a 

broader context. As I’ve said, we’re growing as a province. We 

have needs and services, programs that are needed to 

Saskatchewan people. And we have a government that’s 

speaking about austerity — cutting those very programs. 

Instead of leading by example, they’re increasing the number of 

MLAs at a significant expense, over 700,000 to Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

And I know it’s been covered in many, many different 

discussions in the public, many different dialogues in the 

public, but also in the newspapers. And I quote from a March 

13th article in the Leader-Post. The question in the article and 

the title in the article is, “Do we really need three more 

MLAs?” And the article goes on to explain why in fact that’s 

not in the best interests of Saskatchewan people, and why in 

fact it’s very inconsistent with a government that’s speaking of 

austerity and making cuts. I quote that article: 

 

I haven’t met anyone outside the premier’s inner circle 

who thinks adding more MLAs is a good idea. And, no, I 

have no idea why he didn’t mention all this in the 

November election. That’s a good question, too. 

 

And we see this on many fronts. A government that didn’t run 

on this in an election campaign, didn’t consult with the public, 

didn’t share this idea with the public, won a mandate on 

different matters, different issues, and now is forging ahead 

with an agenda that is all about their electoral interests and not 

about Saskatchewan people’s interests. It’s about being straight 

with Saskatchewan people. It’s about sharing in the exchange 

of the goals of government, the objectives of governments. And 



558 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2012 

this is certainly a surprise to Saskatchewan people. 

 

A question at the end of the article, or statement I should say, 

“You might . . . ask your nearest government MLA . . . if he or 

she’s not too busy.” Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I look across 

the Assembly here today, and I see benches of MLAs, Mr. 

Speaker, that don’t look very busy to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And I think there is more than adequate resources, with the 

number of seats we have in this Assembly, to meet the needs of 

Saskatchewan people. And whether you’re sitting in the back 

on the government side and reading a newspaper, or whether 

you’re looking at different aspects, Mr. Speaker, what we need 

to be focusing on is Saskatchewan people. So I’d argue that we 

have adequate representation for Saskatchewan people. 

 

And you know, it’s pretty interesting here. I hear one of the 

long-time backbenchers shouting out from his seat here, Mr. 

Speaker. A good person; I like him. But unfortunately he’s 

getting angry about this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And what he’s 

questioning is whether, you know, how this nine-member 

operation goes about doing their work. And certainly the 

answer, of course, is that certainly these nine members in this 

official opposition are busy members and are occupied with the 

important responsibility of responding to the needs of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Now what would help Saskatchewan people on this front is if 

this government would simply be straight with Saskatchewan 

people, if they would do what they say they were going to do 

instead of running in an election and not mentioning these sorts 

of changes and then surprise, surprise, making these 

introductions. In this case, they’re creating three new MLAs at 

a significant expense to Saskatchewan people and then 

expecting and calling on Saskatchewan people to accept that 

somehow Saskatchewan people should accept cuts to the 

programs and services that many people depend on. There’s a 

huge inconsistency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this government’s talking about austerity, there 

should be leadership by example from the centre of this 

government, not expansionary expenses as it relates to creating 

more politicians when what we need to do is be striving and 

working harder to meeting the needs of Saskatchewan people. 

So like I say, I’ll read again the quote there: “You might want 

to ask your nearest government MLA . . . if he or she’s not too 

busy.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s a fair question. It’s a fair question and 

it’s a fair point. And I would argue that there’s lots of 

representation in this Assembly the way it stands and lots of 

ability to serve Saskatchewan people. Unfortunately that’s not 

what we’re seeing from this government. 

 

I’ll move on and quote a little bit more here: 

 

What’s that you say? You can’t figure out why they’re 

adding five per cent more Saskatchewan MLAs at a time 

of “austerity” and when they’ve already set targets to 

reduce the overall civil service size by 16 per cent in four 

years through attrition. Yes, you’re right, this wouldn’t 

seem to make much sense given that you are far more 

likely to need the services of a government employee than 

that of an MLA. 

Mr. Speaker, this move by this government is offside with 

Saskatchewan people. It rejects the research and evidence that 

supports addressing the needs of Saskatchewan people. And it’s 

inconsistent and hypocritical to call on Saskatchewan people to 

accept cuts or brace for cuts, as this Premier and government 

have been calling for, at a time when they want to increase the 

number of MLAs. And the question is, whose interests are you 

serving? And in this case it’s crystal clear — certainly not the 

best interests of Saskatchewan people. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this point in time I don’t have much 

else to say about this Bill other than to express my great 

disappointment with this agenda from the Sask Party. And to 

see a government that was elected on a mandate that didn’t 

include any of this, and now to be more interested in their own 

political hide or their own political fortunes than the best 

interests of Saskatchewan people, is a sad and sorry state in this 

province. 

 

Instead of embracing and enabling and inviting First Nations 

and Métis people and young communities to be a larger part of 

our economic future, to engage these communities, to improve 

our social well-being as a province, we see a government that 

instead is pursuing policies that are in their best interests as a 

political party. That’s disappointing. And one of my colleagues 

here points out that of course this gets to, of course, a very 

unfortunate circumstance, which many have weighed in in the 

debate, and we have circumstance of gerrymandering that just 

of course is all about their interests and not about Saskatchewan 

people’s interests. 

 

So we’re disappointed that we have a government, Sask Party 

government, that’s discounting, eliminating the youth from the 

political equation, from the political discourse, from the count 

in constituencies. We do believe that youth count in this 

province. We do believe that young people and young 

communities have specific needs, and we’re going to work hard 

to represent all Saskatchewan and all young people and all the 

people of this province. And I just can’t express enough how 

disappointed we are with this piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this point in time, I move adjournment 

of debate with respect to Bill No. 36, An Act to amend The 

Constituency Boundaries Act, 1993. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 36, The Constituency 

Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 30 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 30 — The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 



March 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 559 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to rise again today and speak to the 

following, the sister Act to I think it was Bill 26, I’m not sure, 

but the one around maintenance orders, enforcement of 

maintenance orders. And this is the Act respecting 

consequential amendments resulting from the enactment of The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

So these are ones that do the nitty-gritty, the detail of the larger 

Act that I had spoken to earlier in the afternoon. And so it’s 

relatively straightforward; if you agree with one, then you must 

agree with the second. And so we have questions about the first 

one, and I outlined some of those concerns earlier today, 

particularly around the apparent success of the office of 

maintenance enforcement and that they’re doing good work, it 

seems. You have a high percentage rate of enforcement, some 

90-some, 91 per cent; and they collected over $35 million last 

year, which goes a lot to helping out families. 

 

But I am deeply concerned that while we can be, on one hand 

. . . And this is what this government does. On one hand, it does 

one thing but, on another hand, it does another thing. So it 

sends really mixed messages. Like it will update and modernize 

its language, but through its lean initiative where it’s cutting 16 

per cent of its employees, will this office be strong enough? It 

can have the strong legislation, but it means absolutely nothing 

if there’s nobody there in the office to actually enforce the 

legislation. So the question will be, and we’ll see what happens 

next week with the budget and what it means to this office 

particularly, but I think it’s a sad state of affairs when we see 

many offices that deal with and help people with vulnerable 

situations or situations at risk. 

 

Today I raised in question period a very parallel situation about 

asbestos. And the minister said, and he got up and said, you 

know, we have the folks who are doing the enforcement, the 

inspections, and all of that. But if those folks too are going to 

suffer from a 16 per cent decrease, that’s a big problem. That’s 

a huge issue. And so you can’t be doing this and relying on 

your record, while at the same time you’re cutting, cutting 

people. So in this case are we talking about cutting staff one at 

a time? This group is doing such fine, fine work. It’s hugely 

important that we have people in the office to make sure that 

the i’s are crossed, the t’s . . . the i’s are dotted and the t’s are 

crossed. That’s what you’ve got to do, because you can’t get 

those two mixed up. 

 

So it’s really important when we go through the legislation. We 

see that this Act’s to amend The Automobile Accident Insurance 

Act. The Enforcement of Money Judgment Act has to be dealt 

with. The Labour Standards Act has to be dealt with. The 

Municipal Employees’ Pension Act has to be dealt with, 

pension benefits. So the list is long — The Provincial Court 

Act. And we can go through this, but at the bottom line, at the 

end of the day when the rubber hits the road, it really has to be 

that you have the staff to make things work. 

 

And so I think that it’s important that we will see how things 

pan out next week. We’ll be asking those questions because at 

the end of the day we want to make sure people have the ability 

to do the things that they need to do. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I won’t be speaking long because this is a 

straightforward consequential amendments Act. And as I said, 

if you agree with one, you must agree with the other. Or if 

you’ve got questions of the one, I guess you’ve got questions 

with the other. Right? They go hand in glove. And as I said, I 

do. But I think the good work is there, and I want to make sure 

the good work happens. And we can’t drop the ball on this. 

There’s too many families, too many young people, too many 

children who are depending on the enforcement of these 

maintenance orders that you can’t have a hiccup. You can’t 

have somebody dropping the ball because of ideology. 

 

And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move adjournment of 

Bill No. 30, An Act respecting consequential amendments 

resulting from the enactment of The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2011. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 30, The Enforcement 

of Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendment Act, 2011. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 31 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 31 — The 

Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 

2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur l’exécution des 

jugements canadiens be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 

pleased to enter the debate on Bill 31, The Enforcement of 

Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2011. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, what this Bill does is it basically provides the force of 

the court with foreign protection orders. So what it does, it 

defines what a foreign civil protection order is, and then it gives 

it weight so law enforcement officials here in Saskatchewan can 

enforce it. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is something that already 

happens within Canada. There’s civil protection orders in other 

jurisdictions in Canada, and the legislation allows for us to be 

able to enforce these protection orders from other provinces. 

And now what will happen is a foreign civil protection order 

here will be able to be in force and enforced by our authorities. 

 

So I just would like to read a little piece from the Act here, 

section 10.1, and the definition of a foreign civil protection 

order means that: 

 

a foreign judgment, or a portion of a foreign judgment, 

made by a court in a foreign state, except for a foreign 

state prescribed in the regulations, that prohibits a 



560 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2012 

specified individual from: 

 

(a) being in physical proximity to a specified person or 

following a specified person from place to place; 

 

(b) contacting or communicating with, either directly or 

indirectly, a specified person; 

 

(c) attending at or within a certain distance of a 

specified place or location; or 

 

(d) engaging in molesting, annoying, harassing or 

threatening conduct directed at a specified person; 

 

So the goal of this legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or this 

amendment, is safety of citizens. One can think about where 

this might come from. So you have someone moved to Canada, 

perhaps, who has a protection order from their home country. 

And perhaps this came out of police officers or other 

enforcement officials seeing these protection orders and 

wondering, can I enforce this? Is this possible? They know that 

the safety of individuals is absolutely imperative, but the 

struggle between the police officer seeing what an order is and 

then trying to figure out if they’re able to enforce it, that time 

that can pass before they figure out, before something is 

actually enforceable, an individual may be put in harm’s way, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So this Bill No. 31, An Act to amend The Enforcement of 

Canadian Judgments Act, is completely reasonable, and it 

sounds like a very useful Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, especially 

in light of the fact that we already consider civil protection 

orders from other jurisdictions across Canada. We’re a province 

open to people coming from all over the world to call this 

wonderful place home, and sadly there are issues of violence, 

partner violence, that may be part of this problem, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. It doesn’t necessarily have to be partner violence, but 

this allows the opportunity for people who are new to our 

country perhaps to have a little added safety too. That piece to 

be able to speed up the process and say this is a protection order 

until deemed otherwise is, I think, a very valid piece of 

legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So with that, it’s a fairly straightforward Act so I don’t have 

much more to say. So with that I’ll leave it up to my colleagues 

in future debates on Bill No. 31 to see if they have anything to 

say about it as well. And with that I’d like to move to adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 31, The 

Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2011. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 32 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 32 — The 

Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders Amendment Act, 2011/Loi 

de 2011 modifiant la Loi sur les ordonnances alimentaires 

interterritoriales be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 

with pleasure that I rise today to speak to the debate on Bill No. 

32, The Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders Amendment Act, 

2011. 

 

And I guess first of all I just want to comment a little bit on 

interjurisdictional support orders, and it appears this suite of 

Bills that the government has introduced today dealing with 

interjurisdictional orders of all kinds and sorts — my colleague 

just previously talked about ones relating to protection orders 

— and this one deals with support orders. 

 

And as you know, this is a complicated world and families 

today are often spread apart through different jurisdictions, and 

life is complicated for a lot of families. So these kinds of Bills 

tend to try and make the whole divorce proceedings much more 

efficient and less troublesome for the people that are trying to 

get the orders through. 

 

I guess I have to commend the Department of Justice staff for 

bringing forward these Bills and all the work they’ve done on 

these Bills. I know it’s a lot of work for them, and given that 

there’s going to be cuts over the next four years of 16 per cent, I 

think it’s going to be much more difficult for those 

hard-working civil servants to continue to bring forth these 

types of Bills. A lot of these are difficult; they’re 

administrative. And I know the work that is involved in 

bringing Bills forward. So my congratulations and 

commendations to the staff who will probably find themselves 

with less colleagues in the future to do this kind of important 

work. It’s an unfortunate state, given the cuts that we know are 

coming and the announcement by the Premier that over the next 

four years we’re going to see a large cut in the civil service — 

more than 10 per cent; 16 per cent — which has to be of 

concern to all the staff that are working for the minister right 

now. 

 

At any rate, the minister has indicated that the reason for this 

Bill is to provide a procedure for registration of a foreign 

support order for enforcement in Saskatchewan. So it’s a very 

basic Bill. It’s been around since 1997 because this amendment 

is an amendment to The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Act, 1997. And so it’s just basically adding some procedures for 

registration of foreign support orders. And it also establishes a 

procedure for getting, for obtaining or varying a provincial 

support order where one party resides in Saskatchewan and the 

other party lives in another jurisdiction. Again, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that’s a common occurrence these days where people 

end up in different provinces. I know that, perhaps, in places 

like northern Saskatchewan where we’ve seen the demise of the 

forest industry . . . And I know there are a lot of families who 

have been split apart because of job requirements, and often 

that leads to separation and divorce. And those kinds of 

situations are regrettable but that’s the way when the forest 

industry falls and we don’t have any way to replace jobs. It’s 

one of the situations that happens. 

 



March 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 561 

[16:00] 

 

There is a national interjurisdictional support subcommittee 

that’s been established. The federal Government of Canada is 

responsible for divorce under the federal law. That’s federal 

jurisdiction. And so provincial laws have to work in 

conjunction with federal laws in order to ensure that there is 

harmony between the laws. That committee has been doing a 

lot of work since 2004, as a matter of fact. So it’s taken six 

years and they, at that point, recommended amendments to 

improve the model legislation. 

 

So thanks to our hard-working civil servants, Saskatchewan 

will be the third province to introduce amendments to the 

legislation following our Prairie province neighbours of Alberta 

and Manitoba. So what the amendments will do will require the 

court to . . . This is an important piece of the amendments, is to 

require the court to apply the law of Saskatchewan first. So that 

will give a lot of clarity in terms of the priority of the orders. 

 

And currently when a Saskatchewan court gets that application 

for child support, they have to determine if they’re entitled, 

they have to determine what law applies, and this amendment 

will just clearly say Saskatchewan first. That will be easier for 

the courts and it will speed up process, which is important to 

the people with the application. 

 

So basically if you look at the Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s 

a number of changes that are being proposed. And the first one 

is in section 2, and again it’s a definitional addition. And the 

term that’s being added is a term, or definition, “request to 

locate.” And in this case, it’s a request to find someone to 

facilitate a variation application. Often in support orders, the 

person paying support, their circumstances change and they 

require a variation in their support order. And so the court is 

now . . . You can supply “a written request to locate a person 

for the purpose of facilitating a proceeding with respect to the 

establishment, variation, registration or enforcement of a 

support order.” 

 

And they’ve also repealed the existing definition of support 

order, and they’re now instituting a new definition which seems 

to add not only a support order but where an administrative 

body — so that would be the enforcement office, the 

maintenance enforcement office — have recalculated the 

payment of support for a child if it’s enforceable in the 

jurisdiction where the recalculation was made. 

 

So what that suggests to me is that if a Alberta person is paying 

support to someone in Saskatchewan, and they apply to their 

maintenance enforcement office for a variation or a 

recalculation, that that could also fall within the definition of 

support order as is defined in The Inter-jurisdictional Support 

Orders Act. So that’s another new definition, or it’s an addition 

to the definition support order. 

 

In the next part of the law, division 1, there has been a few 

changes, and there’s a new definition that’s being added or 

changed. In our law it said “ordinarily” and apparently it’s now 

being switched to the word “habitually.” And again that’s part 

of the harmonization that’s happening across the country in 

order to bring, make it consistent with the Hague Convention 

on the International Recovery of Child Support and Other 

Forms of Family Maintenance. 

 

So again, the people that are working on this nationally within 

the interjurisdictional support orders group or our own civil 

servants here who are paying attention to these things, they’ve 

identified that this word needs to be changed in order to be 

consistent. 

 

Again we look into another change, and that’s to section 5. 

Now section 5 is about the support application. So this is how a 

claimant would make an application in court for a reciprocating 

order to recognize an extra-jurisdictional order. So if you’re 

living in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and you have a 

spouse that owes you support from Alberta, and you think that 

that’s where they are living — sometimes people aren’t sure 

where their ex is living — but you can start a proceeding here 

in Saskatchewan and that could result in a support order being 

made in that province. 

 

So it identifies how you would start the proceeding. And what 

you have to do is complete a support application with their 

name and address for service and a copy of the specific 

authority on which you’re basing your application for support, 

unless you’re relying on the law of their jurisdiction. So you 

have some choices there. 

 

There’s a few changes here. Again we’re changing ordinarily 

resident to habitually resident in the first part of the section, and 

the same language is being amended in clause 5(2)(b) where 

ordinarily resident is being switched to habitually resident. 

 

And then that leads to clause 6 which is also being amended, 

and the same change is being made there. That’s providing 

support application to the designated authority. So once you’ve 

filled out your application form and you want to hand it over to 

the designated authority, they review it, and then they’ll send a 

copy of your application to the appropriate authority in the 

reciprocating jurisdiction. So again in this case, if you were 

filing in Saskatchewan, then the authority would send that order 

or the support application over to the other jurisdiction. 

 

The change that’s being made here, as I said, was just to change 

ordinarily resident to habitually resident. And I think there’s a 

fine distinction there between the two words, but it is one that is 

obviously important and again brings harmony into the laws 

across Canada for this type of legislation. 

 

Now section 7 is about provisional orders. So if the respondent 

that’s living in the reciprocating jurisdiction . . . So if the person 

you’ve applied against requires a provisional order, then you 

can apply to the court to give them — even if they’re not there 

in court, so they don’t have to be present in court, and there’s 

no requirement for notice — you can make a provisional order, 

taking into account the statutory authority that the application 

for support is based on. So that provides an opportunity. There 

again the change in that particular clause for section 7 is to 

switch ordinarily resident to habitually, so that brings 

everything in harmony. 

 

Division 2 is regarding claimants that are habitually resident 

outside Saskatchewan. So the heading has been changed to put 

the word habitually in there. And in section 9 of the Act, The 

Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders Amendment Act, 1997, talks 



562 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2012 

about the notice of the hearing. So there’s a fairly lengthy 

section here that explains how the notice is properly given for 

the hearing. So if there’s an application from you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, for example, and you were applying to a designated 

authority, they receive your application, then . . . Oh sorry, this 

is where they receive it from an appropriate authority in a 

reciprocating jurisdiction together with information that the 

respondent lives in Saskatchewan. So this is the reverse 

situation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In this case there is an 

individual living in Alberta who wants to get a support order for 

someone in Saskatchewan. 

 

So in this case they would fill out the application under their 

law, and it would be received here from a designated authority. 

And what the designated authority needs to do here is serve this 

notice that’s coming from Alberta to the respondent, to the 

person that’s being claimed upon, in accordance with the 

regulations. 

 

So there’s two things they have to serve. And service is just the 

process of having an official deliver documents to that 

individual and they acknowledge that they have received those 

documents. There’s different ways to provide service. And 

usually, you know, that’s done through sheriffs or law offices 

that will make sure that the person being claimed against, the 

respondent, adequately receives the application. So they’ll 

provide the respondent a copy of the support application and a 

notice requiring them to appear at a certain time or to give 

documents required by the regulations. 

 

Now what happens if you can’t find that respondent, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker? That’s what this section speaks to. So there’s 

a woman in Alberta who wants to claim against a former 

partner for support that they believe lives in Saskatchewan. 

They’re not sure exactly where, but they have good reason to 

believe it may be in Saskatoon. What does the designated 

authority do when they receive the application? 

 

So they haven’t served them, but they believe that they’re 

ordinarily resident in another jurisdiction. Then they shall . . . 

oh yes, at this point, if the authority knows that that person 

might be living in Manitoba, they can actually forward that 

application on to the next person in Manitoba as well and notify 

them that they’re doing it. And then they have to return the 

original application to the appropriate authority in the original 

location. So it’s a bit complicated, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

you can see that it’s always complicated once lawyers get a 

hold of things, but that’s sometimes of necessity. 

 

And in this case, section 9 is being amended by striking out 

again the words “ordinarily resides” to “habitually resident.” So 

that occurs in a number of spots in the notice of hearing clause. 

 

And then this goes on to section 10. There’s a slight 

amendment there. In section 10, it’s a time provision. So what it 

says here is, if they don’t get the documents that they requested 

in the previous section within 18 months after the date of the 

request, the court can dismiss the application. The time frame 

here is being tightened up to 12 months. There’s no reason for 

that given in the explanatory note, so I can only assume that 18 

months was deemed to be too long by the wise people that were 

looking at the changes that are needed. 

 

In the next section that’s going to be changed, this is section 12. 

And this entire section is repealed, although the substitute 

proposal and the amendment is not a lot different. But I guess 

it’s the nub of the changes, or probably one of the more 

important changes, and that’s what law comes first. And I 

talked about that earlier when I was referring to the minister’s 

comments. 

 

But this is the section, section 12 of The Inter-jurisdictional 

Support Orders Amendment Act, 1997 that’s being amended to 

reflect the ability of the determining people, the people making 

the determination to apply Saskatchewan law first. And the way 

they’ve done that is they’ve added a clause that says a court 

shall first apply Saskatchewan law. 

 

So that’s the first order for the court to consider. It makes their 

life a lot easier and I think it makes the process a lot easier. And 

then “if under Saskatchewan law the child is not entitled to 

support, the court shall apply the law of the jurisdiction in 

which the child is habitually resident.” 

 

So in this case, it’s determining whether there is entitlement for 

support or a continuance to receive support and the amount, the 

court shall first apply Saskatchewan law. But if the child is not 

entitled to support under our law, the court can apply the law of 

the jurisdiction where the child lives. So if this child is living in 

Alberta, an application is made against a parent here in 

Saskatchewan, the law here would apply first to determine the 

amount of support that’s needed or the variation of the order, or 

all of those things. But if for whatever reason our courts say this 

law doesn’t apply, then the court must look at the law from the 

jurisdiction where the child lives normally. 

 

The second part of that clause, now there was three subsections, 

there’s now two. And the clause describes that when you’re: 

 

. . . determining a claimant’s entitlement to receive or 

continue to receive support and the amount of support, the 

court shall first apply Saskatchewan law, but if . . . the 

claimant is not entitled to support, the court shall apply the 

law of the jurisdiction . . . 

 

So in this case, it would be a spousal claim for alimony. So this 

is a different sort of support that we’re talking about here; it’s 

not the child, but the spouse. And in that case, then the same 

rules apply. The court shall first apply Saskatchewan law. And 

then if there’s no entitlement for support for the claimant, then 

you go back to the jurisdiction, the law of the jurisdiction in 

which the claimant and respondent last maintained a common 

habitual residence. So if they were living together in Alberta, 

you would apply the Alberta law if there was no eligibility 

under Saskatchewan law. 

 

So in this case, the changes are really about applying the law of 

Saskatchewan first, and that’s a critical change in this particular 

amending Bill. 

 

The next section that’s being amended in the Bill is section 13, 

and there’s a new subsection that’s being added after the rest of 

the section. Section 13 is about the order itself. So once the 

hearing is done, the court has to make an order, and it’s in 

respect to either a claimant or a child or both. So the spouse and 

the child, they can make a support order, they can make an 



March 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 563 

interim support order and adjourn the hearing to a specified 

date. They can adjourn the hearing to a specified date without 

making an interim order, or they can refuse to make a support 

order. 

 

And the subsection that’s being added reads: 

 

“A support order must specify the law applied pursuant to 

section 12, and, if the order does not specify the law 

applied, the order is deemed to have been made pursuant 

to Saskatchewan law”. 

 

So again there’s going to be more clarity about which law 

applies when these orders are being made. And the court order 

must include a clause that specifies which law is being applied, 

or if it doesn’t specify it, if a judge forgets to specify it, then it’s 

deemed to have been made pursuant to Saskatchewan law. I’m 

not sure how that’s going to happen when the court finds that 

Saskatchewan law is not applicable and yet there’s a deeming 

provision in the order that says it’s Saskatchewan law. So there 

might be a little Catch-22 there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that our 

civil servants, I assume they’ve considered it. They’re wise and 

able. But this may be something that could raise interpretation 

problems, at a minimum. So that’s something that would be of 

concern. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Section 18 is now the next one that’s being changed. And in 

this case, it’s about the registration of the order. So this is part 

of the procedural stuff that goes on when these kinds of orders 

are being issued. It’s a very administrative-type process and one 

that requires a lot of work by civil servants. And unfortunately I 

think the courts are going to find themselves subject to 16 per 

cent cuts as well over four years, so there’ll be a lot less people 

able to handle all this administrative work. And the austerity 

that we’re hearing about in the upcoming budget will likely 

affect people that are trying to get their lives in order through 

these types of proceedings. 

 

So it’s unfortunate that, you know, we create these fairly 

administrative, bureaucratic processes which are necessary to 

protect everyone and yet we see fit to cut the number of people 

that are able to do that kind of work, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 

sad statement particularly when we know we’re in times of 

prosperity and we see a lot of money being distributed in grants 

— just announcements made today again. So I’m not sure 

where the balance is or if they’re speaking out of two sides of 

their mouth, but it seems there’s some inconsistent messaging 

coming from the government here on these types of things. 

 

So the people that are going to be left to register all these 

orders, there’s several things they have to do. First of all the 

order has, the first part of the clause states that the order has the 

same effect as if it was a support order made by a court in 

Saskatchewan. So it deems to be, even if it’s an extraprovincial 

order, it’s going to have the same effect as it has in 

Saskatchewan. And when the order is registered, it can, both 

with respect to arrears and obligations accruing after and before 

registration, it can be enforced in the same manner as a support 

order made by a court in Saskatchewan. So in this case, if there 

is enforcement required, the court will have to, the court clerk 

will have to deal with the sheriff’s office. Again we don’t know 

if we’re going to have cuts in the sheriff’s office and the 

number of people available to enforce these orders, but we will 

see, once the budget comes down, the kinds of cuts we’re 

looking at in the next few years. 

 

So we’ve added some subsections in this amendment Act, The 

Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders Amendment Act, 2011. And 

in this case we are looking at three additional subsections. The 

first one is the duration. So how long is this court order 

available and alive? And this subsection says that “The duration 

of the support obligation set out in an extra-provincial order or 

foreign order is governed by the law pursuant to which the 

order was made.” So if the court order comes 

extrajurisdictionally, then the duration of that order is under 

that law. 

 

Then we go on to subsection (4). And this is an interesting 

addition to the Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The onus here and the 

burden of proving “is on the appropriate authority of the 

reciprocating jurisdiction to provide proof of the law governing 

the duration of the support obligation to the satisfaction of the 

designated authority.” So in here, in order to prove what the law 

is, it’s on the appropriate authority of the reciprocating 

jurisdiction. The Saskatchewan court and the clerks and the 

sheriffs don’t have to determine what the laws are of the other 

jurisdiction. That would be way too hard for them to do. So 

what this law says is the onus is on other courts. Now again, 

I’m not sure that Saskatchewan law can bind other jurisdictions 

to do that. Although we can say the onus is on them, clearly our 

law doesn’t apply to those jurisdictions. So it will be interesting 

to see how this particular subclause plays out, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

And then the next subclause says, even though we put the onus 

on them, if they can’t determine the duration of the support 

obligation pursuant to their laws, then they can apply in 

Saskatchewan to apply the duration. So in the event the 

reciprocating authority isn’t able to determine the duration — 

maybe it got left out; I don’t quite know how that works — at 

any rate, the court of Saskatchewan could determine the 

duration. So that’s something that will be helpful to the people 

here when they’re not certain what the duration of the support 

obligations are. 

 

The next provision that’s being amended is section 19 of the 

Act. And again this is one about foreign orders where there is 

the language about ordinarily resident and we are switching it 

to habitually resident. In this case, this talks about registration 

of foreign orders and where the court has jurisdiction. So 

there’s a few minor amendments to that subsection. 

 

Then we go on to division 1, section 25. So in this case section 

25(1) is again the changes to change ordinarily resident with 

habitually resident. This section is about the application to vary 

the support order so it sets out the proceedings for varying a 

support order. And when an applicant feels that their support 

isn’t enough and they may have knowledge that their former 

spouse or co-parent, his financial or her financial circumstances 

have changed, so they can make an application to vary the 

order. 

 

The next change we find is in clause 26. Oh, the heading has 

been changed as well of division 1. Here in subsection 25 of the 



564 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2012 

English version is again the change ordinarily resident to 

habitually resident. Same thing in clause 26(2)(b) and 

subsection 27(1) of the Act. So those words “ordinarily” are 

again being cleaned up to “habitually” just to bring harmony 

with the other jurisdictions across Canada. As I said, Alberta 

and Manitoba have already gone forward with these changes 

based on a lot of work that was done by the national 

interjurisdictional support subcommittee. 

 

We’re getting into section 29(1), (2), and (3). Again the change 

is to strike out ordinarily resident and replace it with habitually 

resident. Subsection 30(3) is the same change as well. Section 

19 is the notice of hearing clause for variation. So this is all 

about variation agreements now, not the original application. 

 

And then we have subsection 31(1). Again this is more about 

the law of Saskatchewan and what applies first. So when we 

talked about the original application being made and that the 

courts have now the authority to determine that Saskatchewan 

law applies first, we have section 31(1) for determining 

entitlements to receive or continue to receive support for a 

child. So the first thing the court must do now is to first apply 

Saskatchewan law, so those words are being added to . . . Well 

in fact they repealed the whole section, but what they did is 

they just changed it to Saskatchewan law in 31(1). And the 

habitually resident clause is also being substituted in 31(3)(a). 

Sorry, that’s 31; 32 is the one where we put the Saskatchewan 

law, in section 32. So that’s been changed as a new subclause. 

 

Section 32 is the order again. So the order, on the conclusion of 

a hearing in this case, the court can make a support variation 

order, an interim support variation order, adjourn the hearing, 

or refuse the order. And there’s a new subclause that’s saying 

that that support variation order has to specify which law is 

being applied pursuant to section 31. If it doesn’t specify the 

law applied, it is deemed to have been made pursuant to 

Saskatchewan law — so the same situation here with the 

variation orders as we had with the original applications. 

 

We will have a little, slight change to clause 34(b)(i). Again the 

change from ordinarily resident to habitually resident. 

 

And subsection 35 has been repealed and there’s a new one 

substituted. And basically it allows the court to vary a support 

order registered in Saskatchewan pursuant to part III or the 

former Act. And there’s also a reference to part II now that’s 

been added. If both the applicant and respondent accept the 

court’s jurisdiction, if they’re both ordinarily resident here in 

Saskatchewan, or if the respondent is resident in Saskatchewan 

and the support order was registered by the applicant — so if 

the spouse, applicant, is living outside of the province — as 

long as they’ve properly registered it then the court can make a 

variation on the support order. 

 

The other thing that the section has changed is they’ve dropped 

a reference to The Family Maintenance Act, 1997. I just assume 

that that is a cleanup, a consequential cleanup of what’s going 

on here, and that The Family Maintenance Act, 1997 may not 

be of force and effect any more. But I haven’t confirmed that, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Then the next section — we’re getting close to the final 

amendments to the Bill — the next one is section 36(5)(a). And 

in that case again, it’s the change from ordinarily resident to 

habitually resident. This is the appeal section which allows or 

sets out the terms for the appeal that’s required. And this 

particular clause is how the appeal decision is delivered to the 

resident if they don’t live in Saskatchewan. So the appeal order 

would be mailed or delivered to the other authorities in the 

reciprocating jurisdiction, 36(5)(a). 

 

And then there’s a new section, 37(1). So this is again one of 

the more interesting changes in what is rather an otherwise 

somewhat mundane Bill. But this one here allows, it’s called 

the request to locate. So what it does is it allows a designated 

authority in other jurisdictions to ask our courts to locate an 

individual. I’m not sure how that’s going to happen or how the 

court will proceed to do that and again, given the cuts in our 

civil service, who’s going to be left to actually do the location. 

But we’ll wait and see because we don’t know how it’s going to 

impact them. 

 

The designated authority can make inquiries about the 

whereabouts of a person named in the request to locate, and it 

allows them to respond to a request to locate and advise the 

reciprocating jurisdiction if they have been located. But I guess 

in the interests of privacy, the lawyers who have drafted these 

changes indicate they can make inquiries as to where they are, 

but they can’t disclose any information about that person’s 

address. So the person’s address won’t be disclosed to anyone, 

but the reciprocating authority will — is required — to make 

inquiries as to where they’re located. And I presume then the 

reciprocating authority will, here in Saskatchewan, will have to 

ensure that those documents are delivered to that location. 

 

It takes a lot of effort to find someone who doesn’t want to be 

found, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and this is a fairly onerous burden 

on the authorities. I’m not sure what kind of consultation that 

the minister has had with the authorities that are required to do 

that. 

 

In his comments, he indicates that the new provision to 

establish location services in order to allow other jurisdictions 

to request a search for a person in Saskatchewan prior to 

sending any application to the interjurisdictional support order 

unit, he went on to say that the unit regularly gets application 

from jurisdictions that have reason to believe, but can’t 

confirm, they’re living in Saskatchewan. And now its, the ISO 

[interjurisdictional support order] unit can determine that he 

doesn’t live here and send it back, or it’s forwarded to another 

jurisdiction, wherever they believe he’s going to be living. 

 

So there’s an attempt to streamline the process, but I’m not sure 

what kind of resources it’s going to take for our authorities and 

our civil servants to be able to actually do what’s required by 

this section. Because again it says that if they receive a request, 

they can take any steps they consider appropriate to obtain 

information about this person, and they can also advise whether 

or not they’ve found them. So this is going to be a bit more 

work for busy people, particularly when there’s going to be less 

of them available to do that kind of work. So I would caution 

the minister here to ensure that before they put additional 

burdens on the civil service, that there’s sufficient people 

available to do these kinds of things. Sometimes finding 

deadbeat dads can be like finding a needle in a haystack, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, so this is not something that’s easily 



March 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 565 

undertaken. 

 

The section 46, which is just a transitional clause, is amended 

again to replace ordinarily resident with habitually resident. 

And then the final changes to subsection 13(1), and this one 

here talks about adding a clause saying a person mentioned in 

. . . Oh no, that’s the maintenance of enforcement orders Act. 

So it’s a consequential change to The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Act, 1997. 

 

And that’s basically what the premise of the changes are for 

Bill 32, The Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders Amendment 

Act, 2011. It appears that off the top this is something that’s 

been worked on for a long time with our partners across the 

country and certainly with our federal partners in relation to the 

harmonization of the laws in the Divorce Act so that, for people 

applying for support, the administration of that order and the 

relationships with other jurisdictions runs smoother. 

 

[16:30] 

 

As I indicated earlier, I think we have to be concerned about the 

additional burden that these types of Bills put on the civil 

service, and that there’s adequate support within the service to 

ensure that the meaning and the true meaning and intent of the 

Act can be adequately implemented. 

 

You know, it’s a good sign when jurisdictions are working 

together. And as I said earlier, it’s difficult for families these 

days when people move around. And another example would 

be, you know, rural women in Saskatchewan who end up in a 

situation where they need to move as a result of a divorce and 

their spouse remains. And they have to go out of the province 

because they have family in other places. Or it could even be a 

case of domestic violence, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There aren’t 

adequate housing and supports for women in rural areas right 

now who are suffering from those kinds of domestic violence. 

 

And this is a case where the attempt that’s being made by the 

Department of Justice is to streamline these processes. You 

know, it’s unfortunate that families are split apart like that, and 

it’s a difficult time for everyone. And given the economy that 

we live in now, it’s so fluid that people are transitional from 

province to province. 

 

So these types of Bills and the work that’s being done by our 

colleagues across the country is important work, and again I 

just can’t stress enough that it’s important that the civil service 

be strong so that they can assist people to bring full force and 

intent to these types of fairly administrative legislation. 

 

So given that, Mr. Speaker, I think that other of my colleagues 

are going to want to speak to this Bill as well, and I think 

they’ll have concerns as well. But at this point, I would move to 

adjourn. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 32, The 

Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders Amendment Act, 2011. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 33 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 33 — The 

Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 

pleasure to weigh in on discussion and debate here this 

afternoon as it relates to Bill No. 33, The Residential Tenancies 

Amendment Act, 2011. Now this Bill is in response, I suspect, 

to something that’s important to Saskatchewan people and that 

is some of the challenges and pressures as it relates to housing 

and affordability. And when I first saw this Bill being 

introduced by title, I was encouraged and hopeful that a 

government was or this government was in fact going to be 

doing something meaningful on the housing front, and 

something that certainly would connect with so many in this 

province who are facing challenges as it relates to the 

affordability of a home or of rent or for their children. 

 

And I guess all I can say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that I’m 

greatly disappointed with the ineffectiveness of the Bill that’s 

been put forward. We have a major crisis on our hands for so 

many people across Saskatchewan in so many communities, 

and we see ineffective legislation like this. It’s really 

disappointing. And this is no solution at all, Mr. Speaker, to the 

housing pressures and crisis that face so many. So we’re really, 

we’re really disappointed that we don’t see meaningful action 

on this front from this government. In fact we see steps in the 

wrong direction on this front. 

 

Recently the Sask Party’s cut a program that was part of the 

solution. When I say part of the solution, I think, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, when we’re talking about housing, it’s important we 

recognize that we’re talking about comprehensive solutions, 

comprehensive tools to bring around affordability and to 

address the pressures that so many people are facing. There’s 

not one silver bullet or one solution. 

 

But this government actually cut part of its tool box to make 

things better recently when they cut the home purchase program 

that participated with the housing authorities, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And this program here worked where renters could 

build equity in fact in their homes. So lower income individuals 

wanting and struggling to make ends meet, but hopeful to gain 

some equity or to move into home ownership, had the 

opportunity to show disciplined approach to paying rent for a 

whole many of years but then being able to have an ownership 

stake or have ownership of a house, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I’m incredibly disappointed to see a cut to a program like that 

that’s meant so much to many families in this province. And 

unfortunately it’s a tool like this that in fact should have been 

studied, consulted, and expanded to bring solutions forward on 

what’s an incredibly meaningful issue to Saskatchewan people. 

 

We talk about lots of important things in this Assembly, Mr. 



566 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2012 

Speaker. But in many ways, when you’re talking about the 

adequacy or dignity of a home and the affordability of that 

adequate, dignified home, there’s little more important than this 

file and this issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And unfortunately 

we’ve had a government that’s struggled to manage the activity 

going on within the province. They haven’t chosen a course of 

smart growth, Mr. Speaker. They’ve pushed away from 

utilizing tools and approaches that could be meaningful in 

addressing the housing pressures on so many in this province. 

 

I know in my constituency I chat with many parents in fact who 

are so concerned about the impact of the pressures of and lack 

of affordability of housing on their children, whether it’s that 

great barrier to that post-secondary education or whether it’s 

that great barrier in building and starting that life with dignity 

and with some excitement for these young people. And we see 

it both as it relates to home owners or prospective home 

owners, but we also see it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as it relates to 

rent. And the two really do connect, and it’s where we really do 

need to have a thoughtful, evidence-based, comprehensive 

approach to addressing this challenge. 

 

Quite simply, Mr. Speaker, we’re short on supply of housing in 

this province, specifically on the side of affordable rental 

properties. And this has caused a significant run on the prices 

that Saskatchewan people are paying. And I know that in many 

cases, we’ve seen what can only be categorized as unacceptable 

increases that so many young people and seniors and families 

have faced and increases that simply aren’t felt on the other side 

of the ledger in the household finances, that being the wages 

that so many are receiving. 

 

So whether we’re talking about seniors who are on a fixed 

income or whether we’re talking about young people working 

hard to earn a living — certainly those young families and 

young people — their income, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has in no 

way kept up with the pace of the massive increases to rent and 

the significant challenges of housing affordability in this 

province. 

 

Now I think to go at this, it’s about making sure that when 

you’re growing as a province by way of your population, by 

way of your economy, that in fact you’re bettering the lives of 

Saskatchewan people. And it’s a different approach to policy 

and to government that this side of the Assembly takes than 

government. Their number one goal is growth — economic 

growth, population growth. And that’s something that’s vital 

and important to Saskatchewan’s well-being; no doubt, would 

never discount it. It’s something we’re proud of, and we’re 

proud of our record in bringing about economic growth and 

development in this province. 

 

But the problem exists when a government doesn’t have a game 

plan that goes beyond just growth. That’s the end goal — 

growth in itself. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we believe something 

different on this side of the Assembly. We believe that that 

growth needs to be able to provide for improvements and 

well-being and quality of life, improvements in life and 

communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. At the end of the day, that’s 

what differentiates that side of the Assembly from this side of 

the Assembly. So we need to be utilizing that robust economy 

to make sure that we’re bettering people’s lives, not preventing 

dignified, quality living. And certainly when we’re talking 

about housing, this is a significant concern. 

 

So I guess when we look at — and we go back a few years — if 

there was some significant challenges that we saw over the past 

few years. We had population that was growing in the province 

and economic activity, which was a good thing, but we saw no 

investment or inadequate investment, ineffective investment, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Back into addressing that housing supply and the challenges 

and pressures that exist in this province, quite simply, if you’re 

growing as a population, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is something 

that we should be proud of and work towards. But then we need 

to be able to place that subsequent investment back into the 

social and physical infrastructure in this province. And I know 

when we look at so many aspects of that social infrastructure, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at health, when we look at 

education, we’ve got pressures that are brought to the 

classroom or to health services that require a smart investment 

back in a strategic investment to make sure that in fact that 

growth is bettering the lives of Saskatchewan people. This is 

just the same for housing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I know it’s 

why I’ve been on record and this opposition’s been on record, 

in our time in opposition both this term and certainly the term 

prior, Mr. Deputy Speaker, calling for those meaningful 

investments in comprehensive strategies to address housing 

affordability in this province. 

 

Dial it back to a new, young government that was elected in 

2007, Mr. Speaker. And what was handed to them was billions 

of dollars, fiscal surplus, but more so, Mr. Speaker, a growing 

economy, a red-hot economy, and a growing population. 

What’s incumbent of government at that point in time is to 

balance off the needs and pressures being realized by 

Saskatchewan people. And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that just 

never happened by this government. And what we stood and 

called in 2008, 2009, and 2010 for, recognizing that while a 

growing Saskatchewan or in a growing Saskatchewan that we 

need to be addressing things like having meaningful policy to 

make sure we’re addressing housing supply, Mr. Speaker, that 

fell on deaf ears. 

 

And we ended up having a significant, have a significant 

problem for Saskatchewan people, being felt by Saskatchewan 

people and being taken directly out of their pockets, but also 

their quality of life, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we can do better 

on this front. We had the opportunity to do better and it’s fallen 

on deaf ears. And it highlights the different priorities, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, of that Sask Party government and this official 

opposition, Saskatchewan New Democrat team. Our goal would 

be to build a robust, strong economy that betters the lives of 

Saskatchewan people, makes those improvements. That side 

focuses on a short-sighted and narrow approach to this, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And had that government prioritized the strategic investment 

that was required to place into housing over the past five years, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in communities such as Estevan or in 

communities such as Regina or communities such as 

Saskatoon, all across — Weyburn, Mr. Deputy Speaker, North 

Battleford — the housing pressures are felt all across this 

province, had that government been able to have an effective 

strategy in placing some of those investments into increasing 



March 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 567 

supply as we had that robust economy and fiscal surplus, we’d 

be in a better spot here today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We say we’d be in a better spot. I say Saskatchewan people 

would be in a better spot and that the crisis that is for so many 

people, young people, seniors, families alike, that struggle to 

make ends meet and to pay for that rent or to the ever-elusive 

dream — and that’s a sad thing, Mr. Speaker — the 

ever-elusive dream of owning that first home, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that’s unfortunate. And I guess, you know, members 

that catcall opposite, I would urge them to use their voices 

instead to, use their voices instead to bring to cabinet and bring 

to the Premier to say, listen, my constituents too are struggling 

with housing affordability. And this needs to be put onto the 

agenda of government. 

 

What we’ve seen instead is, as I say, the home purchase 

program cut by this government, November of this year, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, shortly after the election. Well it’s 

disappointing. This is the kind of program or tools that we 

should be enabling. The idea that if somebody’s disciplined 

enough to pay rent through a housing authority for many years 

that they should be able to build equity and move into home 

ownership, this is a common sense, meaningful policy for 

Saskatchewan people. And what they don’t need is ideological 

pursuit of policies as we see by this government. 

 

We’ve seen more on this housing file that’s been disappointing 

where in fact this government brought forward $200 million, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and with this, a potential opportunity to 

address some of the supply challenges of affordable rental units 

and to bring some relief and pressure off that market. And 

instead we’ve seen this government double down on what’s 

nothing more than a failed solution in providing $200 million to 

developers to build housing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you can 

imagine, that already exists in the price range that already exists 

on the market. Now that’s no solution to the challenges 

Saskatchewan people face. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And there is no developers that I’ve come across and met with 

that have said to me that securing the capital that they needed to 

advance housing projects was in fact preventing them from 

building homes. So why this government would chose to 

become the de facto lender to Saskatchewan developers with 

$200 million to build houses that are in the range of $300,000, 

housing stock that already exists in communities, is 

disappointing. 

 

It also is a cautionary tale, and one where why is government 

getting involved and intervening in a part of the market that’s 

already relatively served, and in fact potentially causing some 

adverse effects back on to home valuations and on to 

circumstances for Saskatchewan people. Cranking up supply in 

an area that already exists, instead of dealing with the problems 

that exist for the end user, instead of looking at the real 

challenges — which is that we don’t have enough affordable 

rental units, Mr. Deputy Speaker — again highlights the 

difference between that Sask Party government and the 

approach we would take. 

 

Building a robust economy and focusing on growth shouldn’t 

be the endgame of a government. And that’s what this 

government’s content with — to put press releases out about 

population growth or economic growth — and that’s not good 

enough, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s something that’s 

important. It’s something that we’re certainly proud of in 

building a robust economy and building the population of this 

province, and they’re certainly important goals. But the broader 

goal of building economic growth and a population growth 

must be to better the lives of Saskatchewan people. And as 

we’ve called for, year after year — 2008, 2009, 2010 — this 

government had a blessed opportunity to place strategic 

investments back into communities to make sure that we could 

take some pressure off and to balance out and to make sure that 

a problem didn’t exacerbate itself as it relates to affordable 

housing stock in this province, affordable rental units, Mr. 

Speaker, in this province. 

 

So when we look at this piece of legislation, I guess the best I 

can say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that I’m underwhelmed and 

that I expected more, and this certainly misses the mark. And 

no solution to the real challenges that face my constituents, or 

the member from Athabasca’s constituents, or the member from 

Cypress Hills’s constituents, or the member from Estevan’s 

constituents, or the members from Saskatoon’s constituents. 

And we should be turning our attention to bringing meaningful 

action on these fronts. And it’s comprehensive strategy that’s 

needed. There’s no simple, direct approach. The member from 

Weyburn, his constituents need these sorts of solutions as well, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And what we see in this Bill in fact is rather, is interesting. And 

I don’t know what the purpose of this is. I mean they’ve . . . 

The change is in fact that if, I guess as I understand it, that 

landlords can only increase rent once a year. It doesn’t dictate 

how much they can increase rents, so they can make that as big 

as they want, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But they can do it twice a 

year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if they join the new landlords’ 

association, or the landlords’ association. Now the landlords’ 

association, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you can imagine, wasn’t 

even calling for this. So this isn’t a solution to something that 

was being called for by the landlords’ association. It’s not a 

solution to what Saskatchewan people are looking for. And I 

don’t know what the purpose of this Bill is. It doesn’t make 

sense. 

 

And I think that’s what Saskatchewan people are asking when 

they look at it, that they’re disappointed when they look at this 

as the actions of government to address what’s in fact a very 

significant challenge for Saskatchewan people. So I don’t know 

why the government finds it, why their goal is not to address 

the problem but in fact pool together the voices of landlords, or 

something, in the association, something that wasn’t even 

called for by the association. It just doesn’t make sense, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think that at the very base of it, this is where 

Saskatchewan people get frustrated, is that they expect in . . . In 

Saskatchewan we expect common sense solutions to challenges 

of the day to address any opportunities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and we can do a lot better on this front. 

 

And to the members that heckle opposite, you know, I question 

them. Maybe they aren’t even aware of the program. But how 

could they sit in a government, how could they sit in the 

government that shortly after the election cuts the home 



568 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2012 

purchase program? I mean this is the exact kind of thing that we 

should be enabling in our province, allowing individuals, who 

are working hard to get through life and struggling in some 

cases, but that have the discipline and the work ethic and the 

commitment to pay that rent for an extended many, many, 

many, many years to build a bit of equity, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And I think it’s out of touch, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with this 

government to make such a move, something that’s important. 

And I know some of those individuals over there, sitting there, I 

think they have significantly strong social conscience as well. 

And I urge them to do better on this front, and they can do 

better on this front. 

 

We see this as a major challenge. We don’t see the consultation 

that’s required. And we’ve got good people that are doing good 

work in our community on this front that could have been 

engaged, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have the Queen City 

Tenants Association, Angelica Barth-Burkholder. That would 

be a fantastic individual to engage and to include in creating 

policy, in creating mechanisms that address the real challenges. 

Or I’d urge them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to meet with guys like 

Shawn Fraser over at the Carmichael Outreach centre, that see 

the desperation for so many families and the perpetual state that 

exists of a feeling of hopelessness and helplessness that exists 

for far too many, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And unfortunately, 

we’re not going in the right direction on this front, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

You know, I think that we have people such as Peter Gilmer of 

the Anti-Poverty Ministry who are there to lend a hand, to 

co-operate, and to build legislation and meaningful tools to 

address the challenges that are facing far too many families. I 

look across the floor and I see a member that I don’t know well, 

but I suspect he recognizes some of these challenges well, who 

comes with a great history working in the Saskatoon Food 

Bank, who sees those great pressures and the real pressures that 

families are facing. And what they expect from a government is 

meaningful action to reduce some of those pressures in a 

market that’s been strained. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s about putting priorities of 

Saskatchewan people first. It’s about refocusing government, 

not simply the focus and the priority being that of putting out 

cheery press releases to count new people moving to the 

province. That’s a good thing. We’re excited about that. But 

what we need that government to do is to then focus on placing 

those investments back into Saskatchewan people and 

communities that improve their lives. And if that’s not the 

endgame of government, then it’s disappointing. 

 

What I can let you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that’s the end 

goal and endgame of this opposition — improving the lives of 

Saskatchewan people. So while we build out, what we build 

out, we’re proud of building out a strong economy, what we 

need to do is to place those effective investments in a 

comprehensive strategy back to, back to the people that depend, 

depend on us to have meaningful actions. 

 

We worry a little bit as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we move 

into the budget period as next week or the budget next week 

and we have a government that, instead of doing anything 

meaningful in housing, think that they need more MLAs, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, think they need more MLAs. Meanwhile 

Saskatchewan people should deserve less, whether it’s 

reductions in health programs, whether it’s reductions in the 

classroom, or whether it’s the ineffective action as it relates to 

something that’s so important to Saskatchewan people. 

 

We need to make sure we’re providing solutions for young 

people, for seniors, for hard-working families. We need to 

make sure that we’re providing some protection that’s deserved, 

some certainty, and some peace of mind, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

something that’s absent in the current housing environment, the 

current context. And we need to make sure we’re looking at 

solutions that meet the needs of the end-user, the end-user being 

young families or the young Pages that are sitting here today 

and planning out their lives. Those are the kinds of people we 

need to have in mind when we’re looking about at individuals 

who are going to be entering into home ownership or going to 

be, that are renting, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I know that one of biggest challenges on this front when 

we talk about the housing crisis or challenge is that it disables 

and acts as a significant barrier for so many in pursuing 

advanced education in this province. And if you’re in Cypress 

Hills, in the constituency of Cypress Hills, and moving to the 

city to take some studies at SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology] or some job-skill program or 

university, the cost of housing is a significant factor and 

unfortunately a barrier for so many and preventing so many of 

our young people from in fact bettering their lives and being 

able to seek gains from a social and economic perspective for 

themselves and their families by pursuing training because they 

can’t afford the housing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You know, 

certainly tuition and cost of programs, that’s also important, but 

housing’s a significant part of these costs. 

 

So we’re disappointed, to say the least, to see a newly elected 

government that continues to cheerlead about a strong 

economy, but to be meaningful — but to not be meaningful and 

to be ineffective as it relates to needed housing in this province. 

 

And like I say, the programs to date of this government have 

been insufficient, have been off target. The $200 million that 

this government chose to bring to lend to developers just misses 

the mark, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And certainly this legislation 

that, in essence, brings the landlords all together in one pool, I 

guess to be one voice, certainly that isn’t a tool to bettering the 

circumstance for people across the province, our constituents, 

for families that are struggling with housing affordability. 

 

It’s an interesting question. I’m not sure why they’re trying to 

urge the consolidation of that voice, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

There’s interesting questions that maybe we can ask at 

committee about maybe the intended purpose of that. Because 

certainly that change doesn’t bring about addressing the 

housing pressures in this province. And we’ll continue to make 

sure that this is of top priority in this Assembly. Housing 

affordability, quality of life, well-being: that must be the goal of 

government, and we’re disappointed to see that it’s not with this 

government. 

 

And so at this point in time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s been my 

pleasure to weigh in on debate as it relates to Bill 33. But I’m 

disappointed that we’re not talking about meaningful change 

for Saskatchewan people, something that addresses the realities 



March 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 569 

that Saskatchewan people, young people, and seniors are 

facing. And certainly we look forward to urging further 

solutions on this front, something that we need to bring forward 

a comprehensive strategy to address. And this is just entirely 

inadequate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But at this point in time, I move adjournment of Bill No. 33, 

The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2011. Thank you, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 33, The Residential 

Tenancies Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 34 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Bjornerud that Bill No. 34 — The 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation Act, 2011 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to have 

the opportunity to join in in this debate to do with crop 

insurance, though the remarks I make at this time may be 

somewhat brief, Mr. Speaker, as the hour of adjournment is 

soon approaching. 

 

But when looking at the issue of crop insurance, Mr. Speaker, 

we know that this is something that is very important to 

Saskatchewan people. I did not have the good fortune, Mr. 

Speaker, of growing up on a farm, but I did have the good 

fortune of marrying into a family that still is on the farm. And I 

have to say over the past years since I’ve been in their world 

and going to the farm, I’ve appreciated the opportunity to gain a 

better understanding about issues that matter to individuals 

actively involved in agriculture — seeing what matters, what is 

important. And we know, Mr. Speaker, that the challenges for 

farm families and individuals involved in agriculture are 

significant. 

 

And the issues that people in agriculture face come in many 

different fronts and one of them, Mr. Speaker, an obvious one 

of course, is that of weather and how it affects operations on the 

farm from a production perspective. So when I’m looking at 

this piece of legislation that is before the Assembly at this time, 

it’s important to keep in mind how important this is for 

individuals involved in agriculture, living on a farm. 

 

There are times, Mr. Speaker, when individuals look at possible 

changes to a program and there may be different . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Members, we have reached the time 

of adjournment. This House stands adjourned until tomorrow 

morning at 10 a.m. 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 539 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 539 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................... 539 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 539 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 539 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 540 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 540 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Les Rendez-vous de la Francophonie Week 

  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 540 

 Luther Invitational Basketball Tournament 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 540 

 Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities Convention 

  Stewart ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 541 

 Building a Better Future 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 541 

 Farm Family of the Year Award 

  Eagles ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 541 

 Prince Albert Council of Women’s Hall of Fame 

  Jurgens ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 541 

 Music Educator Honoured 

  Kirsch ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 542 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Representation 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 542 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 542 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 542 

 Injectable Drug Supply 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 543 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 543 

 Identification and Removal of Asbestos 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 544 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 544 

 Federal Crime Legislation 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 545 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 545 

 Provincial Budget and Relationship with Federal Government 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 546 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 546 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 546 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 547 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 27 — The Education Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 547 

 Bill No. 28 — The Education Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 549 

 Bill No. 29 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 549 

 Bill No. 26 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 551 

 Bill No. 35 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 555 

 Bill No. 36 — The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 556 



 

 Bill No. 30 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 559 

 Bill No. 31 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 559 

 Bill No. 32 — The Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi sur les ordonnances alimentaires interterritoriales 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 560 

 Bill No. 33 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2011 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 565 

 Bill No. 34 — The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation Act, 2011 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 569 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


