




















































Hansard: November 06, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 8A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 6, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1773 

 November 6, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to introduce a group that have joined us and 

seated in your gallery. And I want to note, Mr. Speaker, that the 

hon. member for Wood River and the government’s military 

liaison will be introducing each of the individuals that have 

joined us, I think, and give a bit of a broad introduction. But 

they are the family and the friends and the recipients of the 

Saskatchewan Scholarship of Honour. We had a chance to 

salute them a little bit earlier on today, over lunch hour, and to 

officially present them with a few tokens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you’ll be familiar with this program. It was the 

idea of the member for Cannington, now Speaker, who 

presented it to us, and implemented later by the military liaison 

and the then minister of Advanced Education that we would 

offer this scholarship to returning veterans and — heaven 

forbid, if they were not returning — to their family members. 

And I just wanted to stand and on behalf of the government, and 

just ahead of the more specific introduction by the member, 

acknowledge them here today, welcome them to their 

legislature. 

 

I had a chance very briefly to chat with a couple of them, Mr. 

Speaker. Sergeant Shawn Blair was one and Corporal Tyler 

Davey was another, and they made a couple of points. One, 

these scholarships reinforce for Saskatchewan people that the 

Canadian forces are among us. The reserves and the regulars are 

here; they’re part of our community. And Tyler reminded me of 

the fact that they have these veteran’s plates on some of their 

vehicles and drive around. And some of them feel a little bit 

strange about it perhaps, because people are expecting to see 

someone maybe a little bit older driving the car. But we live in 

a day where we have young veterans, who have given much and 

sacrificed much, and we want to honour them with licence 

plates and scholarships in any way we can. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, ahead of the member for Wood River, I 

want to introduce them to you, to the Assembly, and I want to 

thank them very much and welcome them to their Legislative 

Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’d 

request leave for a bit of an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Wood River has asked for a 

leave for an extended introduction. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to move the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for Wood 

River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all the members of the Assembly, I’m honoured 

to introduce some very special guests today. As the Premier has 

mentioned, we’re joined in your gallery by recipients of the 

Saskatchewan Scholarship of Honour. The Scholarship of 

Honour was created in 2009 to honour returning military 

members who actively served in the Canadian Forces and assist 

them in the pursuit of post-secondary education. Mr. Speaker, 

we recognize the commitment and sacrifice that has been made 

by these military members and the price that has been paid and 

continues to be paid for our freedom. 

 

An event was held earlier today to recognize 83 recipients of 

the scholarship. Not all of the recipients were able to make it, 

but there are 16 recipients who are with us today. I would like 

to read their names so they can be recognized formally: 

Bombardier Nathan Betz, Sergeant Shawn Blair, Second 

Lieutenant Devin Chadwick, Captain Luke Coupal, Corporal 

Tyler Davey, Corporal Jayson Derow, Master Corporal Adam 

Donauer, Colonel Ross Ermel, Master Corporal Stephen 

Fennelly, Corporal Marcel Heichert, Private Craig Hicks, Navy 

Lieutenant Aaron Kaytor, Corporal James Kletchko, Captain 

Walter Martin, Corporal Chad Martinson, and Major Timothy 

Rupsich. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to welcome the family and friends of 

these heroes who are joining us as well today and thank them 

for their support. I would ask all members to welcome this fine 

group of citizens to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

want to rise today and on behalf of the official opposition, I 

want to also welcome the Saskatchewan Scholarship of Honour 

folks that are here to their Assembly. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, defending this country as a member of the 

Canadian Forces is a noble calling. The individuals who joined 

the Forces, along with their families, make many great 

sacrifices including sometimes the greatest sacrifice of all. 

 

So to all the scholarship folks that are here today, I want to 

congratulate you. I want to thank you. And I especially want to 

note that it’s not every day that we get to say thank you, but this 

weekend we’re having a great ceremony back in my home 

community. I’m looking forward to thanking the many veterans 

that laid down their lives for their country, those that continue 

serving today. And I can tell you it’s always a special moment 

because my father was a veteran, and many members of my 

family also served in the different parts of the forces. 

 

And we all know that the navy and the army and the air force 

all get along. But I want to point out that this weekend is going 

to be a great opportunity for us to thank them individually. But 

publicly today we recognize you, we respect you, we honour 

you, and above all else we thank you for your kind service. 

Thank you. 



1774 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2012 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

To you and through you and to all the members of the 

Assembly, I’d like to introduce a very great delegation visiting 

Canada and Saskatchewan from the Republic of Namibia. Now 

they’re way up on your left, Mr. Speaker, behind the clock. If I 

was a little taller, I might be able to see them. They’re way up 

there. 

 

Mr. Fritz David, education officer and early childhood 

development and pre-primary education from the National 

Institute for Educational Development in the Republic of 

Namibia. And Ms. Mariane Kapepu, education officer, 

pre-primary education, with the regional council, Republic of 

Namibia. Also joining them from the Ministry of Education 

Saskatchewan, Kathy Abernethy, director of the early childhood 

education branch, and Ms. Sharon Markesteyn, senior policy 

analyst with intergovernmental relations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. David and Ms. Kapepu are in Saskatchewan 

as part of a partnership project between the Saskatchewan 

Ministry of Education, the Government of Namibia, and the 

Institute for Public Administration of Canada. The partnership 

project focuses on early childhood development. Our guests 

have visited a number of school divisions in the province to 

observe and review the implementation of various early 

childhood assessment tools and processes. The visit has also 

included observations and discussions on teacher professional 

development. Please help me, members of the Assembly, and 

welcome our visitors from Namibia. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure on behalf of the official opposition to join with the 

hon. minister and welcome the delegation that’s here from 

Namibia here today as part of an education delegation and 

exchange between the country and our province as it relates to 

early learning in our province. I’d like to welcome these visitors 

here today. I wish them a great learning experience, and I hope 

that that learning experience is reciprocal as well. 

 

I also recognize the officials with the Ministry of Education and 

the resources that are put into this exchange. And I’d like to 

thank all that are involved in what should be an exceptional 

learning experience for all parties. Thank you so much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your 

gallery, I would like to introduce to my colleagues in the House, 

Steve Berg. He is the national director of the Christian Embassy 

of Canada. The embassy is an inter-denominational, non-profit 

organization serving diplomats, senators, members of 

parliament, and business executives. 

 

Steve has been in Saskatchewan a few times, and I understand 

that he’s met with Richard Lepp and his wife for the House of 

Prayer to see about coordinating services that will benefit all of 

us who are involved in politics in this province. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to publicly thank the 

House of Prayer and the Christian Embassy of Canada for their 

dedication and prayers for all of us here today. And I ask all my 

colleagues to welcome Steve Berg to our Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, Mr. Speaker, I have the honour of introducing 

some very important guests from a few of our Saskatchewan 

community-based organizations. 

 

Joining us today from Menno Homes is Board Chair Peter 

Guenther. I’d also like to introduce Mr. Darwyn Worsley, 

president of the board of directors for the Saskatchewan 

Association of Rehabilitation Centres; and Amy McNeil, 

executive director of SARC [Saskatchewan Association of 

Rehabilitation Centres] and Sarcan recycling. 

 

From FoxValley Counseling Services, I’d like to welcome Mr. 

Mark Fox, the founder and executive director; Mr. Keith Pratt, 

chairman; and Ms. Tracey Dunnigan, board member. I would 

also like to introduce Ms. Brenda Rossow-Kimball, Vice-Chair 

of Creative Options Regina. With them is Amanda Plumber 

from my office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today is Community-Based Organizations 

Appreciation Day in Saskatchewan. In honour of this very 

important day and on behalf of our government, I want to 

recognize the valuable contributions that these organizations 

and all community-based organizations make to our community 

each and every day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank these organizations for their 

dedication to helping our most vulnerable citizens. The work 

they do make a tremendous difference in the lives of 

Saskatchewan people, and CBOs [community-based 

organization] greatly enrich the fabric of our great province. I 

ask all members to join me in welcoming these outstanding 

citizens to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister on behalf of the official opposition in welcoming 

all of the leaders here today from our community-based 

organizations, or some of our community-based organizations, 

who do very much the heavy lifting here in Saskatchewan when 

it comes to providing services and supports to our citizens here. 

So on behalf of the official opposition, welcome to your 

legislature and thank you for all the work that you do in your 

communities. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, I’d like to welcome four gentlemen of South Asian 

origins, but as we all know, in the 21st century you can have 

more than one home, and they are pleased to call Saskatchewan 

home. We have here joining us today Musaddaq Hayat, a dear 

friend and a person who is seen as a leader right across 



November 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1775 

Saskatoon and well beyond. Azhar Khan is also joining him as 

well as Sarveshwar — or Sarvesh for short — Jaswall and 

Bhupinder Thind who comes from a very distinguished military 

family. 

 

Their individual and combined presence in their legislature 

reflects and reinforces that Saskatchewan is an increasingly 

diverse, dynamic, and cosmopolitan community, a community 

that welcomes and receives newcomers. And we’re not simply 

talking about numbers, Mr. Speaker; we’re talking about our 

neighbours that help all of us grow into much better global 

citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to help me welcome these fine 

gentlemen to their Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in reference to cell coverage support. 

And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel delivers 

cellular service to the Canoe Lake First Nations, along 

with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay, Jans Bay; 

Buffalo River First Nation, also known as Dillon, and the 

neighbouring communities of St. George’s Hill; English 

River First Nation, also known as Patuanak, and the 

hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch Narrows First Nation and 

the community of Turnor Lake, and all the communities 

around these major centres. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 

primarily from Patuanak, and I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents 

from across Saskatchewan as it relates to education in our 

province. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to make education a top priority by 

establishing a long-term vision and plan, with resources, 

that is responsive to the opportunities and challenges in 

providing the best quality education and that reflects 

Saskatchewan’s demographic and population changes, 

that is based on proven educational best practices, that is 

developed through consultation with the education sector, 

and that recognizes the importance of educational 

excellence to the social and economic well-being of our 

province and students for today and for our future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents from 

Saskatoon and Regina. I so submit. 

 

[13:45] 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 

 

Saskatchewan Scholarship of Honour 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the women and men of the Canadian Armed Forces make 

incredible sacrifices to protect the freedom and way of life we 

all enjoy. As a way of honouring these brave women and men, 

our government created the Saskatchewan Scholarship of 

Honour. This $5,000 scholarship is given to current or past 

residents of Saskatchewan who actively served in military 

operations, either as a regular force member or as a reservist in 

Canadian Forces to assist in their pursuit of post-secondary 

education. It’s also available for the spouse and/or children of 

severely injured or deceased soldiers and can be used at any 

recognized Canadian post-secondary institution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in November 2009, the first 11 recipients were 

honoured. Today we honoured another 83 women and men who 

have received the scholarship since 2009. Sixteen of these 

recipients were able to take part in the recognition ceremony 

here in the legislature today. This scholarship is one small way 

we are able to give back to those who have already given so 

much, by supporting them in their pursuit of post-secondary 

education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this scholarship serves as a reminder of the 

courage and sacrifice of our military members. And I believe 

this is the only province in Canada that has a scholarship of this 

nature. And I can say that it is indeed an honour to help our 

military members pursue their dreams. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Saskatoon Co-op in National Co-op Challenge 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Co-operatives have 

been building local economies and supporting communities 

worldwide for hundreds of years. In 2012 we honour this 

business model and its values of working co-operatively to 

achieve our economic, social, and cultural goals. 

 

Recently the Good Food Junction co-operative opened on 20th 

Street West as part of Station 20 West, a larger development 

which includes other important health, housing, community, 

and economic development services for individuals and 

families. This new co-op is an oasis in a food desert, offering a 

range of fresh food as well as packaged food and household 

items for reasonable prices, making healthy eating a viable 

option for families living in our core communities. 

 

The Good Food Junction recently became a Western finalist in 

the National Co-op Challenge, an opportunity for new co-ops to 

win cash prizes to assist the growth of their businesses. Twelve 

regional prizes will be distributed in four areas across Canada. 

Three co-ops will win prizes in the western region after creating 

a video to showcase their commitments and their enthusiasm to 

growing their enterprise. The Good Food Junction is a strong 

contender for an award and may then be entered to win a final 

grand prize of even more cash. 



1776 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2012 

Mr. Speaker, people can check out the Facebook page for the 

National Co-op Challenge. We can all vote to support the Good 

Food Junction in its bid to win the grand prize to help this co-op 

grow even stronger to serve the people in Saskatoon. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Better Together Food Drive 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, last Wednesday, 

October 31st, was more than just Halloween in my city of 

Moose Jaw. Besides the excitement of the trick-or-treaters, it’s 

the annual Better Together Food Drive. The Better Together 

Food Drive is organized by the Hillcrest Church in aid of the 

local food bank. 

 

Over 400 volunteers were involved, dozens of drivers with 

pickup trucks, cars, vans, accompanied by hundreds of 

door-to-door canvassers, all gathering food donations 

throughout the city. And while the city canvass was taking 

place, other volunteers were at the Hillcrest Church auditorium 

beginning to sort the food into boxes, on to pallets, to be 

delivered to the Moose Jaw Food Bank. 

 

My wife, Debbie, and I have been part of this campaign for the 

last six years and I can speak proudly of the volunteers and the 

citizens of Moose Jaw who showed their support and their 

generosity. In most cases the pre-circulated paper bag is filled 

and placed by the door ready for the volunteers to be picked up. 

Some people simply didn’t get around to it, but insisted on 

being part of the cause and went to their cupboards and found 

some product to donate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the food drive presents an overall, overwhelming 

feeling of goodwill, pride in our community. This year almost 

28 tonnes of food was collected for the food bank. Thank you to 

the organizers and hundreds of volunteers and all of the 

residents of Moose Jaw for giving so generously. Their efforts 

are greatly appreciated and show that Moose Jaw is a caring 

community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Parking Day 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was very pleased to 

participate in Parking Day in Saskatoon last September 21st. 

People across the city demonstrated various creative ways to 

share city streets with cars, buses, bikes, and pedestrians. 

 

This event originated in San Francisco in 2005. An art and 

design firm by the name of Rebar put quarters into a parking 

meter and then transformed the parking space into a park by 

putting down some sod, a bench, and a tree. The idea was to 

create a temporary haven for people living in cities that lacked 

green space. The event has now spread to more than 160 cities 

who find creative ways to use city parking spaces on Parking 

Day. 

 

The organizing group for Parking Day in Saskatoon included 

urban planners, architects, business people, and together they 

reimagined the way that we can use our city streets. They 

worked with the city of Saskatoon staff and council to convert 

metered parking spots into temporary miniature parks, eateries, 

yoga studios, pop-up retail stores, poetry stages, and even 

outdoor living rooms. An empty lot on 20th Street was 

converted into a stage for live local music, and several local 

food booths fed the crowds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, streets are not just intended for moving cars. They 

are critical community hubs that serve as focal points of 

commerce and culture. It was an amazing day and I want to 

thank organizers Curtis Olson and Carrie Catherine for once 

again showing leadership in our community by heading up this 

event and the organization of this event. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Weyburn and District United Way Communithon 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to congratulate all those who participated in the 31st 

annual Weyburn and District United Way Communithon on the 

weekend of October 26th. 

 

The Weyburn United Way’s mandate is to improve lives in the 

community by engaging citizens and mobilizing collective 

action. The organization put their mandate into action at the 

communithon by raising an impressive $126,640 to support 

many local agencies. In fact, Mr. Speaker, this money will go 

towards 11 different agencies in the Weyburn area that provide 

support to some very worthy causes, including the Canadian 

Mental Health Association, Canadian Red Cross, and the 

Weyburn Big Brothers Big Sisters. These are all great 

organizations who do a fantastic job each and every day in our 

community and for the individuals who they serve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the communithon lasted for 33 hours and featured 

some amazing local performers and announcers who entertained 

all throughout the night. 

 

Of course this event could not have been possible without the 

volunteers. We all know that Saskatchewan people are among 

the country’s most engaged volunteers and their efforts were on 

full display this past weekend in Weyburn, from the individuals 

preparing the food to the office volunteers, production 

individuals, and countless others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a big thank you to everyone who made this effort 

possible. There’s no better feeling when a community comes 

together to help each other. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Recognition for Métis and Old-Time Fiddle Player 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in this House 

to bring attention to a very talented young man in the 

constituency of Saskatoon Fairview. Dallas Boyer is a 

22-year-old Métis and old-time fiddle player from Saskatoon. 

Mr. Speaker, Dallas began learning fiddle at the age of nine and 

learned from many fiddle players including Lenny Dumont, 



November 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1777 

Everett Larson, and John Arcand. Dallas got the chance to 

attend the 2010 Olympic opening ceremonies where he 

represented his Métis culture, dancing in the athletes parade. 

 

Recently Dallas attended Back to Batoche Days in July, where 

he performed a number of times with master fiddler Darren 

Lavallee and his band. Dallas has also opened for 

award-winning country music star Michelle Wright during the 

2010 Back to Batoche anniversary celebrations. His album 

Métis Fiddle Music was nominated for the 2012 APCMA 

[Aboriginal Peoples Choice Music Awards] award for the 

Album of the Year as well as Dallas himself was nominated for 

the 2012 APCMA Entertainer of the Year award. 

 

Dallas was nominated and won the Youth Award at the 

inaugural Wiichihiwayshinawn 2012 Métis Awards in Regina 

two weeks ago. He was also nominated for best fiddle CD 

[compact disc] and Entertainer of the Year at the recent 

Aboriginal Peoples Choice Music Awards. I’d like all members 

to join me in recognizing Mr. Dallas Boyer and his outstanding 

achievements. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Community-Based Organization Appreciation Day 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

rise in the House to recognize today, November 6th, as 

Community-Based Organization Appreciation Day here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we recognize and celebrate the valuable 

contribution that community-based organizations make in our 

communities. The province invests nearly 300 million annually 

in over 500 CBOs across Saskatchewan. These organizations 

and the people who work with them are making positive 

impacts every year and every day in the lives of some of the 

most vulnerable citizens. Every day they help children, people 

living with disabilities, the homeless, those struggling with 

addictions, families in crisis, and women experiencing abuse, 

just to name a few. 

 

Since November 2007 our government has provided an 

additional $53 million to the CBO sector. These funding 

increases over the last five years constitute more than the 

previous 12 budgets combined. In addition we have given 

CBOs more certainty about their funding by moving to more 

multi-year contracts. Three years ago only 8 per cent of CBOs 

funded by the Ministry of Social Services had multi-year 

contracts. Now 75 per cent of them do. 

 

I also thank everyone involved with these wonderful 

organizations. Your selfless dedication to those in need, the 

work that you do makes a real difference in the lives of 

Saskatchewan people. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Relationship with United States 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, today our neighbours and friends 

to the south will take to the polls and elect the President of the 

United States and many other representatives across the county. 

 

The United States is our largest trading partner. Our goods and 

services find a welcome market south of the border. That’s why 

we need provincial leadership to work with leaders of the 

United States at all levels regardless of party affiliation on 

either side of the border. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people 

expect our Premier to provide leadership. We expect our leaders 

to work with our international partners. 

 

My question to the Premier: why did he choose to hurt the 

relationship with the current US [United States] administration 

by injecting blame and accusations against President Obama. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I assume the hon. member 

might be referencing — though who knows really what — 

some comments we’ve made with respect to this 

administration’s position on buy American provisions, 

provisions that are protectionist against Canadian and 

Saskatchewan companies, or comments that we’ve made where 

we’ve been concerned about the position on the Keystone 

pipeline, which has a direct impact on oil pipeline capacity in 

our province as it relates to the Bakken. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government will, on an issue-by-issue basis 

regardless of who’s in power anywhere, will raise issues that 

are of interest to the people of this province. And when we 

travel to the United States, as we have done, we will meet with 

both sides of the aisle. Yes, we will meet with Senator Lindsey 

Graham, the Republican of South Carolina. We will also meet 

with John Kerry, as I did, the Democratic senator from 

Massachusetts and the former vice-presidential candidate for 

the Democratic party. We will develop a relationship with the 

Democratic Governor of Montana where we can advance 

Saskatchewan’s interests on a case-by-case basis. That’s what 

Saskatchewan people expect. That’s exactly what we’ll do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, often as elected officials, we may 

work with individuals with whom we may not agree. But it’s 

common sense to represent our province fairly as statespeople 

first and foremost. Mr. Speaker, that wasn’t the way Premier 

approached working with the current present President this last 

summer. The Premier said, “People think in this country, 

perhaps they do, that the Obama administration is good for 

Canada. The facts say something else.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, it would be incredibly frowned upon for an 

American legislator to weigh in about our electoral politics. 

Why does the Premier think the situation is different for him? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I think the people of the 

province want a government and a Premier and ministers and 

MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] who will 

represent their interests, who will point out when other 

jurisdictions — perhaps they’re within Canada, perhaps they’re 

outside of Canada — when those other jurisdictions undertake 



1778 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2012 

measures, regardless of party stripe, that aren’t in the trade and 

investment interests of the province of Saskatchewan. I think 

the people expect us to say so. Mr. Speaker, we’ll continue to 

do that. We would do that in the case of Republican 

administration stateside or Democratic administrations or 

Conservative governments here in Canada or New Democratic 

governments in Canada. 

 

It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that this member and those 

members opposite have this real interest in what we are saying 

about leaders in another country when on the matter of Dutch 

disease and the federal NDP’s [New Democratic Party] attack 

on this province, Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing but silence from 

members over there. My question to him is, when will he stand 

up for this province against his own leader in Ottawa? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I as the leader of the 

Saskatchewan New Democrats and all of my colleagues stand 

for common sense perspectives on the issues of the day. We 

know, we know that this Premier shares the ideological values 

of the President of the United States’ opponents. But that is not 

a reason for his attacks on the current sitting President when so 

much of the province’s economic activity relies on a strong 

relationship with the United States. 

 

Mr. Speaker, regarding the Keystone XL pipeline, we’ve been 

on record many times in support of that National Energy Board 

regulated project. But we also believe it is up to the United 

States, as a sovereign country, to determine what is in its 

economic, social, and environmental best interests. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why did the Premier misuse the privilege of 

hosting the PNWER [Pacific NorthWest Economic Region] 

Conference to attack the President of the United States? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

an interesting premise to the question. I wonder if we checked 

the record if we’d find any elected members over in the NDP or 

NDP members across the country who may have criticized 

George W. Bush. I think we might find a few members, a few 

examples of that, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Athabasca, the NDP Deputy 

Leader, says, oh but that’s different. The NDP, where the D has 

always stood for double standard, Mr. Speaker: one set of rules 

for them, one set for everyone else. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the Democratic Governor of Montana, 

Brian Schweitzer, I think he’s expressed concerns about the US 

administration’s position on the Keystone pipeline. We will 

defend the interests of the province of Saskatchewan. We will 

point out when those interests are perhaps at risk from any 

particular administration, or any particular party in the country. 

Again I ask that member, and I ask that party and those two 

running for leadership over there, if they’re interested about the 

views and our position vis-à-vis other leaders in North America, 

why will they not defend this province’s interest against their 

own federal NDP leader, Mr. Speaker? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier claims his ideology 

doesn’t influence his responsibility to the people of 

Saskatchewan. But his words tell a different story, Mr. Speaker. 

In the year 2010, over $15 billion worth of exports went to the 

United States. Even in their economic downturn, that was 63 

per cent of our trade here in Saskatchewan. Our province’s 

petroleum, potash, natural gas, and agricultural products and 

manufactured goods need a leader to help build that 

Canada-US, Saskatchewan-US relationship, not someone who 

would jeopardize our trade by complaining about what movie 

stars or American newspaper columnists say. 

 

My question is to the Premier: instead of taking a diplomatic, 

statesmanlike approach, why did he choose to play politics and 

risk jeopardizing Saskatchewan-US relations? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, never has this province been 

more engaged in developing the relationship with the United 

States. Mr. Speaker, just in the last number of years since we’ve 

taken office I’ve had the privilege, the honour, of speaking with 

the Chicago Board of Trade, along with former Premier Doer 

when he was the premier of Manitoba, along with Premier 

Stelmach. We went down to Houston. We spoke at the chamber 

of commerce there. We advanced the trade interests of the 

country with specific companies that are there. 

 

We’ve had several missions to Washington where we met 

officials from the Obama administration concerned about some 

EPA [Environmental Protection Agency] policy, concerned 

about cap and trade, but a good dialogue, Mr. Speaker. We met 

with Democratic Senator Kay Hagan twice. We’ve had her back 

to Canada. The first congressional delegation visit to 

Saskatchewan in its history, senators and members of the House 

of Representatives, happened under our government because of 

our engagement program with the US. She and her husband 

were a part of that. Senator Lindsey Graham, Mr. Speaker, 

meetings with Senator Kerry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have for the first time engaged representation 

in the United States with contacts on both sides of the aisle. 

That’s what we’ve done to further the relationship with that 

country, Mr. Speaker. You can talk about it, and I guess try to 

score points on US election day on these weird line of 

questions, or you can act. And that’s exactly what we’ve been 

doing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Pipeline Safety 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it seems that all the Sask Party 

wants to talk about is the National Energy Board regulated 

pipelines, which of course we are on the record time and again 

as being supportive of the NEB [National Energy Board] review 

process. But there are still serious issues here within the 

province about regulating provincial pipelines to protect people 

here and the environment here. 

 



November 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1779 

In June the Provincial Auditor raised serious concerns about the 

regulation and upkeep of pipelines and flow lines that run 

within Saskatchewan. The auditor says that the Sask Party 

government is not compliant with its own legislation and that 

leaves people exposed to potential harm. In the auditor’s words, 

“Failure to regulate pipelines effectively could harm people or 

the environment.” 

 

To the minister: what steps has the Sask Party government 

taken to improve pipeline safety in Saskatchewan since the 

auditor’s report? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

privilege to give the House an update on the state of our 

pipelines in Saskatchewan. The auditor did come out with some 

recommendations here earlier this year. We looked at them at 

the time. We take them very seriously, and we said at the time 

that we will be moving forward and finding best practices and 

accepting her recommendations. She put forward that there was 

appropriate actions being taken but those actions might not be 

appropriately documented. We have taken the steps to 

document those processes. 

 

There is also some recommendations, Mr. Speaker, that flow 

lines will be included. We are currently in the middle of a 

review under the PRIME [process renewal and infrastructure 

management enhancement] process, multi-year review of 

pipelines and all oil and gas regulations. As we work through 

that, we will take that into consideration and be bringing those 

as well, Mr. Speaker, into the regulation. 

 

We all know that pipelines are the safest way to transport 

products like oil, gas, Mr. Speaker, and it’s the least expensive 

way. It’s crucial to our industry. We know that the people of 

Saskatchewan expect an extremely high standard, and I’m 

happy to report that Saskatchewan has the highest standard and 

one of the safest safety records in the world, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, there are 10 new flow lines 

constructed in our province every day, and yet the auditor 

points out that the Sask Party government doesn’t license them 

and doesn’t even know where these flow lines are or whether 

they are designed and operated according to law. The auditor 

says flow lines pose the same environmental risks as pipelines, 

and if there is a spill from either a pipeline or a flow line, 

there’s no requirement to report the spill to the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people are concerned about the safety of their 

water supply, their farm lands, and their communities. With the 

significant growth constructed each year, when will the Sask 

Party take full responsibility for proper oversight, not a review, 

of the many hundreds of spills happening every year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, in my first answer I 

addressed the flow line issue. It is the next stage of our PRIME 

processes looking at pipelines and flow lines, Mr. Speaker, and 

we will be addressing that issue at that time, Mr. Speaker. We 

recognize the concern put forward, and we will be addressing it. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I also said that pipelines are the safest way to 

transport oil in the world. We know that. We know that the 

people of Saskatchewan have an extremely high level that they 

want oil companies and pipeline companies held to. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we strive to continually to push that bar higher, that 

it’s an environment of improving upon excellent performance, 

more so and more so. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have worked very hard 

as an opposition, as a party in Ottawa, as an official opposition 

in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, to try and kill pipelines, that they want 

to see pipeline capacity down, Mr. Speaker. They’ve lobbied, 

they’ve actively lobbied in Washington, Mr. Speaker, sent 

officials, sent elected members to Washington to lobby against 

pipelines, Mr. Speaker. On this side of the House, we expect the 

high standard of pipelines, and we will continue to provide that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s clear that the use 

of pipeline and flow lines is a safe method, the safest method 

available, and what we’re talking about is ensuring that that 

safety is continued. Clearly we all need to be cautious about our 

province’s pipelines and flow lines and implement a plan of 

smart growth that includes proper regulation and regular 

inspections of all our pipelines and flow lines. 

 

The Auditor’s report points out that pipeline inspection is a 

serious problem for the Sask Party government. And even the 

National Energy Board is conducting a major audit of TCPL 

[TransCanada Pipelines Ltd.] due to whistle-blower concerns 

about quality control problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the issue of pipeline safety is on the minds of 

Canadians, especially here in Saskatchewan. Will the minister 

commit today to implementing the auditor’s recommendations, 

not doing a review, implementing them in full — they’ve had 

several months to do that already; we see no regulations in 

place — and ensure that Saskatchewan’s pipelines are properly 

regulated? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, in my first answer I was 

pleased to report to the member opposite and to the House that 

in fact we accepted the recommendations put forward by the 

auditor that she felt that the structure, that the documentation 

around when inspections take place, how that works, Mr. 

Speaker, the documentation needed to be beefed up. That has 

been done, Mr. Speaker. I’d be pleased to table that 

documentation if the member opposite would like to see that, 

Mr. Speaker. It is now a standard practice in our ministry, in the 

oil field, to continue this high level that’s expected. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite may worry about 



1780 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2012 

pipelines, but I can tell her, in my area — truck traffic, hauling 

oil, Mr. Speaker, again very important — it’s something that’s 

crucial to our industry that we have effective pipelines. And I 

challenge members opposite to stand up for Saskatchewan on 

the pipeline issue, that our industry needs pipelines. They need 

them to the West Coast. They need them to the south. And I ask 

them to state where they stand on this issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Long-Term Care Facilities 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, northern seniors need health 

care service to address their specific culture and community 

needs. Unfortunately the Sask Party government has ignored 

northern seniors who need long-term care facilities close to 

home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2010, the Mamawetan Churchill River Health 

Region released a study calling for an investment in a long-term 

care facility for La Ronge to help northern people. To the 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health: why does 

the Sask Party not help northern people get the long-term care 

facility they need? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to thank the member for his question. Certainly 

we know full well where this province stands when it comes to 

long-term care facilities and beds, Mr. Speaker. That’s why 

we’ve invested in 13 new long-term care facilities across this 

province, replacing ones that were far outdated, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can as well, Mr. Speaker, point to the good work that’s been 

taking place over the last summer months by the Minister for 

Rural and Remote Health who has toured much of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, including northern Saskatchewan, 

and has brought many of those concerns back here to Regina for 

us to deliberate in the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Certainly I think those members though would recognize that 

we would be in a far different place had we not had 16 

long-term care facilities closed under their watch which lost us 

1,200 long-term care beds in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the report sits on the website 

for two years, but the community of La Ronge does not have 

the beds the North desperately needs. The report says, Mr. 

Speaker, that the health region faces increased service demands 

and aging infrastructure. 

 

As a result of inaction, northern seniors must travel south to 

long-term care facilities. This is not common sense. This move 

is hard on seniors who may face cultural and language barriers. 

To the minister: why has the Sask Party neglected northern 

seniors and our many respected elders? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Weekes: — Thank you very much, Speaker. Thank 

the member for the question. For part of my summer tour was 

also a trip into the North. And we went to La Ronge and 

Ile-a-la-Crosse and Buffalo Narrows, and we met with 

community leaders and health providers, physicians and nurse 

practitioners. And that was one of the issues that came up, and 

we certainly took notice of all the concerns, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We also have a very good record in long-term care capital . . . 

budget items. We have constructed or undergone construction 

of 13 new long-term care homes in the province. Since 

November 2007, this government has made an unprecedented 

$744 million investment in major health capital project building 

improvements and economic upgrades, Mr. Speaker. And so I 

think our record really stands out compared to the opposition 

when they were in government. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, many families, northern 

Saskatchewan seniors cannot afford to travel, sometimes 

several hours away, to visit their loved ones in care facilities in 

the South. Clearly it is not common sense that northern 

residents are cut off from frequent visits with their families and 

friends. Mr. Speaker, the report shows that a crisis has reached 

a code red rating. The need is critical. Mr. Speaker, can the 

minister commit today to build these facilities in northern 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I had said, 

on my tour of rural and remote Saskatchewan that we listened 

to community leaders and visited many facilities. And again, 

Mr. Speaker, we have a very good record as a government since 

we formed government in 2007, building or in process of 

building 13 new long-term care homes and many other facilities 

— the children’s hospital, the Plains surgical centre to name 

some other projects under way, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we will be looking at all the capital 

requirements into the future and be making those decisions in a 

timely manner, as we always do through the budgetary process. 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, our record stands head and 

shoulders above what the NDP did in their 16 years of 

government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Number of Women on Boards 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On International 

Women’s Day eight months ago, I asked the Sask Party 

government why its record on naming women to boards was so 

abysmal. At the time, we brought to light the fact that only 34.2 

per cent of government boards’ members were women under 

the Sask Party. In 2007, it was 43 per cent. We have been 

moving backwards, Mr. Speaker. 

 



November 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1781 

Despite those who apparently still believe that flipping through 

binders full of women is the path to equality in leadership, my 

colleagues and I on this side of the aisle note that Saskatchewan 

is home to a wealth of capable women who offer intellect, 

education, common sense, and compassion. We know that 

women in leadership have an amazing ability to get the job 

done. What changes have been made over the last eight months 

to ensure that skills, qualifications, and qualities of women are 

recognized on boards? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased today to 

rise on behalf of government and talk about the work we’re 

doing with women and for women in this province. You just 

have to look across government and see the number of deputy 

ministers we have, the number of chiefs of staff that are women 

that we have in the province. And only yesterday, I was very 

pleased to go to Moose Jaw and learn that that was the city that 

had not only a mayor as a woman, but most of the councillors 

are women. 

 

The type of work that’s being done across this province for 

women is being done because women no longer see a glass 

ceiling. And they know with support and the opportunities in 

the economy, they can go anywhere they want to. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Let’s talk about that glass ceiling, Mr. 

Speaker. I’ve had a look at 21 boards including Sask Arts 

Board, the utility Crown boards, and others. On those 21 

boards, there are 43 women filling 185 positions. That’s only 23 

per cent. 

 

Utility Crown corporation boards are important. The people 

who receive appointments to these boards control millions of 

public dollars. Four big Crowns — SaskTel, SaskPower, 

SaskEnergy, and SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] 

— important holdings for the people of Saskatchewan, have a 

board makeup altogether of nine women out of 50 seats. That is 

18 per cent. 

 

Can the member responsible for improving the representation of 

women on boards tell us what per cent of Crown and ministry 

board seats are held by women today? Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, this fall we had the 

opportunity to attend the universities as a caucus and cabinet to 

talk to the universities there, and both presidents of the 

universities are women in Saskatchewan. That is a change. 

That’s the type of thing can happen because we understand that 

women have every opportunity in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the third highest rate of labour 

force participation in Canada for women, and wages for women 

have grown 15.5 per cent since 2009. The opportunities for 

women in boards are unlimited, and as they bring names 

forward and talk to them about what their goals are, some of 

them see that their work on boards is important, but some of 

them see that their work in their own businesses and in 

following their dreams is important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to work with some of my 

colleagues who have been talking to women say, yes, there’s 

work out here for us, but there’s also work in the private sector. 

And they’re doing what they want to be doing in a province 

with lots of opportunities. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This issue’s one 

that got a few people upset the last time I asked about it. When I 

pointed out in this Assembly that men had received the vast 

majority of the Sask Party appointments, the minister then for 

Crown Investments Corporations told us, “It isn’t something we 

discriminate on [Mr. Speaker]. It’s competence that we search 

for.” 

 

I disagreed with the minister’s view that for every one 

competent woman in Saskatchewan that there are three 

competent men. I hope that the Sask Party government has 

made some progress since the time on equality issues, but we 

haven’t heard what this government is doing yet. That day we 

were told that the member for Saskatoon Fairview had been 

tasked to “identify women who could be on boards.” 

 

Can the member tell us where she’s been looking and if her 

process has identified enough women to make the province’s 

Crown boards more representative of our population? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I am so pleased with the 

women that are working with our government on various boards 

and organizations, whether that’s the appointed boards or the 

boards that are looking after working on CBOs, the boards that 

are bringing ideas to government through universities, through 

classrooms, through social services. Mr. Speaker, we’re not 

against women on boards. What we are is . . . What we would 

really like to do, ensure that women have every opportunity, 

things that weren’t happening in the past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, women on boards has increased 6 per cent over 

the last year, 6 per cent more. And I don’t see any women on 

that side that are running for the leadership. I don’t know what 

their feeling is on women in leadership opportunities in the 

NDP. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 61 — The Railway Amendment Act, 2012 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 61, 

The Railway Amendment Act, 2012 be now introduced and read 

a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Highways and Infrastructure that Bill No. 61, The Railway 



1782 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2012 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now introduced and read the first 

time. It is the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 63 — The Regional Parks Act, 2012 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 63, 

The Regional Parks Act, 2012 be now introduced and read a 

first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Parks, 

Culture and Sport that Bill No. 63, The Regional Parks Act, 

2012 be now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. When shall the bill be read a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 51 — The Public Inquiries Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 sur 

les enquêtes publiques 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — I rise today to move second reading of 

Bill 51, The Public Inquiries Act, 2012. The Public Inquiries 

Act, 2012 is a new bilingual Act that will repeal and replace the 

current public inquiries Act. It will govern the employment and 

conduct of public inquiries in Saskatchewan. 

 

Members of the Assembly will know that inquiry commissions 

are temporary bodies that are created by order in council to 

review and investigate a specific incident or matter. 

Commissions of inquiry have statutory powers to conduct their 

proceedings. They are limited by any terms and conditions 

placed on them by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. The 

creation and use of public inquiries was recently reviewed by 

the Uniform Law Conference of Canada, and new public 

inquiries legislation was recommended for implementation 

across Canada. 

 

The uniform Act provides for the modernization of the 

administrative powers and functions of a public inquiry and 

addresses the reality that different inquiries may be appropriate 

depending on circumstances. The bill, like the legislation 

already enacted in British Columbia and Newfoundland and 

Labrador, is based largely on the uniform Act. 

 

The current public inquiries Act is composed of five sections 

that have been enforced for nearly a century. The current Act 

provides only bare framework powers for the implementation of 

a public inquiry. A detailed order in council is required to set 

out the terms and conditions and operational mandate for any 

public inquiry struck under provincial powers. 

 

The new Act contains specific provisions that outline a 

commission’s authority in a number of areas. These include 

standing and participation, procedure, evidence, compellability 

of witnesses, investigations, search and seizure, and reporting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new Act will provide the creation of two types 

of inquiry commissions: study commissions to research, 

examine, and provide advice on public policy; and hearing 

commissions to investigate and make findings in fact in matters 

where there’s a possibility of the finding of misconduct. 

 

Under the existing legislation, the term “public inquiry” invokes 

a full judicial inquiry. While large-scale inquiries may be 

warranted in certain circumstances, there are also situations in 

which a study inquiry conducted on a smaller scale and with 

different terms of reference would be a more appropriate way to 

look into certain matters. The new Act will give express 

recognition to the two different types of public inquiries and 

provide a process for how they may operate and report. Instead 

of leaving it to the order in council to create all the terms and 

conditions that govern a particular inquiry, the new Act will 

provide a basic framework for the establishment, proceedings, 

and reporting of all inquiries. 

 

The authority to enter into agreements with other jurisdictions 

to establish joint commissions is also contained in the new 

legislation. 

 

The new Act also establishes reporting requirements and 

provides that reports generated by inquiries shall be made 

public after ensuring that privacy and confidentiality concerns 

are addressed. The Act also requires that a report of a 

commission must be released to the public by the minister 

within two weeks of its receipt. 

 

The new Act maintains certain features of inquiries established 

pursuant to existing legislation that continue to be appropriate 

and in the public interest. For example, the Lieutenant Governor 

in Council will continue to maintain the flexibility to appoint 

commissioners who are qualified and impartial and also to set 

any terms and conditions specific to the inquiry. Commissions 

will continue to be able to determine their own procedures 

subject to the terms set out by the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council. This includes determining who is entitled to participate 

in an inquiry and what, if any, funding will be provided to 

participants. 



November 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1783 

Mr. Speaker, the new Act prohibits a commission from making 

findings alleging misconduct against a person before the person 

has been given reasonable notice of the allegations and an 

opportunity to respond to those allegations. If a commission 

decides to hold a hearing, the Act requires that the hearing be 

public except where considerations of privacy, the consequence 

of disclosure of personal information, public interest, or the 

right to a fair trial weigh in favour of closing a hearing. 

 

The new Act also provides authority for publishing, broadcast, 

or electronic transmission of any proceedings before the 

commission. Commissions will continue to retain the ability to 

compel the attendance of witnesses and require the production 

of evidence. Commissions will also have search and seizure 

powers and the ability to apply to the court for contempt orders. 

Also under the new Act, decisions, acts, or omissions of the 

commission will be conclusive and will not be subject to 

judicial review by the courts. A consequential English-only bill 

accompanies this Act to amend 45 Acts and one regulation that 

reference The Public Inquiries Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new Act will clarify the powers and functions 

of an inquiry. It will also ensure that inquiry commissions are 

based on modern standards of the administrative law and that 

they are adequately empowered to govern their own processes 

effectively. However, Mr. Speaker, flexibility is maintained to 

allow for the creation of different types of inquiries and to set 

the terms and conditions that are appropriate to the matters 

being reviewed. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second 

reading of Bill 51, The Public Inquiries Act, 2012. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved that Bill No. 51, The Public Inquiries Act, 2012 be 

now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 

behalf of the official opposition, I am pleased to stand today to 

offer very brief comments about the Bill No. 51. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think what’s important here is that if you look at 

some of the plans that the minister alluded to in terms of 

bringing the public inquiries process to a more modern standard 

of clarifying some of the rules, and I understand from some of 

the discussions that there’s been other jurisdictions across the 

country . . . And I think we’re the fourth, if I’m not wrong on 

that front, that we’re the fourth province to look at how we 

could modernize our process to bring it on line with how other 

jurisdictions do their public inquiries. Mr. Speaker, I think that 

this has a lot of ramifications to a number of other departments, 

and really it is something that we have to pay very, very close 

attention to as an opposition in ensuring that there’s fairness 

and that there’s thoroughness and certainly that there’s an 

impartial process when one speaks about the public inquiries. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, some of the history I’ve had in public 

inquiries when I was a young lad was of course through some 

of the commissions held in northern Saskatchewan as it relates 

to mining. There may be other, different inquiries. One of the 

most recent ones of course would be with the North Battleford 

Water Inquiry. These processes are fairly rigorous. They’re 

fairly thorough. There’s a lot of witnesses. There’s a lot of legal 

matters that need to be addressed and one must not take into 

any context the . . . not to take the inquiry process serious, 

because if you don’t take the inquiry serious then there’s a lot 

of potential problems that could occur, not only to the people 

that are aggrieved but to those that want to find out what 

exactly happened as a result of the public wanting an inquiry. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had some of the notes forwarded on 

the actual bill itself that would certainly give us some 

information, sketchy at best, in terms of what the intent of some 

of the changes are as it relates to this particular bill. So we’re 

going to take our time to go through it and make sure that there 

is nothing untoward about why some of the changes are coming 

forward. As an opposition, the common sense approach we 

have is to ensure that we modernize, and certainly that we 

streamline processes and especially when it comes to matters of 

urgent public nature such as an inquiry. 

 

And the inquiry itself, Mr. Speaker, it’s got to be top-notch; it’s 

got to be professional; and as I mentioned, it’s got to be neutral; 

and it’s got to be understood. And if the intent of the Act is to 

make sure that our processes, the Saskatchewan process when it 

comes to The Public Inquiries Act is . . . It certainly is able to 

make sense to other jurisdictions and other provinces. And of 

course as an opposition we would support that process because 

there is a lot of times interjurisdictional issues that get involved 

with any kind of inquiry, and if we streamline and coordinate 

with other jurisdictions, it may make, at face value anyway, it 

may make the public inquiry changes as identified in Bill 51 

something that the opposition could support in the name of 

efficiency and certainly in making sure that we provide as fair 

and thorough and efficient process when the inquiries are 

undertaken. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at the outset we obviously, as we’ve said on 

every bill that we get, we’ll be looking through this bill. We’ll 

certainly do our . . . We’ll connect with our network of people 

that watch what happens as the Sask Party moves their agenda 

forward. At the outset, as I mentioned earlier, it appears the bill 

is all about efficiency. It appears it’s really trying to streamline 

some of the Acts and to also make sure that we are coordinating 

with other jurisdictions. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s such a, there’s 

such a potential for fault and there’s such a potential for error 

on this particular bill that we want to take the time to go 

through it and to make sure that exactly what is intended, as the 

minister alluded to earlier, is that it’s followed to the law. 

 

So on that front, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to be able to offer 

our initial comments. We obviously invite the public and those 

that are involved with this particular process, the public inquiry 

process, we would ask them for their input. And you can 

obviously do it online. You can do it through the telephone, 

through fax. There’s all kinds of avenues to participate in this 

process. And we would ask, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan and those that might have some issue or some 

information that’s of value to this process to certainly contact 

the official opposition, and we’ll ensure that your voice is 

heard. So on that front, Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn 

debate on Bill 51. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 51, The Public Inquiries Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the 



1784 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2012 

Assembly to adopt the motion? If not, I will call the question. If 

the members don’t want to . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the House is Bill No. 51, 

The Public Inquiries Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the adjournment? All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say no. The ayes have it. 

 

Bill No. 52 — The Public Inquiries Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2012 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of The Public Inquiries Consequential Amendments 

Act, 2012. This Act consequentially amends 45 English Acts 

and one English regulation. It adopts the powers conferred on a 

commissioner pursuant to The Public Inquiries Act. 

 

In each case the amendment makes a change to refer to the 

provisions of the new Act that correspond with the powers 

under the current Act. These changes are made to ensure 

consistency with The Public Inquiries Act, 2012. In each case 

the amendments will refer to specific provisions in the new Act 

in order to maintain the status quo. For example, the majority of 

Acts will be amended to provide powers conferred on a 

commission by section 11, the power to compel evidence; 

section 15, contempt of commission; and section 25, the ability 

to hire staff. 

 

Presently The Automobile Accident Insurance Act and The 

Labour Standards Act provide for the powers of a commission 

pursuant to sections 3 and 4 only. As such, amendments to 

those Acts will only extend the powers conferred on the 

commission in section 11 and section 15. Similarly each of The 

Cities Act, The Municipalities Act, and The Northern 

Municipalities Act currently grant inspectors all the powers, 

privileges, and immunities of commissioners. Accordingly, in 

addition to referencing sections 11, 15, and 25 in those three 

Acts, it will also extend the immunities conferred on the 

commission pursuant to section 26. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of the public 

inquiries consequential Act, 2012. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved second reading of Bill No. 52, The Public Inquiries 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize the member for 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. What I 

think is really important as our official opposition’s first look at 

the bill, obviously it’s a complementary bill to what the minister 

spoke about earlier, Bill 51, and obviously, Mr. Speaker, we 

look at the bill as well. And one must never, ever take into 

consideration the fact that, even though it’s a consequential 

amendment Act, that it’s not important to see the ramifications 

of the bill that’s being proposed. 

 

So one of the things I think is really important is that as a 

layperson, when it comes to the process of a public inquiry, 

people have to really, truly understand how the inquiries are 

handled, what the processes that are involved at the actual 

hearings and, Mr. Speaker, as well as who commissions, who 

authorizes, and who oversees the appointment process when 

there is an inquiry called for. These are some of the things that 

are really important. 

 

And the minister briefly spoke about some of the issues on Bill 

52 in relation to being immune from lawsuits and being 

immune from frivolous charges that the commissioner may be 

subjected to from time to time as he or she undertakes her duty 

as an officer of a commission. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, we 

see that as a very important piece in making sure that the 

inquiry system per se does have integrity by offering officers 

certainly or allowing them to become immune to some frivolous 

lawsuit or other potential threats to his or her person. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to the extent of trying to sound like a lawyer 

here, I want to point out that many people out there do not 

understand how the public inquiry system works, and they need 

to completely understand how it works to understand what is 

being proposed not only in this consequential amendment Act, 

Bill 52, but really what’s also being proposed in Bill 51. At the 

outset, as the opposition, we understand, we respect common 

sense in these approaches. We’re not going to be frivolous in 

some of the comments and some of the points that we wish to 

make, but in order for us to really, truly be able to offer the 

people the insight that is necessary and what is being proposed 

in this bill or any other bill, we’ve got to take the time, we’ve 

got to seek advice, we’ve got to have our own input. All nine 

members of the opposition will take their perspective, and 

they’ll certainly offer that perspective here when the debates on 

this particular bill moves further down the process. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that process is certainly . . . will be 

forthcoming, as I mentioned at the outset at yesterday’s session 

day. We actually have a couple of months to look through this 

bill to make sure that there’s nothing untoward as to what the 

minister is proposing. 

 

Now I know from watching a number of movies, legal movies, 

that people talk about intent, Mr. Speaker, and that’s what’s the 

important process that I want to undertake as our first blush at 

this bill, the first look at this bill, is to make sure that what the 

minister is intending as a result of his presentation here today 

and some of the points that he’s raised in this bill is exactly 

what the end goal is, because . . . the end goal. Because some 

people out there certainly don’t trust the Sask Party, and they 

look at some of these bills and they begin to wonder what the 

ramifications are, what the consequences are. So that’s why it’s 

important we take the time to look through the bill, we look at 

potential pitfalls that may occur, Mr. Speaker. And we also 

want to make sure that the public has that opportunity, that the 

public out there . . . It may be a legal student, it may be a person 



November 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1785 

that has some significant information, or it could be people that 

have a lot of knowledge on how commission or inquiries work. 

And that’s something that’s really important, that we tell them 

today that your input is valued and we certainly look forward to 

hearing from you if you have any particular advice that you 

want to share and offer. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, we have nine members in 

the official opposition, and those nine . . . We have a number of 

staff members. We of course have a number of people 

throughout the province that are pretty familiar with the legal 

system that they could certainly . . . What I think is going to 

happen is that the process unfolds, every single one of my 

colleagues will have an opportunity to look through Bill 51 and 

this particular Bill 52 to see what exactly is being proposed and 

to offer their take or their view on this particular Act and, Mr. 

Speaker, at the end of the day, to make sure that what the 

minister has alluded to in terms of his intention as a result of 

this bill, that that’s the end game — that there is no hidden plan 

over there; that there is no hidden agenda by the Sask Party to 

try and weaken the public inquiry process or the public 

commission process by simply weakening it in some way and 

trying to of course hide it through fancy wording. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that people understand 

that the opportunity to dissect the bill, look through the bill, 

seek advice, is certainly something that the opposition will take 

to ensure that Bill 52 is following through with the intent and to 

make sure that at the end of the day it’s all about efficiency, it’s 

all about coordination, and it’s all about making sure that the 

public inquiry process in Saskatchewan is fair, it’s balanced, 

and it’s neutral. It’s not being hampered with politics or 

hampered with orders from some political person. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to look very, very closely at some 

of the smaller details of this bill. And as I’ve mentioned to folks 

from time to time, in looking at the wording, there are 

significant differences between the word “will” and the word 

“shall.” You know, these are some of the things that you have 

to be careful of as you look through some of these bills, and 

because certainly some of the experiences I’ve had, that there is 

significant legal differences between “will,” the word “will,” 

and the word “shall.” So I think it’s important that people look 

at that and see what could possibly harm the process that the 

minister spoke about when he said he wanted to do it this way 

and this is how we’re going to do it. 

 

And that’s the prerogative of the opposition, to take its time to 

make sure that what he proposes, and the intent of what his 

proposals are, are being followed to the letter and that there is 

no hidden agenda or other scheme in place that the Sask Party 

has to try and weaken the process of having public inquiries or 

commissions on a wide variety of potential projects or issues, 

Mr. Speaker. So on that note, I think we will take our time. The 

nine of us will offer our perspective and our valued opinion. 

 

We would encourage people out there to watch the process 

unfold, and as the time will permit us before the spring sitting, 

we will go out and consult with people on this bill and any other 

bill that the Sask Party proposes, to ensure that it’s fair, it’s 

thorough, it’s common sense, and that there is no hidden agenda 

in terms of some other proposals that they intend to make, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s one of our roles and jobs that we relish here 

in the opposition benches. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I am again pleased to offer our 

initial comments and I now move that we adjourn the debate on 

Bill No. 52. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 52, The Public Inquiries Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 53 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 

Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2) 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of Bill 53, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2). The purpose of this bill is to repeal 11 

statutes that are no longer necessary or have become obsolete. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the bill will repeal The Crown Foundations Act. 

That Act was introduced in 1994 to allow universities to take 

advantage of a difference in the income tax treatment of 

donations made to charitable organizations and to the Crown. 

At that time the income tax deduction for donations made to 

charitable organizations could not exceed 20 per cent of a 

taxpayer’s income whereas donations to the Crown could be as 

high as 100 per cent of the taxpayer’s income. The Act 

permitted Crown foundations to be established for 

Saskatchewan’s two universities to act as a conduit for 

donations to those universities. This allowed donors to take 

advantage of a larger tax benefit. 

 

In 1996 the tax credit distinction between donations to 

charitable organizations and donations to the Crown was 

eliminated. The new limit of 75 per cent of a taxpayer’s income 

is the same for either type of donation. As there is no longer any 

tax advantage gained from establishing a foundation, there is no 

need for this Act to continue. The Crown foundations at both 

universities have had no activity in the past several years, and 

both universities support the elimination of the foundations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the bill also repeals The Vegetable, Fruit and 

Honey Sales Act . . . [inaudible interjection] . . .Yes, it’s 

awesome, awesome. The Act has been in place since 1947. It 

permits inspectors appointed pursuant to the Act to certify that 

vegetables, fruits, and honey for sale in Saskatchewan meet the 

standards specified in the regulations. However since the Act 

was first introduced, changes have occurred in the industries to 

the federal regulations that have rendered the Act irrelevant and 

cumbersome. Federal legislation regulates producers selling to 

retailers or wholesalers both inside or outside the province. 

Retailers use the federal legislation even if the produce is being 

sold in province, as wholesalers and retailers purchasing 

produce or honey from growers request the federal standards 



1786 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2012 

are met. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are also recommending that The Sales on 

Consignment Act be repealed by this bill. This Act creates a 

licensing scheme respecting sales on consignment of 

agricultural products. However no scheme is currently in place, 

and non-enforcement of the Act has not negatively affected the 

industry. There is also no record of the last time the Act was 

used, or the appointment of any inspectors. The industries have 

undergone significant change since 1978. There are now 

additional business laws in place that govern the sale of 

products, including agricultural products, which supports the 

repeal of this Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the bill also repeals The Saskatchewan 

Development Fund Act. That Act was passed in 1974 to create 

the Saskatchewan Development Fund Corporation to perform 

the duties of trustee, custodian, and manager of the 

Saskatchewan Development Fund, an open-ended investment 

trust. In 2009 the board of directors of the corporation resolved 

to close the fund, and since then all accounts have been 

redeemed and operations have been closed. In 2010 the board of 

directors resolved to begin the process of winding up the affairs 

of the corporation. The corporation no longer has any assets or 

liabilities. The bill includes provisions to wind up and dissolve 

the corporation and repeal The Saskatchewan Development 

Fund Act as it no longer has any purpose. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The NewGrade Energy Inc. Act will also be 

repealed. This Act was enacted to facilitate the financing, 

construction, and development of the heavy oil upgrader in 

Regina. In 2007 the Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan sold its interest in NewGrade Energy Inc. and as 

such the Act is no longer required. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Government Relations has put 

forward six pieces of legislation for repeal. The bill will repeal 

The Cut Knife Reference Act. Passed in 1978, the Act replaces 

Cutknife, previously one word, as two words. No current 

legislation refers to Cut Knife as one word and as such the 

purpose of the Act has been fulfilled and it can be repealed. 

 

The Municipal Debentures Repayment Act will also be repealed. 

Nearly 100 years ago, municipal Acts required municipalities to 

issue debentures with prescribed terms of 10 or 15 to 40 years, 

and to levy annual rates for repayment. The Municipal 

Debentures Repayment Act was passed in 1915 to provide 

municipalities with the ability to extend terms of debentures 

with the approval of Saskatchewan’s . . . [inaudible] . . . 

government authority, which is now the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board. At present the municipal Acts provide the 

ability for municipalities to finance and restructure financing 

instruments, including debentures, subject to Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board’s approval. Where municipalities and the 

board need to extend repayment terms on debentures, they now 

do so based on the authority of the current Acts. Mr. Speaker, 

The Municipal Debentures Repayment Act has not been used in 

the last 15 years and can be repealed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the bill will also repeal The Municipal 

Development and Loan (Saskatchewan) Act which was passed 

in 1964 to implement a federal Act. The federal Municipal 

Development and Loan Act (Canada) was passed in 1963 and 

provided for provincial governments to borrow monies from the 

federal government and loan those monies to municipalities for 

capital works to improve the unemployment situation 

throughout Canada. In 1983 the federal Act was repealed, 

rendering the provincial legislation obsolete. 

 

Another Act passed to implement federal legislation has also 

become obsolete and can be repealed. The Municipality 

Improvements Assistance (Saskatchewan) Act was passed in 

1939 to implement the federal Municipal Improvements 

Assistance Act (Canada). The federal Act enabled loans to 

municipalities or power corporations across Canada for the 

construction and operation of public works. It required 

provincial governments to approve the projects and guarantee 

the loans. The federal Act was repealed in 1983, making the 

provincial legislation obsolete. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the bill will also repeal The Municipal Industrial 

Development Corporations Act. This Act was passed in 1960 to 

assist cities and towns with the attraction and promotion of 

industrial development by providing accommodation or 

financial assistance to industries. The Act provides the authority 

for incorporations, powers, distribution of profits or assets, 

directors, and other matters for industrial development 

corporations that are established under the Act. 

 

There are no active corporations that meet the criteria in the Act 

and the last active corporation was formally dissolved in 

September of 2011. This Act can be repealed as municipal 

governments are able to establish corporations pursuant to The 

Municipalities Act, The Cities Act, or The Northern 

Municipalities Act, 2010. 

 

Finally, The Subdivisions Act will also be repealed by this bill. 

The Act was passed in 1914 and provides the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board with the authority to revise the property 

assessments of a subdivided area in a rural municipality and to 

permit the owner of a subdivided area to occupy adjoining 

vacant land for the purpose of common cultivation. 

 

The Act also permits the registrar of land titles to exercise a 

variety of powers in a subdivided area without obtaining 

planning approval from the director of planning. The 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board has no record of using this Act 

in the last 25 years, nor do land title officials recall having 

received an application pursuant to the Act. All sections of the 

Act have either been superseded by other provisions or have 

become redundant or inconsistent with current legislation, and 

the Act can be repealed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, repealing these 11 pieces of legislation 

demonstrates the government’s commitment to review and 

eliminate outdated legislation. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 

move second reading of Bill 53, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2). Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved Bill No. 53, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 

2012 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

once again pleased to be able to rise today in the Assembly to 



November 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1787 

speak, very quickly and very briefly, about some of the 

concerns that we think might be attached to Bill 53. 

 

As my hon. colleague noted, that there are 11 pieces all 

wrapped up in this particular bill, and there are very, very 

important pieces in this bill that need and merit special attention 

and focus, Mr. Speaker. There’s no question that, as we said at 

the outset, we would encourage the public to participate in this 

process. If they have, as a result of some of the . . . whether 

they’re watching the Assembly this afternoon or they simply go 

online, that if there’s something of particular note that they do 

have some glaring concern about or that there is some 

information that is very significant in terms of what the minister 

is trying to do today, I think it’s important that we express that 

welcome and we express the willingness by the opposition to 

hear them out and hear some of their concerns. So obviously 

that open door policy and certainly trying to get people to be 

engaged with this whole process to understand how a bill is 

introduced and in this case how bills are taken off the record. 

And I think it’s important that we involve the public and we 

invite the public as often as we can. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know the minister might not want to be 

known as one of the first bills that he’s introduced in the 

Assembly was the vegetable, fruit, and honey for sale Act, you 

know, in terms of abolishing that particular aspect of this Act. 

But obviously those are some of the issues that I think is really 

important for the public to understand, that there are some Acts 

within government that need to be abolished. Some of them are 

fairly old, and some of them are outdated, and some of them are 

of no use. And obviously as the official opposition, the common 

sense approach that we would take and we would support as 

well is to make sure that there isn’t any frivolous policies or 

Acts in the way of making Saskatchewan more modern and 

more functioning. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think some of the points that I would raise, 

there’s very little information on the NewGrade co-op aspect of 

the Act. It’s one of the 11 items that the minister has spoken 

about, wrapped up within Bill No. 53. There’s The Sales on 

Consignment Act that we need to find more information about. 

There’s also for example I would say the Sask Development 

Fund, that particular aspect is gone as well. And he alluded to a 

federal loan program that we have to see as to what the intent 

was when that fund was in place and who were the benefactors 

and who were the beneficiaries and what process has been put 

in place to replace that particular Act. 

 

So there are 11 pieces of bills from various departments 

wrapped up in this particular bill, Bill 53, that we have to make 

sure that we take the time to study this bill and to look at 

everything that the minister has spoken about as to what 

pertains and some of the work that he’s trying to do under the 

Bill 53 title. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the university income tax process — I’m 

quite interested in hearing about that — where he has indicated 

that, and certainly on some cases, that up to 20 per cent of your 

income on a personal basis could be given to a post-secondary 

institution. And now that has been changed to 75 per cent from 

what I understand that the minister spoke about. Now obviously 

given the fact that I would at the outset say that this is probably 

pretty good for the Sask Party to do this because they’re 

saddling all the universities with high levels of debt. I was quite 

disturbed to hear yesterday during question period the fact that 

the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] is now one of the 

highest per student debt ratios in the country, Mr. Speaker. And 

then you hear about this particular bill indicating that, yes, if 

somebody wants to contribute to a university fund, they can do 

so. We’re not going to limit to only 20 per cent of your personal 

income, that we’re now going to have the ceiling on some of the 

incomes in some of the people that are able to contribute to any 

kind of fund to help the U of S or the U of R [University of 

Regina]. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s really, really important to 

think of the ramifications of that particular Act because 

obviously if it makes sense, the NDP certainly want to support 

that. But the big question we have is that if it’s a way for 

government to simply say, look, we’ve cleared the path for the 

individual people to now make any kind of donations they want 

to the U of S or to the U of R and that means it gives us less and 

less dollars that we have to contribute to them, then you can see 

exactly what I mean when we speak from the opposition 

perspective is that you have to really watch what the intent of 

some of these Acts are and what the purpose is and what is the 

objective, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And that’s something that’s really, really important. And as I 

said at the outset when I spoke about that particular provision is 

the minister under Bill 53 has various different levels of Acts 

that he wants to repeal, and he wants to get rid of them because 

they become obsolete, and they’re of no function to the people 

of Saskatchewan. And then you look at the university one 

where he’s indicating that there’s a change as to how much 

you’re able to contribute from the personal perspective as 

opposed to what it was before. And to us that means that there 

is some plans, that there is some objectives here attached to this 

bill — as much as he may want to gloss over what the intent is 

— that certainly there is a corporate strategy over there to have 

less and less support afforded to the U of S and to the U of R 

and have the individual people out there be able to contribute 

more. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we don’t see no major problems with the, like, 

the Cut Knife Act. That’s fairly straightforward, you know, in 

terms of whether it’s one word or two words. I don’t think the 

people of Saskatchewan want us to hold up a bill, you know, for 

that particular reason. So I think it’s important that we as 

opposition identify where the challenges are on any bill, seek 

consultation on what we think the problems are, certainly get all 

nine of us to offer their perspective, and then that’s where each 

nine have to make sure that what is being planned and proposed 

doesn’t have a negative consequence. Because if it does have a 

negative consequence, then we as an opposition, it’s our role 

and duty to expose that consequence and certainly advise the 

government and the people of Saskatchewan exactly what we 

think the intent of the bill is. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s The Sales on Consignment Act, 

the Cut Knife, the NewGrade co-op, the Sask Development 

Fund, the vegetables, fruit, honey for sale Act, or whether it’s 

the university income tax Act, I think it’s important we take the 

time to look through this bill to see exactly what a number of 



1788 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2012 

departments are proposing through this minister to try and 

repeal some of these Acts that may seem to be obsolete or no 

longer necessary. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we take 

the time to study them. So on that note, I think I will adjourn 

debate on item 53. I so move. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 53, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 

2012 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

Bill No. 54 — The Seizure of Criminal Property 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of Bill 54, 

The Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2009 

provided the authority for the provincial government to take 

responsibility for the seizure of criminal property processed 

from the police services. While there have been successful 

seizures under this legislation since making this change, counsel 

and operational staff have identified a series of changes to make 

the seizure process more efficient and effective. 

 

The bill will amend the definition of instrument of unlawful 

activity. The change will make it clear that property used to 

engage in unlawful activity but that has not yet resulted in the 

acquisition or production of property may still be subject to 

forfeiture. Forfeiture could proceed if there is evidence of the 

likelihood that the activity will result in the acquisition or 

production of property or evidence of an intention on the part of 

the respondent to obtain such property. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill will also specifically authorize the 

director to make an application to the courts by statement of 

claim in addition to the existing ability to proceed by notice of 

motion. It will deal with the challenges of proof of ownership 

by removing the requirement to name the owner of the property 

as a party to an application in all cases and extend the period 

from 30 to 60 days during which time the director can request 

an order to prevent the sale, transfer of property prior to 

bringing a forfeiture application. This change will also provide 

authority for the court to extend a restraining order for any 

further period the court views appropriate. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, this bill will make procedural changes 

to provide for a sealing order regarding the respondents’ 

affidavits, provided that evidence of a person that was not 

charged with an offence is not relevant in making a finding of 

fact in an application under the Act. It will address how the 

rules of court will apply to an application under the Act, 

including one made by way of statement of claim. It will 

provide that the limitation period commences when the director 

is satisfied that property is proceeds of unlawful activity or an 

instrument of unlawful activity rather than two years from the 

point of discovery. And it will provide that evidence is 

admissible based on information and belief in order to lessen 

the burden on testifying police officers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation represents a balance between 

ensuring due process for individuals who may face an allegation 

of holding criminal property and ensuring that criminals do not 

benefit financially from their criminal activities. We remain 

committed to this program, Mr. Speaker. We are confident that 

these amendments will assist our officials in using this 

legislation as intended by this Assembly to prevent profiteering 

through criminal activity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 

Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 

that Bill No. 54, The Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment 

Act, 2012 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

again to just give initial comments on Bill 54. And obviously I 

think what’s the important understanding I think, Mr. Speaker, 

just from what the contents of the bill we’re speaking about is 

really to strengthen the hand of some of the people involved 

with justice in terms of dealing with properties that are believed 

to be used for illegal purposes. 

 

Now no question, Mr. Speaker, from the opposition’s 

perspective that dealing with criminal activity is something 

that’s very serious. It’s a serious undertaking by our police 

officers, by the justice system in general and that obviously we 

want to make sure that there is a speedy process to ensure that 

criminals that may be using property for their own benefits that 

they’re not holding up the courts unnecessarily, Mr. Speaker. I 

think everybody in the province agrees with that because 

obviously there is property being seized, as the bill would 

suggest, that what you want to do is to ensure that it is done . . . 

that justice is indeed swift and efficient. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think when the minister speaks of a notice 

of motion and speaks to some of the legal processes that he 

understands fairly well being a lawyer, I think the important 

thing is that we make sure that people out there understand 

exactly what is being proposed. And that’s the purpose of going 

through these bills one by one and certainly seeing what people 

might offer on two fronts. I think one front being to educate the 

public, which is really, really important, and to let people know 

to not allow criminals to use their property, to not allow 

criminals to try and hide behind names of people that they 

might use as a front for some operations, and so on and so forth, 

Mr. Speaker. So you’ve got to be very, very wise in this regard. 

 

And of course the second thing is to educate the people in 

general as to how the process works. So when the ministry uses 

phrases like “notice of motion,” I think it’s important that 

people basically either brush up on their own through the 

Internet or actually have discussions on this bill to really figure 

out exactly what is being proposed because there is a lot legal 

jargon being used in the presentation of these bills. And it’s 

important that people be given the time to understand what 

these various phrases mean in the long run and how it impacts 



November 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1789 

on this particular bill. So there’s a bit of disadvantage, Mr. 

Speaker, for a lot of the people out there that might be listening 

as to how they proceed with trying to understand this bill if 

they’re not sure of the jargon or the criminal process is 

understood. 

 

The other thing I think is also important is that you also have 

people’s liberties, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s really important that 

the innocent people be allowed to continue to function. There’s 

no question as you look at some of the justice issues over the 

past number of years, there have been people that have been 

found guilty in our courts and people that have been found not 

guilty in our courts. And so I think it’s really important that you 

weigh that particular aspect of the justice system when dealing 

with bills of this sort, that the premise of our justice system is 

you’re not guilty unless proven guilty, and that you can’t have 

activity under this particular bill that’s contrary to that, you 

know, to that standard. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s a lot of general information that 

the minister could share with the public. There’s a lot of 

processes for the public to participate in this particular bill, but 

the premise under which we guard our thoughts on any bill that 

comes forward in dealing with the criminal activity that’s 

hurting our communities is that, from our perspective, that if 

there’s an opportunity to improve the process of law to ensure a 

fair but speedy process to deal with criminal activity, and in this 

case with property, that certainly from the opposition’s 

perspective, we would support that notion. 

 

That being said, it’s always very important to ensure that justice 

is done fairly and that it’s handed out fairly and that people all 

have to know that there is that premise that you’re not guilty 

until proven guilty. 

 

So on that front, Mr. Speaker, we’ll look through this bill. We’ll 

ensure that the intent, as the minister has alluded to, is being 

followed and that there’s also provisions to make sure people 

aren’t unjustly threatened, that people aren’t unjustly accused of 

activity. That premise, Mr. Speaker, is so very important as we 

undertake, as law makers, as we undertake the notion that we 

should have a speedy resolve to justice. There’s no question 

about that, that we have to discourage criminal activity. There’s 

no question about that, that those that offend a community and 

people, that they have to be dealt with as quickly as possible. 

There’s no question about that on our front. 

 

The only thing that we would say is really important is that the 

justice system makes sure that this individual or these 

individuals are guilty before we undertake that process, because 

there are times when innocent people get caught up in a system 

either through a mistake they may have made or not knowing 

some or all the facts. We need to make that concession be 

known as we talk about these particular bills. So on that note, 

Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 54. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 54, The Seizure of Criminal Property 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

Bill No. 55 — The Consumer Protection 

and Business Practices Act 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of Bill 55, 

The Consumer Protection and Business Practices Act. This 

legislation will begin the process of updating and rationalizing 

the consumer protection framework for Saskatchewan. It begins 

with the consolidation and simplification of the existing 

consumer protection Act making the legislation more accessible 

and easier to understand. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a new part of the Act called designated activities 

and licensing will permit us to consolidate other consumer 

protection legislation into the Act. Mr. Speaker, consumer 

protection in Saskatchewan is spread across 12 separate 

statutes, each with different standards, enforcement 

mechanisms, and results. Of these, seven are licensing Acts or 

contain licensing provisions. 

 

The new legislation will permit through regulations these 

licensing regimes to be brought into the same Act resulting in 

consistency of treatment and coordination of administration. 

Mr. Speaker, this does not mean that each licensing regulation 

will be a cookie cutter version of all the others. 

 

The Act will allow for individuality of rules governing the 

businesses depending on the particular needs of the industry 

being licensed. Also this legislation allows other business types 

to be brought into the licensing scheme by regulation as the 

need arises. 

 

Some flexibility will apply to consumer contracts, of which five 

types are typically regulated pursuant to The Consumer 

Protection Act. These are: Internet sales, future performance, 

personal development services, travel club, and remotely 

formed contracts. If our government decides to regulate other 

types of contracts, the new Act will provide a simple 

mechanism to do so. Mr. Speaker, I wish to assure you and this 

Assembly that thorough consultations will be undertaken with 

affected industry groups, consumer and business groups, the 

legal profession, and the public before any regulations are 

passed. 

 

One very important change in this bill, although small, will 

provide a significant benefit to consumers. Recent cases, 

including some from the Supreme Court of Canada, have 

caused us to add clarification to the section of the Act that 

prevents contracting out of the protections of the Act. This 

provision has been enhanced to ensure that standard form 

contracts cannot tie consumers into arbitration clauses or 

prohibit them from participating in class actions. This will not 

prevent the consumer from selecting arbitration if that’s the 

appropriate dispute resolution mechanism. However, Mr. 

Speaker, it becomes the consumer’s choice, not the supplier’s. 

Furthermore, this protection has been applied to the entire Act, 

not just to marketplace practices as was previously the case. 

 

[15:15] 



1790 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2012 

Another small but important feature is the one that permits 

Saskatchewan courts to have jurisdiction over consumer 

actions, regardless of the part of the Act under which the 

consumer rights arise. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the enforcement administration provisions 

have been moved to a part that applies to the whole Act. This 

will make it easier for the consumer protection division of the 

Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan to 

do its job. Through this legislation, Saskatchewan is doing its 

part to provide a fair and balanced legislation that protects the 

vulnerable consumer while avoiding an undue burden on 

Saskatchewan businesses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 

55, The Consumer Protection and Business Practices Act. 

Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 

that Bill No. 55, The Consumer Protection and Business 

Practices Act be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready 

for the question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again it 

gives me extreme pleasure to stand up and offer our initial 

comments on this particular bill, Bill 55. There is no question 

that consumer protection is something that is very, very 

valuable, or valued and certainly valuable — valued by the 

people of Saskatchewan and valuable for government to 

undertake such exercises, Mr. Speaker. As the official 

opposition, any way and means in which we could support and 

endorse and protect the consumer out there that may have had 

some unpleasant experience or may have unwillingly been 

subjected to some unfair practices, that it’s important that we 

strengthen those particular bills and that we do all we can as 

opposition to support that if the government so wishes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this particular bill has a lot of information in 

it. There’s a lot of different corresponding Acts that it impacts, 

and I think it’s important for people to understand what some of 

the bills that are being impacted by this bill. And, Mr. Speaker, 

the consumer bill here we’re speaking about impacts The 

Auctioneers Act. It impacts The Cemeteries Act, 1999. It 

impacts The Charitable Fund-raising Businesses Act. It impacts 

The Collection Agents Act. It impacts The Consumer and 

Commercial Affairs Act. It impacts The Consumer Protection 

and Business Practices Act. It impacts The Consumer 

Protection Act. It impacts The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act, 

2002. Mr. Speaker, it impacts the credit Act. It impacts The 

Direct Sellers Act. It impacts The Film and Video Classification 

Act. It impacts The Funeral and Cremation Services Act. It 

impacts The Motor Dealers Act. It impacts The Sale of Goods 

Act. It impacts The Ticket Sales Act. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of different Acts that is involved 

with this particular bill. So I think it’s important that the people 

of Saskatchewan understand that while this bill is really 

speaking of the consumer and trying to protect the consumer, 

there are a lot of different aspects of the Act that are impacted 

when the minister proposes this particular bill. 

 

So it’s important that the public out there . . . We’re lucky to 

have a couple of lawyers on our benches and they understand 

The Consumer Protection Act better than I do, Mr. Speaker, but 

they’ll certainly have their opportunity. Because I’m sure the 

people of Saskatchewan will be pleased to know that there are 

many people within the NDP ranks that have some very, very 

good skills at understanding how some of these Acts impact the 

people of Saskatchewan. And they’ll have their opportunity 

from their legal position to be able to clarify for the people of 

Saskatchewan what may be strong in this particular bill, what 

may be lacking in this bill, or what might be very weak in this 

bill. And that’s really important that when we get the 

opportunity to provide our legal team with the process or the 

plan to express their particular view, I think it’s important that 

people of Saskatchewan take note and to hear what they have to 

say. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the things that’s important is 

that we know that on many occasions that this particular 

government doesn’t have a good record of protecting 

consumers, Mr. Speaker. We see that in the high prices of rents, 

the high prices of power, and the high prices of food and fuel, 

and the list goes on. So it’s kind of awkward for us as an 

opposition to sit here and watch the Sask Party propose Acts or 

repeal Acts that’s impacting the consumer, Mr. Speaker, 

because they’ve been giving it to the consumer for years and 

years with the high cost of power, high cost of fuel, high cost of 

food, high cost of rent. The list goes on and on and on. 

 

So the people out there are wondering, why should we trust the 

Sask Party to make amendments to a consumer protection Act 

when they clearly don’t do their job to protect us as normal 

citizens? And that’s what’s really important, Mr. Speaker, is 

that we take the time to see and to hear what the people of 

Saskatchewan have to say in this regard. And absolutely I agree 

with the vast of majority of people saying, you should not allow 

the Saskatchewan Party to start talking about consumer 

protection, because quite frankly they don’t practise, in any 

way, shape, or form, what they preach. 

 

So I think that’s one of the points that I want to raise at the 

outset. And that’s why when I rattle off some of the other Acts 

that are impacted, we would hope that when we do that, that 

people see what a broad range of services that this particular bill 

has an impact on. And as you look and you go down the list, 

you can see there are many, many different agencies, many, 

many different people, many, many different aspects of 

Saskatchewan’s life that are impacted by this. 

 

So I think it’s really important that some of the consequential 

amendments to all those Acts that the minister’s proposing 

through this bill, Mr. Speaker, what does that mean? What 

impact . . . Does it strengthen big corporations’ hands over the 

people of Saskatchewan? And many instances we’ve seen them 

practise that particular skill, and what we want to point out is 

that it’s not a skill that the people of Saskatchewan want the 

government to have. They want to have a government that’ll 

defend them through the consumer protection Acts, to 

strengthen those Acts to make sure that they know that the 

government is listening to them and that they feel somewhat 

assured that they’re not getting . . . people are not being taken 

advantage of. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think at the outset there’s many, many 

questions we have on this bill. And, as always, the traditional 



November 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1791 

welcome to people out there who may have information they 

want to share. And like I said, what’s really important is that as 

much as people don’t realize, we have a great amount of legal 

expertise within our caucus and in our network of caucus, so 

we’re going to obviously seek that legal advice from those folks 

as well. 

 

And so it’s very important to go through this Act with a 

fine-tooth comb, Mr. Speaker, with a magnifying glass, to make 

sure, to make sure that all the different issues and points that, 

you know, that they’re raising today with this bill, that there’s 

nothing that hurts the people of Saskatchewan. Because quite 

frankly, the record of the Sask Party in protecting the people of 

Saskatchewan is poor at best, Mr. Speaker, and our job is to 

make sure we strengthen it, not take away from this bill. So on 

that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 

55. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 55, The Consumer 

Protection and Business Practices Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

Bill No. 56 — The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2012/Loi 

de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of Bill 56, 

The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

These amendments allow the Court of Appeal judges to 

participate in decisions for six months after leaving office in 

matters that they’ve heard prior to leaving office. Judges may 

leave office if they choose to retire or resign from the court or 

they may be appointed to another court. These departures can 

lead to challenges in managing the work of the court, 

particularly if the remaining judges on the panel are unable to 

agree on a majority decision on a particular matter. 

 

These amendments allow the newly retired or reappointed judge 

to participate in decisions that will prevent a deadlock among 

the remaining panel members. The other advantage for the court 

is it will allow judges who have announced their retirement to 

fully participate in the work of the court and to hear matters 

until their departure. 

 

Preventing rehearings benefits the public as well as the courts. 

All parties incur additional courts if a matter has to be reheard. 

These costs may include legal fees, time away from work to 

attend the rehearing, and the costs associated with the delay in 

resolving a particular matter. Rehearings are costly for the 

parties and the court, so it’s best to reduce them as much as 

possible. 

 

With this new ability for judges to participate in judgments for 

six months after leaving office, rehearings should be largely 

eliminated in the future. A rehearing will, however, still be 

required when the majority of judges on a panel have died, are 

unable to participate due to illness, or have otherwise left office 

and have decided not to participate in the decision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, most other provinces allow a period of time for 

judges who have left office to participate in decisions on 

matters that they previously heard. The time periods vary from 

90 days, Mr. Speaker, to six months. The six-month period 

contained in these amendments is consistent with British 

Columbia, Alberta, New Brunswick, and Newfoundland and 

Labrador. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of Bill 56, 

The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2012. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 

that Bill No. 56, The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2012 be 

now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I once 

again am pleased to stand up today and give the initial 

comments on Bill 56. At the outset again, it looks like it’s a 

fairly standard process in which I think the minister has spoke 

about allowing judges upon stepping away from the bench for a 

number of reasons, whether they step down or whether they’re 

ill, that they allow them up to six months if they’re sitting on 

some committee to allow them to complete their work and on 

some trial to allow them to complete their work because the 

rehearing process is fairly expensive. Now, Mr. Speaker, if 

that’s at the outset what the minister was trying to propose in 

this particular bill, I think the opposition is all for the notion of, 

as I mentioned earlier, for fair and speedy justice. I think that’s 

important to note. 

 

That being said, Mr. Speaker, is six months an adequate time 

frame? Because based on some of the court cases and some of 

the processes that we hear on television, sometimes there’s 

court cases that drag on for one to two years. Now obviously 

there has been some provisions made in the event that a judge 

that may have an extension of their time to be served on a court 

case or a process or a hearing, that quite frankly that they may 

get ill or they may have other complications. In that instance 

they have provisions to replace that judge. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what happens if the case takes a lot longer 

than six months? I’d like to know how the minister arrived at 

the six-month solution. BC [British Columbia] obviously done 

it, as he made reference to BC doing it in this fashion. What 

were the provisions, and why did BC do it in that fashion? 

These are some of the things that we ought to know with this 

bill. So the questions at the outset, is six months an adequate 

time frame to avoid the heavy costs of hearing . . . another 

judge having the power to hear the case over? Is that enough? Is 

that adequate time, Mr. Speaker? I don’t know that. But from 

what I understand from watching the news and listening to a 

few lawyers that I’m friends with, that sometimes these court 

cases take a long time. 

 

The other question that obviously I had is, how did BC arrive at 

the six-month time frame? Did the minister get any information 

that BC was willing to share with him in terms of this time 

frame, that it would be nice to hear that particular information 



1792 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2012 

as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the rehearing costs, what are we actually saving as a result 

of this Act? Because obviously he mentioned savings because 

you obviously don’t want to have a new judge, a new process, a 

new panel to hear a court case that’s been going on for some 

time. So obviously you want a provision to let a judge that 

decides to retire or step down from the bench continue being the 

judge in that particular case for up to six months. What exactly, 

what kind of money are we saving here? And that’s the other 

important aspect. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think the question at the outset, six-month 

time frame, is it long enough? The second point is how did BC 

come up with the six months? Can you get corresponding 

information on that front? And what kind of costs are we 

saving? What kind of costs are we saving as a result of avoiding 

the rehearing? These are some of the things that we initially 

want to ask as a result of this bill, all the while, Mr. Speaker, all 

the while basing any kind of decision that we have when it 

comes to the issuance of justice on making sure justice is 

served, that there is fairness, that there’s thoroughness, and that 

justice is handed out accordingly, Mr. Speaker. It’s so very, 

very important that, as an opposition, that the government 

understand a lot of the bills that are being proposed, if it’s about 

efficiency, cost saving, and really dealing with the issues in a 

fair, fair but swift manner, I think the NDP opposition would 

like that offer, that premise. 

 

That being said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I underline the note fair. 

It’s got to be fair. And that’s the most important thing because 

you and I know there are many times where innocent people are 

accused of things, and then all of a sudden, if justice is too 

speedy, we forget that there is the fairness perspective. Then I 

think it’s important that we remind people that justice cannot be 

blind. It has to see all the facts. It has to weigh all the 

consequences, and it certainly has to be impartial. It’s got to be 

the underlining theme of innocent unless proven guilty. That I 

think is really important that we say that. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So on that front, Mr. Speaker, those are some of the initial 

questions I have. I think it’s important that we get that 

information as soon as possible. And other people with much 

more legal understanding will be offering their insight and their 

advice on this particular bill as the opposition goes through the 

process here. 

 

And again the standard offer to people out there maybe 

listening to this, we would offer the chance for you to share 

your information, your input, your advice. It’s really, really 

important for us. And that’s something that we of course offer 

to any bill that we speak about this afternoon. 

 

So on that front, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 

Bill 56. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 56. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

Bill No. 57 — The Condominium Property 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 

57, The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2012. While 

various areas of the Act are affected, these amendments focus 

on around four main areas. They include consumer protection, 

dispute resolution, condominium conversions, and insurance. 

The bill was prepared after extensive consultation with 

condominium owners, boards, developers, the Canadian 

Condominium Institute, lawyers, surveyors, insurers, property 

managers, municipalities, the Saskatchewan Assessment 

Management Agency, and government ministries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the consumer protection amendments add several 

new protections for purchasers of new condominium units 

converted from apartments. The Ministry of Justice heard from 

many sources that some purchasers of conversion units are 

experiencing large, unexpected levies to cover repairs or 

replacements of common property very shortly after purchasing 

their new home. This Act is being amended to require a 

declaration from the developer describing the improvements to 

the common property that are promised as part of the 

conversion. 

 

The completion of these improvements is secured by a bond or 

a letter of credit. In addition there is a new requirement for a 

reserve study before any conversion units are sold. These 

amendments will ensure that purchasers of conversion units 

know the state of the unit and the common property prior to 

purchasing the unit. They also provide security that can be 

assessed if the developer does not complete the promised 

improvements. These amendments are supported by 

stakeholders in the condominium sector including developers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second area that I will highlight is the 

improvements to the dispute resolution mechanisms in the Act. 

A consistent theme throughout the consultation sessions was 

that there are often disputes between owners and their 

condominium corporation or board. The ministry receives a 

number of inquiries every year from owners who believe they 

are being treated unfairly or that the corporation is acting in an 

oppressive manner. The government heard these concerns and 

included an amendment specifically aimed at addressing them. 

 

An owner will now be able to seek assistance from the court if 

the board, corporation, developer, or another owner is acting in 

an oppressive or unfair manner. This amendment puts 

Saskatchewan condominium owners in the same place as 

owners in most other Canadian jurisdictions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another common dispute that arises between 

owners and their board relates to the performance of the duties 

of the corporation and the board as set out in the Act. This bill 

provides the new ability for an owner to seek the assistance of 

the court if the corporation is not fulfilling its duties under the 

Act such as failing to enforce its bylaws or failing to maintain 

the common property. If the court determines that the 



November 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1793 

condominium corporation has failed to fulfill its duties under 

the Act, the court may direct the corporation to fulfill its duties 

and to compensate the owner for any damage caused by the 

corporation’s failure to perform those duties. Condominium 

living requires shared decision making on matters of common 

interest which can lead to disputes. These amendments provide 

new avenues for resolving these disputes. 

 

The third area that I would like to highlight is the process for 

approving condominium conversions. Municipalities are 

responsible for approving condominium conversions within 

their municipalities. City officials expressed concern that the 

Act does not provide sufficient guidance on what factors should 

be considered by the local authority when reviewing 

applications to convert existing apartments into condominiums. 

Mr. Speaker, these concerns are addressed through the new 

regulation-making authority to prescribe a rental vacancy rate 

that must be achieved in order for a conversion to be approved. 

The aim here is to prevent condominium conversions from 

depleting rental accommodations in the province. It is expected 

that the prescribed rate will be linked to the results of the rental 

vacancy surveys conducted by Canada Mortgage and Housing 

Corporation on a quarterly basis for areas where this 

information is available. Additional criteria can also be added to 

the regulations. Consultations with the city managers indicate 

that they welcome the additional criteria that are being added to 

the Act and the flexibility that the new regulation-making 

authority will provide when concerns arise in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fourth area that I want to highlight is 

insurance. The bill contains a number of amendments to the 

insurance provisions as a result of the insurance consultation 

group that include owners, condominium corporations, insurers, 

property managers, lawyers, and the Canadian Condominium 

Institute. The work of this group resulted in a new requirement 

for the condominium corporations to carry insurance on any 

bare land units developed as townhouses, row houses, or 

apartment style units. This puts owners in these units in the 

same positions as owners of other types of residential units. 

 

Mr. Speaker, condominium corporations will also be required to 

carry directors’ and officers’ liability insurance. Currently 

owners are sometimes reluctant to allow their name to stand for 

election to the board because they are concerned that they are 

assuming liability for the decisions of the board. This 

amendment should alleviate these concerns and encourage 

owners to become board members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another insurance related amendment is to require 

developers to establish a standard unit description for each unit 

or type of unit shown in the new condominium plan. The 

standard unit description is used to determine the division of 

insurance liability for damage to units within the development. 

The condominium corporation’s insurance is responsible for 

damage to the items listed in the standard unit description. The 

owner’s insurance covers any damage to the improvements 

made to the unit beyond the standard unit description. Existing 

condominium corporations can amend their bylaws to establish 

standard unit descriptions for the units within their 

development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to the amendments focused on the four 

main areas of the Act that I’ve highlighted already, I will briefly 

describe some of the other amendments to the Act. The bill also 

contains amendments to require the same level of approval from 

the owners in a corporation before a service unit can be leased 

or sold as currently exists for the sale or lease of common 

property. Service units and common property are owned by the 

corporation for the benefit of all owners. They should not be 

sold or leased without the approval of the owners. 

 

During the consultation sessions, owners and condominium 

boards expressed concern about the ability of condominium 

corporations to enforce their bylaws. Both owners and renters 

of units within the corporation are required to comply with the 

bylaws. Mr. Speaker, this bill includes amendments that will 

assist condominium corporations to enforce their bylaws and to 

discourage owners and tenants from breaking those bylaws. In 

particular, condominium corporations now have the ability to 

seek compensation in small claims court for damage caused to 

common property, common facilities, and service units as a 

result of the breach of the bylaws. Currently the courts can only 

impose a fine of up to $500 for a breach of bylaws and does not 

have a specific authority to order an owner or a tenant who 

breached the bylaw to pay for the damage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the bill will clarify how tax assessment and 

enforcement proceedings apply to parking units. All 

condominium units used for residential purposes must have a 

designated parking space or parking unit unless exempted from 

this requirement by the municipality. The amendments aim to 

ensure that the parking requirements in the Act are complied 

with when a municipality takes tax enforcement proceedings 

against the owner of a condominium unit used for residential 

purposes. 

 

The bill will lengthen the amount of time allowed for the 

completion of a phase development, Mr. Speaker. Developers 

indicated that they had difficulty completing each phase within 

the current two-year time frame due to challenges seeking 

skilled tradespeople for their project. With this amendment, the 

maximum time frame for completing each phase is extended 

from three to four years. 

 

Other amendments expand condominium corporations’ boards’ 

bylaw-making authority to include establishing administrative 

and service fees for corporate services and fees for using the 

amenities in another sector. 

 

Bylaws have to be approved by a special resolution of the 

owners. This bill clarifies the definition of special resolution to 

clearly identify that the required approval of two-thirds of 

owners can be obtained by a combination of in-person and 

proxy voting at a meeting and signatures on the resolution for 

those owners who did not attend or did not vote at the meeting. 

 

The last amendment that I will note today, Mr. Speaker, is the 

new requirement for condominium corporations’ financial 

statements to be audited annually. The ministry will consult 

further on this issue in order to prepare regulations that will 

define under what circumstances a corporation may be exempt 

from this requirement. We will consider whether the graduated 

exemption system used in The Non-profit Corporations Act 

could be adopted for use in the condominium context. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Condominium Property Act, 1993 creates a 



1794 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2012 

careful balance between the rights and obligations of 

developers, unit owners, and condominium corporations. These 

amendments maintain this balance into the future while 

addressing many of the current concerns raised through the 

consultation process. 

 

I extend a thank you to all those, the participants in the 

consultation process for this bill. They contributed significantly 

by identifying the issues affecting the condominium community 

in Saskatchewan and proposing and refining the solutions found 

in this bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill 57, 

The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2012. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 

that Bill No. 57, The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 

2012 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 

I’m very, very pleased and honoured to be able to stand today 

and give the initial comments, initial few comments that the 

opposition may have on this particular bill, Bill 57. I think, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s really, really important that people ought to know 

the difference . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Leave to introduce guests, please. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s very kind of you and the House to let me introduce a few 

guests of some new staff to our caucus office. And as caucus 

Chair, it gives me great pleasure to introduce Lillian Drysdale 

and Katherine Norton, if they could give a wave up there. And 

they’re joined by Kyall Glennie, senior staff. 

 

These folks are our sessional staff that are helping us wade 

through the . . . [inaudible] . . . complexities of some of the stuff 

that the government’s presenting to us in terms of bills and that 

type of thing. And they’re interested in being here. They are 

interested in being here because they’re committed young 

people to seeing the best for this province, and I know 

Katherine and Lillian are excited and interested. I’m really 

actually quite amazed, you know, when people come and work 

in the legislature. It takes a certain type of folk, a certain type of 

person who sees or appreciates the kind of things that we do 

here. And they really seem to show that interest. And we are 

hoping they enjoy their time here and that they’ll be back. And 

so I ask all members of the House to welcome Katherine and 

Lillian to their legislature. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 57 — The Condominium Property 

Amendment Act, 2012 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

want to welcome our staff. And I’ll just spend very, very, a very 

long time talking about this condominium Act, Bill 57, that the 

minister has spoken about. And the reason why I want to speak 

at great length about the condos, Mr. Speaker, is that many 

people in Saskatchewan simply know that there’s a significant 

problem between condo development when they take older 

apartment buildings and convert them into condos, that the net 

effect is that there’s a lot of rental property for low-income 

people that are lost, that are gone. 

 

Now obviously the minister’s talking about condo development 

in general. That he has certainly spoken about some of the 

things that he wants to resolve in this particular bill, Bill 57, and 

at the same token, Mr. Speaker, I noticed there is really a 

conflicting statement there. When the minister talks about the 

fact that when they do convert buildings, older apartment 

buildings to condos, that it’s really the municipal government 

that has that right and they have the responsibility. 

 

But then on the flip side, through this particular bill, Bill 57, he 

gets really into it in terms of, well first of all, we want to make 

sure that they have parking space in these condo developments. 

We also want to make sure that the board of directors has a 

really . . . They have an upstanding list of board of directors. 

We want to make sure that happens as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And then he also wants to talk about looking at trying to put 

forward financial statements of these condo developments. No, 

we’re not going to make them do the financial statements of the 

condo developers, we’re going to consult with them on how we 

could do that, according to the minister’s presentation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So one of the things that people ought to know is that when the 

Sask Party talks about condo development, I think what’s really 

important is that they are spending more time micromanaging 

condo development in Saskatchewan, as evidenced here in Bill 

57, more time worrying about the rich condo developers that are 

coming to Saskatchewan to make a lot of money off the people 

of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And they’re doing very little 

work and putting very little resources, time, and effort into 

resolving some of the rental challenges that many people in 

Saskatchewan have. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly my point. 

 

When we talk about bills that are like Bill 57, obviously the 

minister opened up his statement by saying, municipalities have 

the right to determine condo development. But we, as a 

government, are going to micromanagement and micromanage 

and babysit condo development to make sure that if you do buy 

a condo, for all the rich people that can afford to buy a condo, 

we’ll make sure that you have parking spaces. Well, Mr. 



November 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1795 

Speaker, there’s a huge problem with homelessness right across 

the province and condominiums are not going to solve that 

particular problem because people that are homeless don’t have 

the resources to even pay rent. How could they buy condos, Mr. 

Speaker? And that’s exactly my point. 

 

So on one instance when they mention Bill 57, right off the top 

they say, don’t engage us with stopping condominiums from 

being developed. Don’t even suggest that Bill 57 is going to be 

talking about that because, as the minister, I’m saying at the 

outset we don’t have no authority on the condominium 

development process. It’s all the municipal government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I think it’s really important that as you look at this bill, as 

you look at this bill . . . I sit here and I say, okay, you’re going 

to make sure people have parking spots for the condo owners. 

I’m sure the condominium owners are pretty happy with that. 

You’re going to make sure they have a process to appeal an 

argument as identified in Bill 57. Oh, they’ve got a process for 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re going to make sure they have public accounting of their 

condo corporation. No, no, no, he didn’t say that. He said we’re 

going to undertake a consultation with them. So I can almost 

guarantee you, Mr. Speaker, that there will be no public 

disclosure of condominium developers’ financial statements. 

We won’t see any of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When the minister makes a reference to that in this bill, to 

consult with the condominium developers on how they can 

show their financial position to the rest of the public, like I 

don’t know what fairy tale that minister has read about. The 

condominium developers, they aren’t about to share their 

corporate information, their corporate income tax information, 

their personal financial disclosure. None of that stuff will 

happen, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely not. It’s absolutely silly. So 

when he makes reference of consulting with condo owners 

about putting out their financial statements on an annual basis, 

that is complete hogwash, Mr. Speaker. It ain’t going to happen, 

Mr. Speaker. It ain’t going to happen. 

 

So when we sit down and we start talking about what we need 

to do to strengthen the rental market program, Mr. Speaker, not 

a word. But now you’re seeing a whole pile of babysitting. 

You’re seeing a whole pile of politicking with the condo 

owners and the developers. And you begin to wonder why is 

this government ignoring those people that have a severe 

problem with finding places to rent, Mr. Speaker. And then, as 

some of these apartment buildings get converted to condos, the 

Sask Party say, oh it’s not our problem, and it’s not our fault. 

It’s not our fault. It’s the municipality that’s done that. It wasn’t 

us. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you can’t have it both ways. You can’t babysit 

the condo developers, Mr. Speaker, and forget about the people 

that have a tough time putting a roof over their head, finding a 

decent place for their children or their grandparents to live. 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is a great, great problem for the people 

of Saskatchewan. And when I see this bill, it doesn’t do nothing 

to address, to stop the onslaught of people losing their homes. 

When you see young families or you see older people that all of 

a sudden find their rents go from 600, $700 a month to over 

1,000, how can they survive, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And this minister and this government is so bound to worry 

about condo developers, Mr. Speaker, that they put a whole bill, 

they put a whole bill, Bill 57, to work with the condo 

developers to make sure that they’re welcome here. But we 

want to play a little bit of politics here. We want to make sure 

you have a parking spot for your nice new car. You know in the 

meantime, in the meantime there’s some people living in 

homeless shelters in our centres, in our cities, Mr. Speaker. And 

did they make a reference to any kind of money they’re going 

to commit to addressing the homelessness problem? Absolutely 

not, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They’re going to make sure that the condo developers . . . 

We’ve got to appear, is what the bill is saying, we have to 

appear to be tough with you condo developers because the 

people of Saskatchewan, you know, they want us to be tough 

with you guys. So we’ll put in little things like make sure you 

have a parking spot for your tenant. What else? What’s the 

other rule? They’ve got to be underground, heated parking 

stalls. You know, I bet you a lot of people in the province 

wouldn’t mind having heat at night, Mr. Speaker. And then they 

want to make sure, they want to make sure that you also have 

good boards in place, like the management of your particular 

condo area, that you want to make sure that you have a good, 

reputable board in place, as the minister alluded to. 

 

You want to make sure . . . Oh, we also have to kind of appear, 

is what the minister is saying to the condo developers, we have 

to make it appear that we’re making you be more accountable to 

the public because that’s what people want, the people of 

Saskatchewan. So what we’ll do is we’ll throw in a provision in 

there, and the provision will state, well we’ll consult with you 

guys on how we can make you more, much more transparent in 

the public. 

 

So there they are saying, we need to do this. We need to make 

sure you have parking spots for your tenants in condos. We 

need to make sure you’ve got good board members. We need to 

make sure you show your financial statement every year — 

which they’re not going to do. And that’s what I think is the net 

effect of this bill, Mr. Speaker. It is all about window dressing 

for their condo developers, Mr. Speaker, that are not just 

developing condos. We have nothing against that, Mr. Speaker. 

To be absolutely clear, they can build and build and build as far 

as we’re concerned, and we’ll support that continued building, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But when you convert older apartment buildings to condos, Mr. 

Speaker, with no regard for the people that are living in some of 

these apartment buildings for years, with no regard for the fact 

that they can’t afford to live there anymore, with the fact that 

none of them can ever afford a mortgage, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

where the NDP draw the line. And that’s where they say, shame 

on the Sask Party for babysitting through bills like this condo 

development at all cost. And the people that are living in some 

of these apartment buildings that are being converted have no 

rights, have no say. And they end up, Mr. Speaker, living on the 

street or living in some substandard basement suite or living 

with family, Mr. Speaker. There’s overcrowding and there’s 

lack of social housing, Mr. Speaker. That’s the crying shame in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 



1796 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2012 

It’s not babysitting condo developers, Mr. Speaker. We have to 

understand as condo developers, they’re welcome here. They 

can come build as much as they want. We want to see that 

build, that growth continue because they hire carpenters, 

electricians, plumbers. But you don’t have to throw people out 

on the street from some of these older apartment buildings so 

they can convert these apartment buildings into condos. 

 

You need to find some mechanism to respect the people that 

have lived in those apartment buildings for years, to respect the 

fact that they can’t afford to pay more, and to respect the fact 

that they don’t want to be pushed out and living on the street. 

But no provisions whatsoever in Bill 57 to talk about that. It’s 

all about babysitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then that’s what I find amazing at times. When we sit here 

and talk about, again I’ll go back to the earlier point when they 

talk about, well we don’t have the authority to tell the 

municipalities that they’re not allowed to convert apartment 

buildings into condos. But when they do convert those 

apartment buildings to condos, we’ve got all these rules now. 

Now we’re engaged. That’s the premise of this particular bill 

and that’s the premise of that particular message, Mr. Speaker, 

from the Saskatchewan Party government. 

 

Now what I think is really, really important that we should 

know, if they really cared, if they really cared about those 

people that are being evicted or people that are being forced out 

of their apartments that they’ve been living at for years and 

years and years, they would have got involved with the decision 

to not allow the municipalities to convert apartment buildings 

into condos, Mr. Speaker. They could have injected themselves 

to ensure that the homeless people that are now out there on the 

streets weren’t kicked out of these apartment buildings. 

 

And they didn’t do that, Mr. Speaker. Why? Because they 

weren’t committed to that process. And at the outset they say 

municipalities have the right. Mr. Speaker, that’s a senior 

government. They could have told the municipalities that as a 

result of the homelessness, as a result of the homelessness that’s 

occurring in Saskatchewan, the fact that we have so much going 

on in this province, we want to have a moratorium on 

converting apartment buildings into condos because, quite 

frankly, it’s really having a negative effect on the people that 

are living in these apartment buildings when all of a sudden 

they’re told, three months from now you’re out; you’re evicted. 

 

Why are they evicted? Not because they’re bad tenants. Why 

are they evicted? Not because they complain a lot, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re evicted because somebody bought that apartment 

building and they convert it to a condo. And then when that 

process was happening, when there’s all these conversions into 

condos, not a peep from the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker — not a 

peep from the Sask Party. They were very quiet. Then the 

moment that apartment building becomes a condo, all a sudden 

we get bills like this, Bill 57. Now they’re engaged, Mr. 

Speaker. Now they’re engaged. 

 

And what’s really worse, Mr. Speaker, what’s really bad, the 

reason they’re engaged is they don’t have a problem with 

homelessness. They don’t have a problem at all with 

homelessness because they don’t see it in their own lives, Mr. 

Speaker, but many people do. Many people in our cities in 

northern Saskatchewan do. 

 

And the other thing that really irks me about bills of this sort, 

Mr. Speaker, bills of this nature that really quite frankly pretend 

to address some of the condo issues, is they spend a lot of time 

and effort on creating bills of this sort to make sure that condo 

developers are taken care of. They take the time and the effort, 

but you look at some of the misery, the misery that is occurring 

when people get evicted from apartment buildings that have 

been converted to condos, Mr. Speaker. They stood idly by. 

And what did they say when the issue came up? Oh it’s not up 

to us; it’s up to the municipal government. I’ll tell you if the 

NDP were in power we’d say, we either build, we build social 

housing units to match the need, or we don’t allow apartment 

buildings to be converted to condos unless there’s a plan of 

action to address the needs of those people living in those 

apartments. 

 

Why didn’t they stand up for them, Mr. Speaker? They never 

stood up for them. They never stood up for them. They bring 

bills of this sort to the Assembly and that’s why we tell people, 

that’s why we tell people you’ve got to watch what these guys 

are doing. You’ve got to watch every word and every bill. 

That’s why we engage the public. What is the intent behind 

these bills? Their intent behind these bills is to babysit condo 

developers, Mr. Speaker, with no regard for people that are 

being booted out of their apartments because they can’t afford 

higher rents. They can’t afford higher rents, Mr. Speaker, and 

the Saskatchewan Party simply don’t care. We told them this 

time and time again. They simply don’t care. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the points that I want to also 

raise is as you travel north, northern Saskatchewan, and I was 

visiting a couple of communities this weekend. And there was 

not a bloody word in this government’s Throne Speech, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s been in this House for 

quite some time, and I would ask him to choose his words more 

carefully. I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

apologize for that word, but the emotions got to me, Mr. 

Speaker. I’ll tell you why. I’ll tell you why. Because I went to a 

small village in my constituency this past week, and I was 

visiting with one of the elders there. And guess what? She was 

not a condo owner, Mr. Speaker. She was not a condo owner. 

She was a homeowner under the Sask Housing, Mr. Speaker. So 

when I went to visit her, she showed me her washroom which 

had a toilet bowl that was barely hanging on because all the 

wood had rotted because of moisture problems. And then I 

asked this elderly lady, how do you heat your home? And she 

said, well I’ve got a wood stove. I said, well don’t you have a 

furnace in your house? She said, no, I don’t have a furnace. And 

I said, why not? Because the road to get to our community was 

too rough, and the oil companies don’t deliver here on a regular 

basis, so we put in a wood stove. We put in a wood stove, and 

that’s how we heat my home. And I said, but you have a 

basement, and you have an upstairs. How do you heat both 

floors with one stove? And she said, well I can’t because I don’t 

have a system to get heat down there, so as a result, the 

basement is getting a lot of moisture, and there’s some 

problems down there. Mould and moisture is a continual 



November 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1797 

problem in my basement. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Now imagine for a moment, Mr. Speaker, if somebody from the 

condo developers that had a condo and was told, you’ve got 

mould in your bathroom; you’ve got mould in one of your units, 

and the toilet bowl’s almost going through the floor here. Oh 

my goodness, then you’d see the Sask Party jump up into 

action. Then there’d be a major . . . There’d probably be an 

inquiry, Mr. Speaker. There’d be an inquiry. And that’s 

probably why the minister brought forward the inquiry 

amendments an hour ago, in case one of the condo developers 

had somebody fall through their floor. But it comes to a lot of 

people that see their apartment buildings being converted to 

condos and the Sask Party babysitting condo developers at the 

expense of people that are renting these buildings and these 

apartments for years . . . All of a sudden they’re very, very quiet 

on that side, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So all the attention afforded to condo developers in this 

particular bill, Bill 57, Bill 57, Mr. Speaker, it’s an absolute 

shame that they don’t show the same attention to the people that 

are being evicted from some apartment buildings that have been 

converted to condos. And they turn around and say, it’s the 

municipality’s choice, not ours. It would be sure nice if Bill 57 

made, that the title is appropriate — The Condominium 

Property Amendment Act. It’d be sure nice if in this bill, this 

thick bill that talks about, that talks about the rights of the 

condo developers, it would be sure nice if somewhere along the 

line, somewhere along these many pages, the government says, 

but we’ll not allow apartment buildings that have a number of 

families and seniors that have been living there for a number of 

years, we’ll not allow them to convert those apartment 

buildings into condos. Not a word in that regard in this 

particular bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I go back to my earlier point, my earlier point being that the 

people out there ought to know that it’s important for the 

opposition to look at these bills. It’s important for the public to 

understand who their target audience is, whose bread that 

they’re buttering, Mr. Speaker, if I can use that phrase, and 

what their objective is. Their objective is not to be concerned 

with those homeless people. That’s how they’re going to phrase 

that, Mr. Speaker, and our social housing unit . . . Actually, Mr. 

Speaker, I challenge the Premier who has just joined us here to 

make sure that for every condo developing . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member is an experienced member and 

knows that you cannot refer to the presence or absence of a 

member. I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

would point out that it’s important that people out there in 

Saskatchewanland know one thing, is that when you look, when 

you look at the quarters that the Sask Party really want to court, 

Mr. Speaker, it is not the people that live on fixed incomes. It’s 

not the people that have had their apartment building converted 

to condos and as a result they’re out on the street or they’re with 

family or they’re with friends, Mr. Speaker, because they can’t 

afford the increased rent. They are making the effort and the 

time to make sure they cross all the t’s and dot all the i’s under 

this condominium development Act, 2012 that’s being proposed 

and titled Bill 57. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a lot of problems in Saskatchewan and one 

of the biggest problems is the fact that the Sask Party is 

ignoring a lot of people that are being impacted by decisions 

that they make and bills of this nature that ignore the reality of 

many people that suffer from homelessness. And, Mr. Speaker, 

those numbers are many. They’re not a few. There are many, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I go back to my earlier comment about this elderly lady 

who said to me that she has so many problems in her home, and 

she heats her house with a wood stove upstairs and she can’t get 

the heat downstairs. And as a result of that, mould and mildew 

set in and then her home, the basement bedrooms are all full of 

black mould. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s no effort, there’s no effort to address 

those issues. And why doesn’t she have a furnace? Because 

they can’t get the fuel to that community because of poor roads. 

Now that is a crying shame in this province, Mr. Speaker, the 

province of Saskatchewan 2012, Mr. Speaker, when you have 

that kind of activity. And where is that lady’s rights? Where is 

that lady’s respect for the issues that she has to face and the trial 

and tribulations that she faced? Where is that corresponding Act 

that addresses that? Instead of worrying about condo 

developers, where is another Act that’s saying . . . Why don’t 

you just name that Act, we will address the homelessness 

problem and we will address all the houses that are in poor 

shape that are under the ownership of Sask Housing. None of 

that is on any bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s the important message that I have to those that are 

listening today, is that these bills that are being proposed, 

they’re friendly to certain people. They’re innocuous; nothing 

heavy-duty here, is what the ministers say. And the problem we 

have, the problem we have is that you have to ask the question 

is, what’s in there to begin with? What’s the intended target? 

And the most important thing is, what’s not in that bill? What’s 

not in that bill? 

 

Why don’t they have a seniors’ bill of rights like the lady up in 

that community I was talking about, where she has a bill of 

rights for her as a tenant of Sask Housing? Where’s her right to 

a safe washroom? Where’s her right to not live in a house that 

has black mould? Where’s her right to make sure that she has 

an opportunity to have doors that lock and windows that close? 

 

None of that is identified, Mr. Speaker, in any of the Acts of the 

Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, and that’s my point. When you look at 

these bills, Bill 57, there is so much they’re missing. There is so 

much that they are missing. They’re not making any effort on 

any of the fronts that I’ve identified. Instead the bill talks about 

making sure that condo owners have parking spots and if 

there’s no parking spots, then we will get a provincial inquiry 

going, Mr. Speaker. That’s the intent of this particular bill. 

 

And again I disagree with the minister when he says we will ask 

the condo owners to post their annual operating budget or their 

financial statement. Well good luck. That ain’t going to happen. 

If they’re a private sector person, they have no obligation 

whatsoever to listen to the rules of the provincial government to 

disclose to the public of Saskatchewan their private financial or 



1798 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2012 

corporate information. They have no right to ask for that, and 

the minister knows that very well. So this whole band-aid or the 

babysitting process that we’ll consult on how we can do that, 

well guess what? That ain’t on and it ain’t going to happen. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s really important is that this 

government has to assume responsibility not just to make sure 

the condo owners have a safe place to live and they have a place 

to park their car. Mr. Speaker, perhaps the government should 

start focusing on Bill 57 to make sure that people have a place 

to sleep that is warm, to make sure children don’t have to sleep 

in a mouldy bedroom, and to make that there’s some alternative 

heat in place for some of the elders in our northern community 

that simply heat their home with firewood, with wood stoves. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is happening in many northern 

communities and on many First Nations communities as well 

and in many inner-city communities as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are problems galore with homelessness. 

And this bill talks about the condo owners. It talks about their 

rights, their responsibilities, the need for parking their vehicles. 

And as far as the NDP is concerned, yes, park your vehicle in 

your assigned spot. And yes, you be part of the condo 

association. Great. And yes, if you have a beef with your condo 

developer then you have a membership, a board of directors that 

you can deal with. But I know every condo owner in the 

province of Saskatchewan, they’d be shocked to see what some 

of the other living conditions of other Saskatchewan people are. 

And they would be concerned. 

 

So yes, it’s important to take care of their needs but don’t forget 

that there are other needs out here. And as long as we have 

seniors living in squalid conditions like many of our northern 

seniors live in, Mr. Speaker, then some of these Acts really 

don’t impress the NDP. They don’t impress us at all because 

you’re missing the mark. Why are you coddling rich condo 

developers who can find the money to build condos? Build 

away. We don’t care. Build as many as you can. That creates 

jobs. That creates opportunity for many of our tradespeople. 

And we support that. 

 

But for crying out loud, at the very least if you are going to do 

some protection measures for the condo owners, then maybe 

you should flip the page and look at the homelessness that’s 

occurring in our cities. Look at the squalid conditions that many 

of our seniors live in in our northern communities. And 

shouldn’t somewhere along the line that you guys recognize 

that they have rights as well? A right to a safe home. A right to 

a heated home. A right to a functioning home. A right to a home 

that doesn’t have doors that don’t close and windows that have 

to be pried open. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, where in the world and when in the world is 

the Saskatchewan Party going to start thinking about human 

rights instead of corporate rights? There’s got to be a shift, Mr. 

Speaker. There’s got to be a shift. And that’s exactly my point, 

Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Sask Housing is sitting in her 

chair laughing about that. It’s not funny, the conditions that 

people are living under. It’s not funny at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The problem you have, the problem you have is many elders in 

northern Saskatchewan . . . I’m going to start taking pictures 

now, Mr. Speaker, and I want to bring them to the Assembly, 

and I want to show the minister herself how some of these 

people are living. I’m going to show them pictures of the 

washrooms, the doors, the windows, and the floors. And I’m 

going to show her the bedrooms where some of the children 

sleep. I’m going to take those pictures. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, and we hope, we hope at the end of the day, 

we hope that we have another bill, maybe Bill 58 or Bill 59 to 

complement what Bill 57 is saying, to say that yes, we 

recognize that the people who live in some of these units in 

northern Saskatchewan or in a city or First Nations 

communities, that they have rights too, that they have the same 

rights as the condo owners. That’s our point, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s our point today. 

 

And what’s really appalling, Mr. Speaker, is that this lady, she’s 

about 67, 68, and she told me, I actually got this letter today and 

I can’t read it very well because my English is not good. And 

what does it say? So I took the letter, and you know what the 

letter said, Mr. Speaker? The letter said, we are reviewing the 

amount of rent you pay and we are looking at some of these 

options why, and they had a list of questions. And they’re 

saying, this is the reason we’re doing this; this is the reason 

we’re doing that. And the poor lady didn’t know that they’re 

going to relook at her rent. And heaven forbid, Mr. Speaker, if 

she finds out later that not only does she not own the house 

which she thought she owned, Mr. Speaker, they’re now going 

to increase her rent. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, where is that lady’s rights, the same rights 

that is described at great length from the Sask Party for condo 

owners in this particular bill? They specify the condo owners’ 

rights, Mr. Speaker. They specify their rights in this bill, fairly 

comprehensive. Where are the people that rent from Sask 

Housing? Where are the people that rent from some of these 

other entities that offer social housing? Where is the book of 

their rights? Where are the rights of the people that got evicted 

from some of the apartment blocks that were converted to 

condos while the Sask Party sat idly by, Mr. Speaker? Where 

are those people’s rights? Why is it so important to spend all 

this time on condo owners’ rights and nothing on other people 

that have been evicted because they can’t afford rents, or other 

people that have houses that should not be lived in? There’s no 

mention of that from the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. And when 

the leadership opportunity came to stop the conversion of 

apartment buildings to condos, the Sask Party sat idly by and 

they said in their document in this bill, they said, they said, it is 

not our responsibility. The municipalities have that right to stop 

that if they want. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is Saskatchewan 2012. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they talk about $11 billion in their budget, talk about a 

booming economy. They talk about a growing population and, 

Mr. Speaker, in this day and age there’s a great many people 

being left behind. And I can tell you right now that the condo 

developers are not one of them being left behind. It’s the vast 

majority of people that have for years suffered and sacrificed 

and made Saskatchewan what it is today. They are now being 

forgotten — that’s the Aboriginal people; that’s the teachers, 

Mr. Speaker; that’s the chiropractors, Mr. Speaker. The amount 

of people that are getting angrier and angrier with this 

government because their lack of action on . . . [inaudible] . . . 

Despite having all that wealth, they have zero action on 



November 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1799 

addressing some of these issues. 

 

[16:15] 

 

And as long as we have, as long as we have elders living in 

poor homes and . . . As long as they have elders living in poor 

homes, as long as they have families living in overcrowded 

conditions, Mr. Speaker, as long as we have black mould 

bouncing around in all our northern communities and we hear 

that TB [tuberculosis] is making a comeback, as long as we 

have those problems, I can tell you that those problems from the 

NDP perspective are way up there — not condo developers’ 

rights, Mr. Speaker. Not even close. Not even close to condo 

developers’ rights. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party are concerned about those guys. We’re 

concerned about the folks that have homelessness, the people 

that have been kicked out of their apartment buildings, the 

people that have floors that are caving in and doors that won’t 

close, elders living in homes that have black mould, Mr. 

Speaker. And not a peep from the Sask Party government about 

what their rights are. 

 

So it’s fine you want to protect the rights of your friends by the 

. . . the condominium developers as your friends. You go ahead 

and do that. That’s your right. But our argument on this side, 

the social conscience of the NDP is telling you guys that you 

better start doing something similar to those people that have 

problems with homelessness, problems of being evicted, and 

people that live in homes that should not be lived in, Mr. 

Speaker. Where are their, where’s their bill of rights? Where’s 

their Act? Where is their Act? And not a peep from the minister 

or from the Government of Saskatchewan. Not a peep. You 

know why, Mr. Speaker? Because they simply don’t care. 

That’s the bottom line. They simply do not care, Mr. Speaker, 

and that’s the bottom line. 

 

Now had we had a similar bill in here that spoke about Sask 

Housing’s need to improve their accommodation, the need to 

build more social housing units, the need to make sure that the 

people in Saskatchewan, the people that rent off Sask Housing, 

or rent off the housing authorities in the North, have similar 

rights as defined under the condominium owners. If they had a 

similar Act and a similar bill then, Mr. Speaker, that’ll show a 

little bit of compassion. That would show a little bit of 

intelligence as well, but we see none of that here. 

 

So the whole point I’m trying to make today is that obviously 

you want to take care of your condo developers as your friends. 

We understand that. But don’t try and fool the people of 

Saskatchewan and especially don’t try and fool the NDP, 

because we know you’re not committed to the same 

constituency that we are when it comes to people that are being 

evicted from these units, people that are homeless, the elders, 

the many families that suffer through mould-infested houses. 

Mr. Speaker, we know those examples exist. We see it every 

day in our communities. And you want evidence? We can prove 

that evidence to you in a heartbeat, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So obviously I would even suggest today as a result of some of 

the bills that are being introduced here is, why don’t we do a 

public inquiry on the state of housing in northern 

Saskatchewan, in the inner cities, in First Nations communities? 

Why don’t we do an inquiry on the state of housing that the 

Sask Party, through Sask Housing, owns? Why don’t we do 

that, that we’ve talked about that today? And heck, we’ll even 

let a judge that maybe wants to retire stay on for an extra six 

months to finish his work. We don’t have a problem with that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think its really, really important that the 

people that have issues, the people that have housing issues, not 

just the condo owners, we know that they’re important. We 

need to respect them as well, but the people that have housing 

issues, their issues need the same attention and action and focus 

as the condo owners are getting under this bill. That is my 

point, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think it’s really important and there’s a lot more that I 

would like to say, a lot more that I want to say, and there’ll be a 

lot more that my colleagues will say because this issue is not 

going away, Mr. Speaker. This issue is not going away. 

 

And to add insult to injury, Mr. Speaker, this Act allows condo 

owners and their association to make sure they have a good 

board of directors. The Act also allows them to appeal some of 

the decisions of the condo developers, and they also have really 

rigid standards for any kind of organization within the condo 

unit itself. They have all that. It’s all identified there, Mr. 

Speaker. And I can almost guarantee you if the condo developer 

were to say to any of his tenants, guess what? I’m raising your 

rent from 800 to $2,000 per month. And the condo owner says, 

why? Well because you’re making more money. Well imagine 

the trouble that that would create, Mr. Speaker. Imagine the 

trouble that that would create. 

 

Well let me give you an example of what this bill does not do, 

Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t address that when it comes to Sask 

Housing, because this minister and this government are now 

telling the working people in northern Saskatchewan that if 

you’ve got a housing unit and you’re raising your family, 

you’re living on fixed income, then over the years you went to 

school, you showed initiative, then you started working at a 

low-level job, and then you started making more and more 

money. And all of a sudden, Mr. Speaker, you’re working at the 

mine where they make 80, 90,000 a year. 

 

And now the minister’s saying, oh you can’t stay here no more 

because you’re making too much money. Imagine if you tell 

that to a condo owner under this bill. You can’t stay here no 

more. You’re making too much money. You pay me 2,000 a 

month or you’re out. Well that’s exactly what this minister and 

the Sask Party’s doing to many working people in northern 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, exactly what they’re doing. 

 

And then the minister says, oh, there’s 13 people making over 

100,000 in these units so we’re going to kick out 800. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, you know, that’s actually splitting hairs here, and to 

use those 13 people as an example for what . . . I have always 

believed that they had no intent of addressing northern 

Saskatchewan housing issues or the rights of some of these 

tenants or finally telling some of these tenants. 

 

The same way that you stood idly by to allow apartment 

buildings to be converted to condos, why don’t you stand idly 

by and let these working families buy these houses off Sask 

Housing and get out of their faces, get out of their hair? Let the 



1800 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2012 

working men and women of northern Saskatchewan own these 

houses. The same way you give rights to the condo owners to 

buy up apartment buildings, why don’t you offer the same right, 

the same opportunity to the working men and women in 

northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Why won’t they do that? You know why, Mr. Speaker? 

Because they don’t care. They simply don’t care for those 

people, the working class in northern Saskatchewan. But if 

you’re a condo developer, guess what? We’ll get a whole brand 

new bill set up for you. If you’re a condo developer, we’ll make 

sure that you have a nice place; you can come and build your 

multi-million-dollar buildings. But guess what? We got to deal 

with the condo owners too, make sure they have parking spots. 

Can you do that? And we’ll insist publicly that you’ve got to 

produce your financial statements. We’ll negotiate that in 

public, but we know, we know you won’t do that. 

 

So the minister says, we’ll consult the condo owners on making 

their financial statements public each year. Well I’ve got a 

bridge for sale in P.A. [Prince Albert] for you. No, it can’t be in 

P.A. They didn’t get their bridge. I’ve got a bridge in Buffalo 

Narrows that I could sell that minister. Congratulations. There’s 

no way, Mr. Speaker, there’s no way that a condo developer’s 

going to share his financial information with the public of 

Saskatchewan because they built a condo project in downtown 

Saskatoon. No way. That ain’t on, Mr. Speaker. And for the 

minister to say, we’re going to consult with them — good luck 

on that one. I can almost guarantee you that ain’t going to 

happen. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s really important. There was a song 

in my heart for the effort they tried to undertake to support 

condo owners. I appreciate that, because a lot of my friends 

own condos, Mr. Speaker. And I appreciate what their point is, 

Mr. Speaker. But they ignored and they omitted and they 

simply don’t care about the other group of people that are 

homeless, Mr. Speaker, that live in squalid conditions. They 

simply don’t care. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s going to be a fight coming up in 

northern Saskatchewan over their program to end the cap on 

rent. There’s going to be a big fight coming, Mr. Speaker. 

There’s going to be a lot of problems occurring in northern 

Saskatchewan because of that minister’s decision to throw away 

the rental cap and then start attacking working men and women 

in northern Saskatchewan. These people are not through, Mr. 

Speaker. There’s going to be a lot of people coming out of the 

woodwork, and there’s going to be a fight on that front. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, why would you do that to one group of people 

and not do it for another, Mr. Speaker? Why are you choosing 

winners and losers in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? Why are you 

doing that? And, Mr. Speaker, you know, the amazing thing is 

the Minister of Finance is smiling at his chair here, laughing. At 

the very least, when he assumed that position in that chair, there 

was money in the bank, a booming economy, and the 

population was growing. The population was growing. And yes, 

we sit here and we all smile when they say, oh we done it. Look 

at us, what a wonderful job we’re doing. We sit here and we 

smile, Mr. Speaker, because the people of Saskatchewan, 

everybody knows it wasn’t them that created it, but they left 

them a lot of money — $2.3 billion in the bank. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the first two months, the first two months 

they say, oh we paid down the debt 40 per cent. So we turned 

around and we said, well that’s the money we left you. You 

know, that’s the money we left you. So the whole point is, 

you’re welcome, but please don’t mess it up. That was our only 

message, Mr. Speaker, don’t mess it up. And what did they do? 

They messed it up, Mr. Speaker. They went to war with labour. 

They threw out the environmental agenda. Their social 

conscience doesn’t exist. They’re going to sell the Crowns. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’re sitting here saying, my goodness. We 

asked them very kindly, despite all the work, all the work done 

by the people of Saskatchewan, and the tough sacrifices made 

by the NDP administration . . . And it took us 16 years to 

rebuild this economy, Mr. Speaker, 12 years of which was 

cleaning up the last Tory mess, Mr. Speaker. That’s where we 

spent a lot of time. And yet they still have the . . . We still left 

them all those assets. And we asked them for one thing. One 

little thing, don’t mess it up. That’s all we asked. 

 

And I’m going to be curious to see, I’m going to be curious to 

see our financial statement coming up in a couple of weeks, Mr. 

Speaker. Where exactly are we? You know, I need to find that 

out. And we’re going to pay close attention to that, Mr. 

Speaker, because the bottom line is, despite what the Sask Party 

inherited, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to the same old tricks. 

They’re forgetting about the people of Saskatchewan and the 

issues that matter, Mr. Speaker. They’re forgetting about the 

integrity of managing this economy and this province well, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re really not taking care of business that they 

should be and making sure that absolutely everybody should 

benefit from this booming economy, not just a select few or 

their friends, Mr. Speaker. It’s got to be everybody. 

 

So I’ll point out again on Bill 57, on Bill 57 that it’s not really 

what the bill is talking about today and talks about condo 

developer’s rights, Mr. Speaker. My point is, where are the 

rights of the other people that rent from Sask Housing? Where 

are the rights of the working men and women in the North that 

are being kicked out because they earn too much money? Mr. 

Speaker, where are the rights of those elders that have 

substandard housing? It’s not identified in this bill. It’s not 

identified in any way, shape, or form. So from my perspective, 

it’s not about the bill that we will study vigorously to see what 

they might be doing wrong. It’s about what the bill forgot about 

as well, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the message, Mr. Speaker. 

That is the message. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would also point out that the whole notion 

of going after working men and women, I have no idea, I have 

no idea why that’s effective nor is it common sense for the 

people of Saskatchewan. I can’t figure that out, Mr. Speaker. I 

can’t figure that out. 

 

And we hear a rant from the former minister of Justice, the guy 

that wants to add three more MLAs and stop people from 

voting. You know, that’s the point that I’ve raised, Mr. Speaker. 

Every right wing plan that comes forward from the Sask Party 

is come from that corner, Mr. Speaker. And we fully realize 

that. And the whole process . . . I’m going to go back to my 

earlier statement, my earlier story on Bill 57, Mr. Speaker, is 

when they’re rocking their grandkids and talking about what 

they’ve done in government, that grandchild will ask his 



November 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1801 

grandfather or grandmother, will ask grampa, well who done all 

this work? Was it a guy named Gerry Mander? . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . No, no, no. It’s not Gerry Mander . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Will the member please make comments 

related to the bill. He’s been wandering all over the place, and I 

ask him to come back to the bill. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the bill itself, the bill 

itself is omitting a lot of issues. It’s a lot of issues. And I want 

to hear, I want to hear the minister of housing get up and say, 

yes, this is a great bill, Mr. Speaker. I want to see how she votes 

on this bill, all the while knowing, all the while knowing the 

incredible, squalid conditions that many people are living in in 

some of Sask Housing units. The fact that she has kicked out 

working men and women out of these units that they’ve 

occupied for many years, refuses to sell them those units, Mr. 

Speaker, and refused to build new social units to address the 

growing demands in our community, Mr. Speaker, because the 

money’s not there. 

 

And the last time I checked in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, on 

the housing file, related to Bill 57, is that I think they fired half 

the Sask Housing workers in Prince Albert. I think that whole 

floor is gone, Mr. Speaker, the whole floor is gone. So we ask 

where is, where are all the employees that deliver programs, 

Mr. Speaker? They have been fired. They have been terminated, 

Mr. Speaker. And the minister ought to know that because it’s 

within her portfolio. 

 

[16:30] 

 

So I think one of the biggest things, Mr. Speaker, one of the 

biggest things is quite frankly, Bill 57 totally misses the mark. It 

totally misses the mark because all I see here is condo 

developers’ protection. Why didn’t they just simply call it the 

condominium developers’ protection Act? Why didn’t they 

name it that, Mr. Speaker? Because that’s all this bill does. It 

doesn’t address any other issue, Mr. Speaker, at all. So on that 

note, I’d like to move that we adjourn debate on Bill 57. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 57, The Condominium Property Amendment 

Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 58 — The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 

great pleasure to move second reading of Bill No. 58, The 

Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012. I heard the member 

opposite, the member from Athabasca’s comments and, Mr. 

Speaker, before I go into my remarks, it’s my intention to go 

through each and every comment that he made and review and 

analyze that. However if I was serious on that, Mr. Speaker, 

we’d be here until about 2 o’clock in the morning, so I will go 

ahead directly and comment on Bill No. 58, The Workers’ 

Compensation Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2010 the government appointed a six-member 

committee to review the workers’ compensation system. This 

committee of review held public consultations across the 

province in 2011 which allowed stakeholders to comment on 

their experiences with workers’ compensation. Feedback 

received from employers and employees was condensed into a 

series of recommended changes to workers’ compensation 

which the committee presented to the government on November 

7th, 2011. Those that require legislative amendments are 

included in The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012. In addition 

the Act has been modernized and restructured to improve 

readability and ease of use. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill represents a positive step forward for 

workers’ compensation in Saskatchewan. It increases benefit 

levels for injured workers. It introduces a system of indexation 

to ensure benefits are adjusted annually. It allows workers to 

chose between purchasing an annuity or receiving a lump-sum 

payment. It provides the Board with the ability to assess 

administrative penalties, and it increases the Board’s borrowing 

limit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some injured workers in the province have not had 

an increase to their workers’ compensation benefit levels since 

2005. This bill addresses this in a manner that is fair and 

fiscally responsible. The minimum wage rate will be increased 

from 55,000 to 59,000 for workers injured after this bill comes 

into force. The Workers’ Compensation Board will then 

increase the maximum wage range incrementally over the 

following four years until it reaches 165 per cent of the average 

weekly range. Additionally all current claimants in the province 

will receive an annual increase in benefits to ensure that they 

are consistent with inflation. 

 

The bill now contains a benefit formula that will ensure future 

changes to benefits will be done in a fair, transparent, and 

predictable manner. This bill moves from the current system of 

fines, payable upon summary conviction, to administrative 

penalties for contravening the Act. An administrative penalty of 

up to $10,000 can be applied in the event that an employer 

breaches their obligations under the Act, such as failing to 

notify the Board of an injury, collecting money from an 

employee for a medical expense, and refusing to let the Board 

inspect their records without a lawful excuse. The introduction 

of administrative penalties is intended to enhance the Workers’ 

Compensation Board’s ability to recover money owed to 

employees. 

 

This bill also, Mr. Speaker, increases the WCB’s [Workers’ 

Compensation Board] borrowing limit to $25 million. 

Saskatchewan currently has the second lowest borrowing limit 

of all workers’ compensation boards in Canada. When 

considered relative to the amount of premiums the WCB is 

responsible for and the value of benefits paid on a weekly basis, 

Saskatchewan has the lowest credit limit in all of Canada. The 

increase to $25 million provides the WCB with additional 

flexibility as it conducts its daily operations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill places an obligation on employers to 

assist with an employee’s Return to Work program. Return to 



1802 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2012 

Work programs assist in maintaining an employee’s connection 

with the workplace. They also increase the employee’s sense of 

self-worth during the recovery process. This change will pay 

dividends to the employee, the employer, and the workers’ 

compensation system. 

 

This bill provides clarity to a number of WCB’s internal 

processes. These include codifying the fair practice office 

within the legislation and clarifying the appeal process for 

claimants that disagree with the decision of the WCB regarding 

a claim for compensation. The fair practices office has been in 

place since 2003 when it was first established through WCB 

policy. The fair practice office will continue to operate as the 

internal ombudsman of the WCB. The appeal provision has 

been clarified in the Act for ease of use by stakeholders. The 

appeal process itself has not been changed. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, this bill also modernizes the previous 

legislation by removing gender-specific language, using 

consistent terms, and improving clarity and ease of use for 

stakeholders. By proposing these changes, we are ensuring that 

both employers and employees continue to benefit from a 

modern workers’ compensation system that addresses 

Saskatchewan’s growing economy. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it is 

my privilege to move second reading of this bill. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Bill No. 58, The Workers’ Compensation Act, 

2012 has been moved for second reading by the Minister of 

Advanced Education. I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

again pleased to be able to stand here today and offer my 

insights on this particular bill. I want to point out at the outset 

that there are many people out there that are impacted with 

workmen’s’ compensation. We’ve had cases come to our office. 

We’ve had people describe many times of the shortcomings of 

the process, and as a government, I think the people of 

Saskatchewan are genuinely concerned as to where this 

government is going to go when it comes to protecting workers’ 

rights. 

 

And certainly the copy of the bill, I think, is something that we 

need to share with people because, quite frankly, it’s something 

that people need to pay attention to. They need to pay close 

attention to Bill 58, primarily because if you look at what the 

original plan was when the NDP were in power, I can 

remember that some of the things we were talking about when 

we talked about workman’s compensation rights — and I need 

my colleague, the former minister of Labour here to correct me 

if I’m wrong — but at one time we had the plan to support and 

protect the workers, that we’d have enough cachet within the 

workman’s compensation Act, enough cash on hand to cover as 

many of the working people that may have got injured for a 

long, long time, Mr. Speaker. That was part of the management, 

financial management plan of the workman’s compensation 

board. And I’m not certain whether my colleague from 

Saskatoon Centre was one of the architects or was a minister at 

the time, but that was a vision that the NDP had. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s really, really important to note that clearly we 

knew protection of workers was paramount to the success of 

our economy, that we had to do that. 

 

And when the NDP talk about smart growth, Mr. Speaker, what 

we’re talking about when we talk about smart growth, Mr. 

Speaker, is balancing three or four principles. And the three 

most important principles, Mr. Speaker, is to allow investment 

into our province. Because we understand that, as we’ve seen 

under the leadership of Romanow first taking back our province 

from the depths of debt, Mr. Speaker, and then you transfer to 

Calvert who really built this economy, Mr. Speaker, by inviting 

companies, oil and gas companies to come here from Alberta. 

And in a heartbeat, Mr. Speaker, they came. They came to 

Saskatchewan, and one of the reasons why they came is because 

of Premier Calvert and the NDP administration at the time, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I do have the transcripts, and I’ll pull them out one of these 

days. When I attended a conference in Lloydminster, Mr. 

Speaker, when I was at that conference in Lloydminster, people 

were there from the oil and gas company, this CAPP [Canadian 

Association of Petroleum Producers] at the time. And they gave 

rave comments about how great Saskatchewan is and how 

visionary Calvert is, Mr. Speaker, and how great the royalty 

schemes are, Mr. Speaker. They had all that, Mr. Speaker, in a 

presentation. And I got that, Mr. Speaker, and I got that 

statement. And I want to share it with all the Sask Party 

colleagues pretty quick, Mr. Speaker. I want to show them what 

those oil and gas company people said. 

 

Now I noticed that member from Moose Jaw is giggling from 

his seat, Mr. Speaker, at that statement. Perhaps he should have 

been showing that much energy and enthusiasm in defending 

Valley View Centre instead of entering into debate on the 

economy of Saskatchewan. He should have shown a bit more 

enthusiasm on that front, Mr. Speaker. But like his colleague 

from Moose Jaw, pretty quiet over there, Mr. Speaker. You 

throw in the odd giggle and the odd statement and that’s the 

extent of their defending Moose Jaw’s interests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But that being said, that being said, when we had that 

presentation from CAPP and from some of these oil and gas 

leaders in . . . I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, they came to 

Saskatchewan in droves, and they really stimulated the 

provincial economy, and everything from the Bakken play, Mr. 

Speaker, to all the activity around Lloyd, Mr. Speaker — all 

that exciting things, all the exciting opportunity and times that 

Saskatchewan enjoyed, Mr. Speaker. It was absolutely 

phenomenal for us to see. And, Mr. Speaker, we continued 

building. 

 

Now the biggest thing I think is important is that when we look 

at that notion of inviting industry, attracting investment to 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s not going to take any 

advice; don’t take a back seat to the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 

Speaker. Because we make sure we do it in a fair, pragmatic 

fashion that’s good for not only the businesses that are joining 

us, but good for the long-term health of our province, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s really important. 

 

The second part of what I think is important as a cornerstone for 

our economy is to make sure that we take care of the 

environment and make sure we have clean air, fresh water, and 

we have lakes and rivers and streams and forest and farm land 

and wildlife to sustain human life. We think that’s really 

important, Mr. Speaker. But what I think is happening on the 

other side is they’re taking their lead from the former federal 



November 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1803 

connection that the member from Martensville may have had 

with Harper. And she is kind of dictating their environmental 

agenda, which is nothing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think one of the points is you look at an example of a 

species at risk where the federal government has basically 

washed their hands of that. Now the Saskatchewan Party is 

saying, you have the responsibility. Not a peep from them. 

What’s going to happen with that particular exercise? 

 

So my point being, Mr. Speaker, is that you have to have good 

investment. You’ve got to have protection of the environment, 

and you have to have protection of workers, Mr. Speaker. 

You’ve got to have protection of workers because that’s who 

drives the economy overall. You’ve got to give them fair 

salaries. You’ve got to give them good workplace safety. 

You’ve got to give them appreciation. You’ve got to give them 

a pension plan because they put a lot of their own money at 

risk, Mr. Speaker. And you’ve got to make sure you give them 

the respect and admiration that they enjoy. These are the people 

that are working in our oil fields, Mr. Speaker. These are the 

machinists that are doing their trade in a number of different 

mines, Mr. Speaker. These are the electricians, the journeymen 

plumbers. These are the people that are really the oil of our 

economy. And what this government decides to do is go to war 

with them. 

 

So you’re throwing out the environment, you’re going to war 

with organized labour, and then all you’re doing is following 

the NDP lead on attracting investing. So what kind of 

government is this, Mr. Speaker? Is the government that’s 

sitting there ideologically driven to sell the Crowns, and it’s 

every man for himself? If you want to be government so bad, 

and the premise that’s used is getting rid of government, that’s 

one thing I can’t understand, Mr. Speaker. They’re talking 

about less government and getting rid of government, yet they 

want to be government. Because, Mr. Speaker, it is quite 

frankly, absolutely confusing. 

 

And the worst part of it, they’re adding more MLAs. So for a 

party that’s advocating less government, we’re going to add 

more MLAs. So the people are saying, well what’s up with 

that? 

 

But anyway, Mr. Speaker, going back to my bill, I think what’s 

important is that when you look at the organized labour file, 

why they’ve done that to begin with is I don’t quite understand, 

Mr. Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan don’t understand, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, and you talk about the lean program, the lean 

program where they’re going to cut — what? — 15, 20 per cent 

of the working staff in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And why 

didn’t they do the lean program with the MLAs? They should 

have got rid of three of them instead of adding three more. But 

what’s up with that, Mr. Speaker? You don’t do as we say . . . 

They don’t practise what they say. And they tell the organized 

men and women that you don’t follow our lead; you just do 

what you’re told. And we’re going to cut, cut, cut, cut. And 

we’re not going to take care of you when the chips are down. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, why didn’t they do, why didn’t they do a lean 

program on the backbench over there, Mr. Speaker? They 

should have done a lean program on the backbench because at 

the end of the day, when there’s great problems in P.A., you 

don’t hear no MLAs in P.A. talking. When there’s Valley View 

Centre problems from Moose Jaw, you don’t hear no Moose 

Jaw MLA speaking. So they should cut out that. They should 

cut out that area because really they’re not contributing 

anything to the debate. They’re not contributing anything to 

their community. And they’re simply singing from the song 

sheet handed from them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:45] 

 

My goodness, why don’t they stand up and get that second 

bridge for P.A.? My goodness, why don’t they stand up and 

fight for a good solution to the Valley View problem that they 

have in Moose Jaw? Instead all you hear, Mr. Speaker, is, we’re 

part of this government. We’re so excited to be part of it. We’re 

just going to keep quiet about it. 

 

And what really is amazing, Mr. Speaker, as a result of Bill 58 

is you’ll stand . . . We see those members stand up even though 

they know many of the people that work in Moose Jaw for the 

government will be hurt by this process. The people that work 

and contribute to Saskatchewan’s economy will be hurt by this 

process. But they’ll stand up and the first words out of their 

mouth, the first words out of their mouth . . . What’s that, their 

phrase? Their growth plan. You know, I noticed you don’t hear 

very much about the growth plan anymore, but you know why? 

Because their growth plan is dead, Mr. Speaker. The growth 

plan is just some figment of somebody’s imagination 

somewhere, Mr. Speaker. The bottom line is that they made the 

statement and they tell all their backbench, say this over and 

over again and pretty soon people will believe it. 

 

Well we in the opposition don’t buy that growth plan one bit, 

Mr. Speaker, because of bills like this, bills like this, Bill 58, 

Mr. Speaker. It goes to war with organized labour. It doesn’t 

protect workers through workmen’s compensation, Mr. 

Speaker, not a bit. There’s nothing in here that impresses the 

NDP whatsoever, Mr. Speaker, because quite frankly they 

forgot, they forgot two pillars — two pillars, Mr. Speaker, in 

their growth plan. Number one is you’ve got to make sure you 

look after the working men and women through Acts like this, 

which they’ve never done. They cut 15 per cent, 20 per cent of 

their workforce, Mr. Speaker. And second thing is, they threw 

out, they threw under the bus the environmental agenda. The 

environmental agenda, Mr. Speaker, that’s gone too. 

 

And about the only thing that they’ve done, Mr. Speaker, that 

was smart, was they followed the NDP’s investment strategy to 

attract corporations to Saskatchewan, namely oil and gas, Mr. 

Speaker. But the very least, at the very least they’ve done one 

of those things right, was to follow the NDP lead on how to 

develop an economy and attract investment. Mr. Speaker, that’s 

exactly what they’ve done. 

 

So on the flip side, on the flip side we said, look after your 

workers. Workmen’s compensation should be, the workmen’s 

compensation Act should be the centre of all the things we do 

as a government. We should make that paramount to any 

activity happening in our province, that worker’s rights and 

positioning men and women to get those jobs and be paid fairly, 

to have that protection. All those issues are so important, Mr. 



1804 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2012 

Speaker. I almost used a bad word there. But they’re so 

important to the provincial economy and I’m trying to explain 

to the Sask Party who simply is ignoring it right now, has their 

backs turned. 

 

But the fact of the matter is we won’t be silenced when it comes 

to workers’ rights, Mr. Speaker. We will not be silenced when 

we see the Sask Party go to war to organize labour and we will 

not be silenced when we have bills like Bill 58 coming up, that 

are watered down and confusing and from our perspective is, 

quite frankly, we simply don’t see no commitment for the 

workers or for the people of Saskatchewan coming from that 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s why on Bill 58 I’m going to make sure, I’m going to 

make sure that all my colleagues have their time to sing from 

the heart and fight from the mind on the points of protecting 

workers, and stop going to war with our working men and 

women and build up . . . [inaudible] . . . the workmen’s 

compensation Act, workers’ compensation Act, Mr. Speaker, 

and to make sure that this government doesn’t get away with 

anything. 

 

And I know our organized labour, the organized union people 

out there, they will not give up. They will not give up. They 

know that this government wants to get rid of them. They’re not 

going to sit idly by and let them do that. They’re going to fight 

back every inch of the way, Mr. Speaker, and the NDP’s going 

to be right alongside of them because it’s the right thing to do 

for our economy. It’s the only way you can build a long-lasting 

economy and it’s time the Sask Party got that message. 

 

So on that point, Mr. Speaker, I adjourn debate on Bill 58. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment on Bill 

No. 58, The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Deputy Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that the 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Government House Leader has 

moved that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:50.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1773 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1773 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1773 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1774 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1774 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1774 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1774 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1774 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1774 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1794 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1775 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1775 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatchewan Scholarship of Honour 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1775 

 Saskatoon Co-op in National Co-op Challenge 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1775 

 Better Together Food Drive 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1776 

 Parking Day 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1776 

 Weyburn and District United Way Communithon 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1776 

 Recognition for Métis and Old-Time Fiddle Player 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1776 

 Community-Based Organization Appreciation Day 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1777 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Relationship with United States 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1777 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1777 

 Pipeline Safety 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1778 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1779 

 Long-Term Care Facilities 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1780 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1780 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1780 

 Number of Women on Boards 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1780 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1781 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 61 — The Railway Amendment Act, 2012 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1781 

 Bill No. 63 — The Regional Parks Act, 2012 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1782 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 51 — The Public Inquiries Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 sur les enquêtes publiques 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1782 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1783 

 Bill No. 52 — The Public Inquiries Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1784 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1784 

 Bill No. 53 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1785 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1786 

 Bill No. 54 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2012 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1788 



 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1788 

 Bill No. 55 — The Consumer Protection and Business Practices Act 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1789 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1790 

 Bill No. 56 — The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1791 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1791 

 Bill No. 57 — The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2012 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1792 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1794 

 Bill No. 58 — The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1801 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1802 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


