




















































Hansard: March 15, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 16A  THURSDAY, MARCH 15, 2012, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 571 

 March 15, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

Clerk: — Members of the Assembly, I wish to inform you that 

Mr. Speaker will not be present to open today’s sitting. 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — I request leave for extended introduction. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has requested leave for 

an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to all the members of the Assembly, I 

would like to welcome to this Assembly a very distinguished 

individual who is helping to bring rural Saskatchewan to the 

international stage. 

 

Amber Fletcher, up in the west gallery, a constituent of Regina 

Douglas Park via Kelvington-Wadena, is a doctoral candidate at 

the University of Regina who has just returned to Saskatchewan 

this past weekend from the United Nations Commission on the 

Status of Women in New York. Ms. Fletcher attended the 

session as just one of four women from non-governmental 

organizations appointed to the Canadian delegation. This was a 

huge honour for Amber and also for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The theme of this year’s session was The Empowerment of 

Rural Women, an area of expertise for Amber who was 

recognized just this past October by the Governor General of 

Canada with the youth award for her commitment, advocacy, 

and passion for improving the daily lives of Canadian rural 

women. The title of her thesis, The View from Here: 

Agricultural Policy, Climate Change, and the Future of Farm 

Women in Saskatchewan, is particularly relevant. To date her 

research has taken her from the homesteads of farm women in 

rural Saskatchewan to international academic conferences on 

climate change and gender in Italy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to please join me in 

acknowledging the outstanding contributions that Ms. Fletcher 

is making to the lives of people in Saskatchewan, Canada, and 

worldwide and welcome her, accompanied by Husain 

Aboghodieh, government relations consultant with the 

University of Regina, to their Legislative Assembly. Thank 

you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members, I would like to introduce a group of 

individuals seated in your gallery in the front row. Seated there, 

Mr. Speaker, are a number of employees from the 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. 

 

I would like to thank these individuals for the important work 

they do for Saskatchewan people, families who are battling and 

fighting cancer. These individuals, some of them also belong to 

the bargaining committee for the employees at the Cancer 

Agency. So I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming them 

to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways 

and Infrastructure, the member from Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to you and through you to this Assembly, I 

would like to introduce, in the west gallery, a group of students 

from the Dinsmore School in my constituency. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, accompanying them are their teachers, Ashley Brown 

and Sue Lytle; and also chaperones Tammy Blackwell, Marnie 

Thorpe, Michelle Dawe, Wanda McPhail, Glen Menke, and 

Murray Dueck. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a special day for me. Because of the 

distance my constituency is from here, I don’t often get school 

groups here. And especially today, I also have a great-nephew, 

KeAndre Evans, in the group, and also my niece, Kailyn 

Jensen. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would also like to mention 

that when I had a chance to talk to the group earlier this 

morning, the member from Regina Dewdney came by and had a 

chat with the students as well. And, Mr. Speaker, because of his 

former profession, he was a much bigger hit than I was. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask everybody in the Assembly to 

please give the students a warm welcome. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena, the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you, I’d like to introduce two very important 

people who are guests in your gallery today. Joining with us 

from the FoxValley Counseling Services Inc. is the founder and 

executive director, Mark Fox, and chairperson, Keith Pratt. Can 

you give us a wave? 

 

FoxValley provides intensive after-hours, in-home supports to 

families in crisis. Later on this morning, I’m going to have the 

opportunity to take part in the grand opening of their new 

offices in downtown Regina, and I’m really looking forward to 

it. 

 

I also want to thank you, Mark and Keith, for your dedication in 

helping children and families in need. It’s the work that your 

organization does that makes a big difference in our province. 

So to everyone in, all my colleagues, please help me to 

welcome these gentlemen to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 



572 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2012 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I’d like to join with the minister in welcoming Mr. Mark Fox 

and Mr. Keith Pratt to their Legislative Assembly. I can’t help 

but wonder if Mr. Fox is also going to be giving some 

instruction on fastball in terms of the work they’ll be doing, but 

it’s good to see Keith and Mark here at their Legislative 

Assembly. And the official opposition looks forward to the 

announcement, the important announcement coming later 

today. 

 

But I’d like to introduce to the Legislative Assembly as well, 

three individuals seated on the floor of the Assembly. Those are 

three grandmothers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They are Sharon 

Lupanko — if you could give us a wave, Sharon; all right, there 

we go — Geraldine “Gerry” Henderson, and Margaret 

Samuelson. They’re three very fierce grandmothers that do a lot 

for their community and for their families, and it’s good to see 

them here today at their Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, bear with me. I have three different introductions 

today, and I don’t want to have to sit down between each one of 

them, so if you don’t mind I’ll just stand while I go through all 

three. First of all, seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, we have 

with us Andrea Stangeland who is in your gallery, if you’d just 

give a wave. Andrea’s daughter works for me — Kaitlyn — in 

the minister’s office and does an absolutely amazing job. Thank 

you for all the work, Kaitlyn. And I have to say after saying 

that, all the staff members in my office do an absolutely 

excellent job. 

 

Andrea is a Saskatchewan expat. She had spent 15 years in 

Swift Current before moving to Indiana with her and her 

husband as they moved their business there. She’s back visiting 

her daughter for the next couple of weeks. Mr. Speaker, this is 

the first time she has been in the House. So before I ask all 

members to welcome her, I also would say that she is soon to 

be a first-time grandmother as well, as Kaitlyn is expecting in 

the next month or two — I should know exactly, but . . . month 

or two. But I would like all members to welcome Andrea to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

Also while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to 

introduce, in your gallery, two members joining us today, Mr. 

Collin Schaan, the CEO [chief executive officer], and Mr. Mike 

Lawton, comptroller, from the Schaan Healthcare Products in 

Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this company was founded in 1980. The Schaan 

Healthcare Products has been serving Saskatchewan very well. 

It’s a leading distributor of medical supplies to health care 

facilities including hospitals, nursing homes, and personal care 

homes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this company obviously has been in the province 

for the last couple of decades doing great work supplying, as I 

said, products. Not only do they service the health care facilities 

very, very well, but they also are a company that gives back. 

It’s my understanding that this company donated about a 

quarter million dollars to the Children’s Hospital Foundation 

just recently, Mr. Speaker. You know, philanthropy is alive and 

well in this province, and this is just another great example of 

that. So thank you very much for the work that you do in the 

province, and I’d like all members to welcome them to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

And finally, as my colleague would say, I would also like to 

introduce or welcome, I should say — they’ve already been 

introduced — the members from the Cancer Agency, the 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. The agency does absolutely 

amazing work in this province and especially when you look 

over the last number of years when we’ve seen the reduction, 

significant reduction of some of the wait times that we’ve seen 

in the province that we inherited, quite frankly, and we’ve been 

able to reduce. So I want to thank all those at the Saskatchewan 

Cancer Agency for the great work that they do. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melfort. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly, I would like to 

introduce a delegation of Chinese nationals from the People’s 

Republic of China, seated in the Speaker’s gallery. The 

delegation is led by Madam Han of the Shanghai Aohon 

Industry Company Ltd., which is a leading company in China. 

 

I had the opportunity to first meet Madam Han as mayor of 

Melfort by hosting a luncheon last June. Madam Han made a 

return trip to the constituency last October and this is her third 

trip to our beautiful province. 

 

The delegation is researching an investment in the Melfort 

constituency and would like to become part of the new 

Saskatchewan. Hosting the delegation is Mr. Jeff Mahon of 

STR Trade and Investment, a former Melfortite. Please join me 

in welcoming Madam Han and her delegation to the 

Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

rise today to present a petition calling for greater protection for 

late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know 

that in the early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray 

Wiebe was shot twice and died from his injuries. He was 

working alone at a gas station in Yorkton and was unprotected 

from intruders. And we know similar incidents have happened 

with armed robberies such as the one that took place in Regina 

on January 23rd, 2012. And just this past Tuesday night in 

Saskatoon, on March 13th, a similar incident involving a 

shotgun shows that Jimmy’s law is needed to give workers 

added protection in the workplace. 

 

And we know provinces such as British Columbia have brought 

in several safety precautions through law, including a 

requirement that workers cannot be alone during late-night, 

early morning hours. And if they are required to work, there 

must be protective barriers such as locked doors and protective 

glass. I’d like to read the prayer: 



March 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 573 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people signing this petition are from 

Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 

to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from 

across Saskatchewan as it relates to education in our province. 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to make education a top priority by 

establishing a long-term vision and plan, with resources, 

that is responsive to the opportunities and challenges in 

providing the best quality education and that reflects 

Saskatchewan’s demographic and population changes, 

that is based on proven educational best practices, that is 

developed through consultation with the education sector, 

and that recognizes the importance of educational 

excellence to the social and economic well-being of our 

province and students for today and for our future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions today are signed by concerned residents of Regina 

and Moose Jaw. I so submit. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of my constituents who live in the 

neighbourhood of Dundonald and the neighbourhood of 

Hampton Village. And the petition is about the need for a new 

school in Hampton Village: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

children in Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend 

school in their own community instead of travelling to 

neighbouring communities to attend schools that are 

typically already reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

[10:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current 

regulations being enforced are creating challenges that are a 

concern to our traditional trappers. 

 

The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued; and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation and 

regulations with respect to trapping regulations and 

firearm use in consultation with the traditional resource 

users. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many good trappers and northern people of 

Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

CTV Saskatoon Citizens of the Year 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, early this year, CTV [Canadian 

Television Network Ltd.] announced that Saskatoon Nutana 

constituents Bill and Eleanor Edwards are the 2012 CTV 

Citizens of the Year. And that award is being given in 

Saskatoon tomorrow. 

 

While operating Saskatoon’s only locally owned full-service 

funeral home, the couple is also renowned for their 

philanthropy and generous service to their community. Bill and 

Eleanor believe in dedicating themselves to their family, their 

business and their community. In the words of CTV 

Saskatchewan’s vice-president and general manager Wade 

Moffatt, “Bill and Eleanor exemplify how a dedicated team 

effort can make a positive difference in the community and 

shape a better life for the city.” 

 

The Saskatoon Funeral Home began in 1910 under Bill’s 

grandfather, William, who followed in the trade of his own 

father, thus establishing a 130-year tradition through four 

generations of the Edwards family. Bill and Eleanor tend their 

funeral business with vision, developing and expanding 

bereavement support for their patrons through groups such as 

Children and Grief, Walk of Memories, and Motherless 

Daughters. Their empathy for others also inspired them to build 

the W.A. Edwards Centre as a place for resource-challenged 

community groups to gather. Bill and Eleanor also volunteer 

with such community organizations as Kinsmen Telemiracle, 

the Saskatchewan Abilities Council, and a number of Saskatoon 

hospital boards and foundations. 

 



574 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2012 

This nomination by fellow citizens for the CTV 2012 

Saskatoon Citizens of the Year Award highlights the good 

fortune felt by Saskatonians to have this outstanding couple in 

their midst. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Moose Jaw Warriors 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. How 

about those Moose Jaw Warriors? I am pleased today to speak 

to you about the Warriors, highlighting what may become their 

best season ever. With first place clinched in the east division, 

12 points ahead of the second place Regina Pats, the Warriors 

have two games left before heading into the first round of the 

WHL [Western Hockey League] playoffs. The team has 

clinched home ice advantage for at least the first two rounds of 

the playoff. If the Warriors win both games this weekend, they 

could set a franchise record for wins and points, surpassing the 

previous mark of 44 wins and 96 points set by the eastern 

conference championship team from 2005-2006. 

 

What makes the Warriors team so special this year is the total 

team-first attitude instilled by coach Mike Stothers, former 

assistant coach with the Atlanta Thrashers. This year’s edition 

of the Warriors is very well-rounded. Each member gives 100 

per cent every night. The team has only three players with 30 or 

more goals, meaning that each player is contributing to point 

production and the success of the team. Cam Braes, Kenton 

Miller, and Quinton Howden are the three players with 30 or 

more goals, and goaltender Luke Siemens is on fire with 

division-leading statistics. 

 

I would like to ask all members, even the ones from Regina, to 

join me in applauding the great efforts of this year’s first place 

Moose Jaw Warriors team. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Colorectal Cancer Awareness Month 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Throughout March, 

which is Colorectal Cancer Awareness Month, the Canadian 

Cancer Society is encouraging people 50 years of age and over 

to fight back against colorectal cancer by getting checked 

before symptoms appear. Colorectal cancer is the second 

leading cause of cancer deaths in Canada, but is also highly 

treatable if detected early through screening. Getting regular 

checkups can help detect cancer early. Some screening tests 

even help prevent cancer by finding changes in your body that 

would become cancerous if they’re left untreated. Mr. Speaker, 

it is important for people to take the time this month to find out 

how they can reduce your risk of colorectal cancer and live a 

healthier lifestyle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we must learn about the relationship between diet 

and colorectal cancer. March is also Nutrition Month, and the 

Canadian Cancer Society is encouraging you all to fight back 

against cancer by making healthy food choices. The agency’s 

goal is to raise awareness of the relationship between diet and 

cancer and the benefits of eating well. Mr. Speaker, good 

nutrition is an important component of a healthy lifestyle which 

can help reduce your risk for cancer. I ask all members of the 

Assembly to join me in recognizing colorectal awareness month 

for the month of March 2012. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 

River Valley. 

 

Saw Mill Operation 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 

Carrot River saw mill formerly owned by Weyerhaeuser and 

purchased by Edgewood Forest Products is back in operation. 

This is good news for the residents of Carrot River Valley. 

 

This plant was closed back when the NDP [New Democratic 

Party] were administrating this province, but now many 

companies such as Edgewood Forest Products see a new 

Saskatchewan — a Saskatchewan that embraces economic 

growth; a Saskatchewan that wants to export products, not 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the forest industry has always been a vibrant part 

of northern Saskatchewan and a major player in the history of 

Carrot River Valley. It is absolutely great news that companies 

such as Weyerhaeuser in Hudson Bay and now Edgewood 

Forest Products in Carrot River are ongoing enterprises. Mr. 

Speaker, the employee base for the mill takes in the entire 

northeast area of the province and includes not just the workers 

in the plant but also contractors, truckers, and of course the 

many spinoffs that come with industry right down to the 

grocery store. This provides a huge boost to the local economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate Edgewood Forest Products, 

thank them for choosing Saskatchewan as the place to be, and 

wish them the best of luck in their endeavours. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Canora-Pelly and the Minister of Finance. 

 

National Recognition for Agri-Retail Accomplishment 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it is with pride that I rise in this House to 

speak about a Saskatchewan business that is garnering 

nationwide recognition. 

 

At the annual convention of the Canadian Association of 

Agri-Retailers, Hudye Soil Services Inc. of Norquay, 

Saskatchewan was awarded the 2011 Retailer of the Year. This 

award is presented annually to a Canadian agri-retailer that 

demonstrates exceptional customer service and satisfaction, 

effective employee relations, business innovation, and 

environmental stewardship and community and industry 

leadership. What is impressive, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was that 

the board of directors was unanimous in selecting Hudye Soil 

Services Inc. for this year’s award. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

Canadian Association of Agri-Retailers represents the majority 

of farm inputs sold in Canada. Their retail members provide 

farmers with the products and services required for Canada’s 

agricultural production. 



March 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 575 

Established in 1983, Hudye Soil Services Inc. is headquartered 

in Norquay, Saskatchewan, and it is a full service farm supply 

retailer with satellite locations in Kamsack and Sturgis, 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like this Assembly 

to join me in recognizing Hudye Soil Services Inc. for their 

accomplishment in being named the Canadian Association of 

Agri-Retailers 2011 Retailer of the Year. Thank you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Youth Science Festival Month 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every year over 

500,000 young Canadians participate in project-based creativity 

and experimentation. During the month of March, Youth 

Science Festival Month is celebrated. Thousands of students 

will be showing their work and competing to earn a spot at the 

Canada-Wide Science Fair. This year the science fair will be 

held in Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island in May. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since 1962, Youth Science Canada has been 

instrumental in encouraging students to push their limits, 

developing scientific and technological knowledge and skills. 

Youth Science cultivates the essential skills needed to tackle 

mathematics, physics, chemistry, and biology. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, science asks students to learn to peer through the lens 

of a microscope and ask challenging questions that sometimes 

neither their parents nor teachers can answer easily. Scientific 

impulse is essential for the good of our future for the economic 

health of our country. 

 

Youth Science Festival Month is carried out due to the tireless 

efforts of volunteers nationwide. Scientists, educators, and 

parents encourage the scientific efforts of over half a million 

young Canadians. Mr. Speaker, foundations like Youth Science 

Canada inspire youth to explore the world of science, 

encourage them to build their professional careers, and make 

our world a better place. Mr. Speaker, I’d like all MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] to recognize them and 

thank them for their efforts. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

St. Patrick’s Day 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Saturday, 

March 17th is St. Patrick’s Day, the annual celebration of 

Ireland’s patron saint. St. Patrick was a Christian missionary in 

the fifth century who worked hard bringing Christianity to 

Ireland. He was beaten by thugs, harassed by the Irish royalty, 

and reprimanded by his British supporters. 

 

After his death, poor St. Patrick was largely forgotten. But over 

his time, mythology grew. It is said he introduced the Irish to 

the concept of the Holy Trinity by using a three-leaf clover to 

represent the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. Another 

legend tells of how St. Patrick banished all snakes from the 

Emerald Isle. It is true that no snakes exist on the island today, 

but they never did. Driving the snakes from Ireland is thought 

to be symbolic of driving the old, evil, pagan ways out and 

ushering in a new age. 

 

When this great province was founded, one in ten of our 

residents were of Irish origin. They have been a crucial part of 

Saskatchewan history, and it is fitting to celebrate with them. 

 

In an interesting and far from sobering side note, Guinness 

consumption worldwide more than doubles to 13 million pints 

each St. Paddy’s Day. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m hoping that 

everyone will raise a glass of their favourite beverage at some 

point on Saturday and join in a toast to the patron St. Patrick. 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, unlike the Irish slogan of Tiocfaidh 

ár lá — our day will come — in Saskatchewan, our day has 

come. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Support for Caregivers 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the Minister of 

Social Services: can she please provide for us her definition of 

financial hardship? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the action that we provided 

on financial hardship is something that we’ve been discussing 

for a number of years. In fact, the members opposite had a . . . 

We knew that they didn’t understand the definition of financial 

hardship for years when they didn’t do anything with seniors 

that didn’t have their income looked at for 16 years, when we 

know that the number of children that were at food banks were 

increasing under their care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have to do with financial hardship is 

making sure that we can support families with housing and put 

more money in their pockets. That’s why we have done things 

like taking people off the tax roll. That’s why we know we’ve 

got a family of four in this province right now who’s going to 

pay over $10,000 less in income tax in the next four years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the definition isn’t something that’s easily 

defined, but the outcomes of it are something that we’re looking 

at. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — I think, Mr. Speaker, that answer is going to 

ring hollow with the grandmothers who are here in the 

Legislative Chamber here today. 

 

The federal government has changed the way it pays out 

children’s special allowances. They now pay the Minister of 

Social Services instead of individuals caring for extended 

family members. The minister sent out a letter in December 

about this issue to all caregivers, the Premier, and all MLAs. 

She stated: “The Ministry of Social Services wants to ensure 

that families do not experience financial hardship as a result of 



576 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2012 

these changes.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that Gerry Henderson is raising her 

five-year-old grandson and has had to go to the food bank for 

the first time because of cuts to her funding. We know that 

Margaret Samuelson will be 74 years old in July and is raising 

her two great-nephews. She is applying for jobs because of cuts 

to her support. 

 

To the minister: would she agree that these families are 

experiencing financial hardship? And what is she going to do to 

live up to her commitment she made to those caregivers in that 

letter? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the issue that the member 

opposite is talking about is something that was brought to our 

attention as a result of changes to the federal government’s 

program last fall. And I was very concerned at that time, and 

we continue to press the federal government to see what they 

actually were defining in that legislation and the monies that 

were going to be changed. 

 

So we sent letters out to people that could be involved, warning 

them that this could be happening. And at the same time, Mr. 

Speaker, I wrote a letter to the federal minister. I’ve written a 

letter to the provincial ministers as well to make sure that we 

are speaking from the same voice. To date there hasn’t been 

one situation that can’t be managed with funding for special 

needs. And our ministry officials have met with 17 caregivers 

across the province who’ve identified concerns, and they are 

being addressed. And right now we’ve got about between 20 

and 25 other meetings scheduled with caregivers to make sure 

that if they have an issue, we can help address it. So I 

encourage the member opposite to bring her constituents over 

and we will talk. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, we understand that money is 

being shuffled between the federal government and the 

provincial government. We know that very well. But the bottom 

line is the minister assured families that they would not 

experience financial hardship as a result. Mr. Speaker, Gerry 

Henderson has an income of $20,485 and now is getting $189 a 

month less than before. Margaret Samuelson is getting $220 a 

month less than before. 

 

The minister and other government MLAs, as the minister has 

said, has been made aware of this problem by many of our 

offices, but the response has been wanting. Geraldine and 

Margaret are representative of the many extended family 

members looking after their children, looking after children 

because they don’t want to see them in foster care. And like 

many others, they are suffering financial hardship because of 

these changes to the special allowances Act. What is the 

minister going to do for Gerry and Margaret and all the 

caregivers experiencing the same hardship? 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, when we sent the original 

letter out to give an update to the families and heads-up to the 

families to make sure that they were aware there were changes 

coming, we also advised them that they should be contacting 

our office and to bring forward their concerns. Mr. Speaker, we 

have met with 17 caregivers and we have another 20 to 25 that 

will be met with. We also know that the federal government is 

not aware specifically of what they have done with their 

changes, and that’s why I’ve written to the federal minister and 

I also contacted the minister from Saskatchewan, Mr. Ritz, and 

asked him to bring, through his office, the concerns forward. 

 

We’re not sure of all the implications, but we are sure that 

everyone in this province should have the benefits they had 

before. And I can tell this House that there are some families 

are seeing that they are going to be getting more money. Mr. 

Speaker, this issue is very important to us. When someone is 

looking after our children is the most important issue in 

government. And I assure you, I’ll be pleased to meet with 

these individuals. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Collective Bargaining at Cancer Agency 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday in question 

period, we discussed how the shortage of injectable drugs is 

causing uncertainty for cancer patients. There are other reasons, 

Mr. Speaker, why patients in Saskatchewan are concerned. 

Since December of 2009, Cancer Agency workers have been 

without a contract. That’s 27 months, Mr. Speaker, of patients 

having uncertainty and of employees having uncertainty, and 

the last thing that cancer patients deserve, Mr. Speaker. My 

question to the minister: does he view this extended length of 

time without a contract as a concern, and what is he doing to 

ensure that a settlement is reached in a timely manner? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as I said in the introductions, I want to acknowledge 

and recognize the great work that all of our health care 

professionals do day in and day out, 24-7, Mr. Speaker, 

including especially the members working through the 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency that supply great service to 

patients throughout our province in some very, very difficult 

situations. And I want to acknowledge that and thank them on 

behalf of government and the people of the province. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity over the 

last four and a half years to stand in this position and talk about 

negotiations — or not really talk about negotiations because 

negotiations are conducted through the Cancer Agency and 

their employee representative group, Mr. Speaker. That’s where 

negotiations take place, and I’ve stayed away from that, Mr. 

Speaker. We have settled with nearly 40,000 health care 

workers in this province through a collective bargaining 

process, Mr. Speaker, that served all, I think, quite well. We 

look forward to that process seeing a conclusion to this 



March 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 577 

contract, we would hope real soon. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After 27 months of 

negotiating, the two sides are not anywhere close to an 

agreement, Mr. Speaker, and this is causing uncertainty and 

having a negative effect on the morale of employees of the 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. 

 

These health care professionals are the people that care for our 

loved ones when our loved ones are battling cancer — people 

like nurses, pharmacists, radiation therapists, Mr. Speaker. 

These individuals do their job because they truly do care about 

patients, and I know the minister can appreciate that point. 

 

I’m told however, though, because of the uncertainty without 

having a contract for such an extended period of time, some 

employees have been forced to look for opportunities 

elsewhere. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that is a problem. Clearly 

we need the most qualified and the most experienced health 

care professionals working in the Saskatchewan Cancer 

Agency. 

 

My question to the minister: will he admit that the extended 

period of not having a contract is having a negative effect on 

the recruitment and retention efforts of the Saskatchewan 

Cancer Agency? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said 

earlier, we would love to see negotiations come to a conclusion 

between the representative group and the Saskatchewan Cancer 

Agency. But I will say to that member’s question as to the issue 

around recruitment, I would say that in the last six months to a 

year, it’s the first time that we’ve had a full complement of 

oncologists in this province, Mr. Speaker — something that 

was never accomplished under the former government, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve been working on it, and we have a full 

complement of oncologists. 

 

There has been a huge reduction in wait times at the Cancer 

Agency through the great work of the oncologists and all the 

others working at the Cancer Agency. Mr. Speaker, an average 

patient wait between appointments has improved by 92 per 

cent. Mr. Speaker, that’s in the last six months. Huge 

improvements, Mr. Speaker. More work to do, absolutely. 

There’s always more work to do and especially once a new 

contract hopefully is agreed on in the very near future. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, over the course of the 27 months 

with the absence of a contract, the employees have been quite 

reasonable in negotiating with SAHO [Saskatchewan 

Association of Health Organizations]. They actually, Mr. 

Speaker have gone so far to say that they’re willing to give up 

their right to strike. From a news release issued a month ago by 

the employees, here’s a direct quote. It says, “Because cancer 

agency workers don’t want to put patient care at risk, workers 

have offered not to strike now or in the future in exchange for 

binding arbitration.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, these individuals want a fair deal. My question to 

the minister: is he prepared to create stability for cancer patients 

in this province by allowing this contract to be settled through 

binding arbitration? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in my previous 

answer, this government, over the last four years, four and a 

half years, has come to an agreement with close to 40,000 

health care employees throughout the province through the 

collective bargaining process. That collective bargaining 

process has served not only employee, but the employer, I 

think, quite well. We would like that process to see this contract 

to fruition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I will say that in the last year, in the last budget year, Mr. 

Speaker, the budget for the Cancer Agency was $122 million. 

That’s $12.6 million more than the year before, or 11.5 per cent 

increase, Mr. Speaker, has gone to the Cancer Agency to 

provide programs such as the bone marrow transplant program, 

the colorectal screening program, operating costs, Mr. Speaker. 

This government has funded the Cancer Agency, Mr. Speaker, 

at record levels. 

 

More work to be done. You can see it by the full complement 

of oncologists, Mr. Speaker. You can see it by the reduction in 

wait times. We’re on the right track. We hope an agreement is 

reached real soon between the Cancer Agency and their 

employees to further serve the citizens of this province. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Cancer patients in the 

province deserve the very best treatment that our medical 

system can provide. Everyone in the province would agree to 

that. But it’s clear that the absence of a long-term and . . . It’s 

clear the absence of a new contract for the employees working 

at the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency is causing uncertainty for 

the employees, it is hurting recruitment and retention, Mr. 

Speaker, and it is having a negative effect potentially on patient 

care. My question . . . Well it’s clear the employees don’t want 

to be involved, I think, in a public tug-of-war for the hearts and 

minds of Saskatchewan patients. What they do want, Mr. 

Speaker, is a positive solution. What they do want is a fair deal. 

There is a solution to the impasse between SAHO and the 

employees, Mr. Speaker, and that is binding arbitration. 

 

My question to the minister: will he demonstrate that he’s 

serious about patient care, serious about ensuring the very best 

possible cancer care here in the province, and will he allow this 

contract to be settled through binding arbitration? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, similar to yesterday, 

he’s asked the same question two or three times. Mr. Speaker, 

I’ve answered that question. I’ve said that the collective 

bargaining process has worked very well for over, up to 40,000 



578 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2012 

people, Mr. Speaker, in this province. We’re going to continue 

to let that process work because it has worked very, very well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am quite proud of what this government has 

done in the last four and a half years. I can tell you, when I was 

on the opposition benches, Mr. Speaker, we saw at least a 

three-month wait between first referral from a GP [general 

practitioner] to an oncologist because we simply didn’t have the 

oncologists, Mr. Speaker, in this province. For the first time in 

many, many years, Mr. Speaker, probably out of the 16 years of 

opposition, when opposition was in power, we have the proper 

complement of oncologists. Wait times are less, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Yes, we want a contract to see this bargaining finished, Mr. 

Speaker. It has gone on probably far too long. I think we would 

all agree to that. But a collective bargaining process has to go 

through its steps, Mr. Speaker. I think we’re getting close to the 

end. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Funding for Education 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, after three long years, the 

Sask Party finally put together a funding formula for the school 

divisions of this province. Unfortunately just a few days before 

budget, the education sector as a whole is bracing for cuts. The 

ministry’s own documents forecast, based on the previous 

year’s funding level, that 12 school divisions will take a 

significant hit, many of them in the millions of dollars. For 

many others, it’s constraint. This, Mr. Speaker, is at a time 

where Saskatchewan communities are growing and significant 

opportunities and challenges exist in education. Can the 

Minister of Education tell this Assembly how this is in the best 

interest of Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, what has been evident 

over the last few years is that there has been a significant 

change from years of stagnant, if not declining, enrolments in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The province of Saskatchewan used to lose 3,500 students per 

year, year after year after year, Mr. Speaker. And there’s been a 

tremendous change here, Mr. Speaker. We not only see a 

levelling off, Mr. Speaker, but we are also seeing a growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was a recognition that the formula — the 

formula that was in place since the early 1970s — was not 

working. The boards of education in the province of 

Saskatchewan had indicated that the formula was no longer 

meeting its needs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have worked on that formula for the last three years. We 

wanted to implement it a year ago. That was not possible, Mr. 

Speaker. And we are now going to move forward with 

implementing a formula that, Mr. Speaker, everyone has 

worked on. The representatives from the boards of education 

and the trustees as well as the Teachers’ Federation have 

worked on this formula and, Mr. Speaker, we’ll see it in a short 

few days. 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Some of the lack of reflection of some 

of those demographic changes mentioned by the minister, that’s 

the very problem with the funding numbers that are coming out, 

and the funding formula. Based on ministry numbers, the 

Living Sky School Division in North Battleford would be cut 

by $6 million based off the previous year’s funding level. This 

is a school division with a young, growing population and in 

fact with a significant community schools movement and 

innovative programs and in fact, a First Nations and Métis 

population that exceeds 50 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A $6 

million cut to Living Sky’s funding would be drastic. Can the 

minister describe where she thinks this $6 million of cuts would 

come from? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 

raised some very good points about the diversity in school 

divisions. There are school divisions that have unique 

situations. They have unique problems, and the funding formula 

has to develop, has to be developed, with those things in mind. 

And that’s exactly what has been occurring over the last two 

and a half years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are moving forward with a formula that will better reflect 

the needs of school divisions. We are going to move forward 

with that. We are going to be able to say that, you know, Mr. 

Speaker, as we’ve developed this funding formula, and that 

we’ve taken over as a government ensuring the full funding of 

school boards. Under that previous system, Mr. Speaker, we 

used to have tax revolts. We used to have tax revolts where they 

knew that the status quo was simply unacceptable. And you 

know, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t do a thing about it. They didn’t 

do a thing about it. We’re going to move forward, Mr. Speaker. 

There are challenges in growth. Growth brings about unique 

challenges, Mr. Speaker, but we are excited about that growth, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has tied the 

hands of the school divisions. They entirely control the purse 

strings but it seems they’re deferring the tough decisions, the 

cuts, to be made at the school board level. They’re off-loading 

those difficult decisions. 

 

I mentioned Living Sky at $6 million, but there’s also cuts in 

many other school divisions: Prairie Spirit at almost 5 million; 

Prairie Valley, more that 9 million; Northern Lights in northern 

Saskatchewan, $1.7 million; Creighton School Division, more 

than 15 per cent. The list goes on, Mr. Speaker. Why is the 

minister making cuts to education at a time of prosperity in the 

province? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 



March 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 579 

it’s interesting to listen to the member opposite reveal numbers 

that are supposedly going to be in the budget. I can tell him that 

he’s a little bit out in his numbers, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

that member has no idea what’s going to be in the budget, and 

I’m not going to release anything today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can tell the member opposite that the school divisions that we 

are going to work with, that the Minister of Education is going 

to continue to work with, are excited about growth. Growth, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, we have moved forward on 38 capital projects in 

the last four years, Mr. Speaker — 38 capital projects. Mr. 

Speaker, that member and his seatmate have raised concerns 

about space and growth and, Mr. Speaker, they used to plan for 

decline. We’re planning for growth. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Water Supply 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, water is one of our most 

precious resources. Our government needs to manage it 

carefully just as it must manage other natural resources. 

Brazilian mining giant Vale is proposing to build a solution 

potash mine near Kronau. Vale needs 40 million litres of water 

per day. That’s 14 and a half trillion litres of water per year to 

create the solution needed to make the mine profitable. There’s 

no large water source near Kronau. 

 

According to Vale’s project proposal, SaskWater has agreed to 

build a 70-kilometre water pipeline from Kronau to Katepwa 

Lake in the Qu’Appelle Valley if the environmental assessment 

gives the green light. To the minister: has a contract for the 

pipeline between SaskWater and Vale been signed? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the short answer to that 

question is no, not at this time, it hasn’t been signed. There is 

some discussions going on between SaskWater, who would be 

hired to provide the water. But first what we need to do, Mr. 

Speaker, is to assess whether or not we actually have the 

capacity to be able to provide that amount of water, and that 

work is being done by the Watershed Authority at this time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we all know the importance of 

potash, both for our economy and for food production in the 

world. However, the pace of development should be based on 

due diligence, ensuring that the rush to develop does not 

negatively impact our precious water resources. Water experts 

are saying that the province needs to look at the cumulative 

impact of all the several mines planning to use the water from 

the Qu’Appelle River watershed. Once that determination is 

made, only then the question as to whether the Vale water draw 

is okay should be answered. 

 

Instead of putting the cart before the horse, will the minister 

first heed the expert advice and demand scientific evidence 

confirming how much water can we take out in total to supply 

all these mines, and then answer the Vale demand? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, certainly not just with this proposed mine 

development, Mr. Speaker, but with the significant number of 

mines that may be coming on stream into the future, the 

Watershed Authority and the Government of Saskatchewan is 

doing our due diligence when it comes to being able to provide 

answers of water stability for the province. That’s why, Mr. 

Speaker, we are engaged, through the Watershed Authority, 

through a multi-year water availability study to be able to 

determine whether we have enough water to supply not only the 

growing demands for industry, but also for the growing 

demands of municipalities. We have a growing province, Mr. 

Speaker. More people come to this province each and every 

year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are engaged, through the Watershed Authority, 

to determine what would need to take place as a short-term 

solution to provide enough water into the Qu’Appelle system to 

be able to draw that much water from Katepwa, Mr. Speaker. 

And that work is, as I said, is currently being done. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Several Treaty 4 First Nations have reserves 

that border the Qu’Appelle River where they are exercising 

their treaty rights. If the actions of the Crown create an adverse 

impact on those rights, there is a legal duty to consult with 

those First Nations. At least one of these nations have publicly 

stated that they have not been adequately consulted. 

 

It seems like the mine is already a foregone conclusion. Vale 

plans to be in production by 2015. To the minister: what has the 

government done to discharge their duty? And if nothing has 

been done, why not? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I think, just like on a 

number of areas, this opposition feels that they know when 

deals are going to be signed before anybody else, Mr. Speaker. 

In terms of Vale, they’re still in the pre-feasibility stage, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

On this case, Mr. Speaker, SaskWater will have to fulfill their 

obligations to publicly advertise in relation to the pipeline. 

Should we ever get to that point where a deal is signed between 

Vale and SaskWater, Mr. Speaker, Vale will then, and all the 

partners, will have an obligation under the duty to consult, Mr. 

Speaker. But it’s interesting that, you know, in one hand, some 

people think that this is going to take too much water out of 

Katepwa; on the other hand, some people think that’s it going 

to flood the area around Katepwa, Mr. Speaker. So we will 

work through this process and do our due diligence as we 

would with any proposal, Mr. Speaker. 



580 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2012 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Local citizens in the Katepwa Lake area are 

concerned about the effects that the withdrawal of trillions of 

litres of water would have annually, not just on their water 

supply but on the province’s lakes. They have many concerns, 

including possible reductions in property values, water quality 

issues, and the accumulative environmental impacts. 

 

They met with officials of the minister on February 11th, and 

gave the minister’s staff 40 questions about the development, to 

which they have not yet received all the answers. Further, at the 

SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] 

convention in February, the minister indicated that the water 

analysis was coming soon. To the minister: when are these 

answers forthcoming? How long do the concerned people of the 

Qu’Appelle Valley have to wait? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

at a minimum, the member would have to wait until at least 

budget day, Mr. Speaker, because if a proposal would go 

forward for the Watershed Authority to do the maintenance 

work that they would need to do to provide additional water, 

they would have to have the budget to do so, Mr. Speaker. So 

that’s one of the steps that has to take place just to ensure the 

Watershed Authority has the capacity to do it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there have been some concerns that have been 

brought forward from people that live in that area. We’re trying 

our best to answer those concerns, Mr. Speaker. The Watershed 

Authority is looking at what would need to take place in order 

to be able to provide, in dry years, additional water into the 

valley so as not to take away from the current existing users of 

that water and their ability to use that water, Mr. Speaker. And 

we’re working through that process. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 

Services. 

 

FoxValley Counseling Services Inc. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 

pleased to rise in the House today to talk about the grand 

opening of FoxValley services incorporated in downtown 

Regina. 

 

The Ministry of Social Services is partnering with FoxValley 

on an important initiative by providing over $439,000 in 

operational funding. I’m excited about the good work that’s 

going to be done out of these offices. And when I say out of 

these offices, that’s exactly what I mean. 

 

We know that family emergencies don’t always happen during 

traditional office hours. Crisis situations can arise at almost any 

time and it’s during those times that the families need the most 

help. These new headquarters will allow FoxValley to provide 

the assistance through intensive after-hours, in-the-home 

support. 

 

FoxValley workers will be able to meet with families where 

they are, right in their homes, with the ultimate goal of 

preventing children from coming into care of the ministry. 

Apprehending children is the ministry’s very last resort. If 

possible, we want children in the home with their parents, with 

their families, where they can attend school and continue to 

participate in the community. Our sincere hope is that this 

outcome can be achieved by the supervision and the support of 

the FoxValley workers. 

 

I’m also very proud of this announcement today because of its 

relationship to both the child welfare transformation strategy 

and the Saskatchewan child and youth agenda. The child 

welfare transformation strategy was developed as a response to 

the child welfare review panel and the 12 recommendations. 

The children and youth agenda is an innovative, 

cross-government approach to deal with the complex issues 

dealing with Saskatchewan’s children, youth, and family. 

 

Two of the main areas of focus for the child welfare 

transformation strategy include working differently with First 

Nations and Métis partners and prevention supports for 

families. The goals of the children and youth agenda are that 

children get a good start in life, youth are prepared for the 

future, families are strong, and communities are supportive. The 

prevention-focused nature of this partnership with FoxValley is 

proof that these changes are taking place. And thanks to 

FoxValley support services, more children will get a good start 

in life, more youth will be prepared for the future, more 

families will be strong, and another community will be 

supportive. 

 

In closing, I want to sincerely thank the staff and board of 

FoxValley Counseling Services for their hard work and their 

dedication. They really are making a difference in the lives of 

Saskatchewan’s children and families. Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I just want 

to commend FoxValley Counseling Services on being part of 

this initiative. I think it’s incredibly important to ensure that 

families have the services they need outside of the Monday to 

Friday workday, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The reality is, crises hit 

at all times of day and night, and ensuring that families have the 

supports that they need to get through those crises is very 

important. So I commend FoxValley Counseling and the folks 

there. And this is a good step on behalf of the government as 

well. 

 

I would like to add, though, it’s ironic. Today one of the 

minister’s comments was around ensuring that apprehending 

children is the minister’s last resort. And we heard today 

earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about grandparents or caregivers 

who have the care for grandchildren or nieces or nephews. The 

reality is, it’s very important to ensure . . . And we heard today 

that the Ministry of Social Services has been lacklustre in 

ensuring that these families have what they need. 

 

So I find it ironic on a day, today, that we’re talking about 



March 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 581 

ensuring that children stay out of care that we are also hearing 

that children who have stayed out of care because families have 

been willing to step up to the plate and take responsibility for 

those children, that those families are being financially 

penalized and not being supported in the way that they do need 

to be supported. So I’m glad to hear that the government has 

implemented this program and . . . to the good folks at 

FoxValley for the work that they will be doing. But the 

government certainly does need to do more in this regard. 

Thank you. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Constituency Boundary Changes 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s with a certain sense of bewilderment that I rise in this 

debate today in terms of the actions of this government as it 

relates to Bill 36, Mr. Speaker. And I just want to read the 

motion out for the clarity of this session, for the assembled, 

wherein it states: 

 

That this Assembly support the inclusion of all young 

people under the age of 18 in any consideration of 

constituency boundary changes and reject expanding the 

number of constituencies in the province by three. 

 

I guess the bewilderment comes from the fact that not too long 

ago in this province, Mr. Speaker, we had an election which, 

you know, we well know the results of that. We also know the 

premium that was placed on the planks in that platform by the 

members opposite and how important it was, what a sacred trust 

and a covenant with the people and all these kind of different 

things, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what they were bringing to the 

people’s attention for their consideration. And I guess if you’re 

going to have . . . you know, that’s fair enough, and that was 

interesting language that they’d used at that time. 

 

So again the Throne Speech touched in large part upon what 

had been included in the election platform, straight ahead 

enough. And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the surprise came when 

in December the Bill No. 36, the last Bill in the legislative 

agenda of the fall, came to this Assembly. It was quite 

interesting to see it come, Mr. Speaker, because of course the 

first thing that garnered a fair amount of attention was the fact 

that they were proposing three additional members of the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

[11:00] 

 

And of course the no-politicians plank in their platform was 

non-existent. It was made of thin air because they didn’t come 

to the people and say ready for growth means — guess what? 

— we need more politicians. They didn’t come and say that, 

Mr. Speaker. They didn’t come and say that in 2007. They 

didn’t come and say that in 2011. And so when it came 

forward, that was obviously the first mark of attention that . . . 

you know, three additional MLAs being proposed, isn’t that 

strange? 

 

I guess the other thing that was a bit of a slow burn on Bill No. 

36 was of course the change that was in it being proposed to the 

calculations or the way that population is calculated for the 

purposes of redistributing seats. And the kicker there, Mr. 

Speaker, of course was the fact that, as it currently exists under 

the constituency boundaries redistribution and as has been the 

case in this province since 1993 when The Constituency 

Boundaries Redistribution Act was passed . . . And I might add, 

Mr. Speaker, after discussion about constituency boundaries 

and electoral reform in the 1991 election, absent from the 2011 

situation, the change that is provided in Bill No. 36 around 

population excludes those under the age of 18 for the purposes 

of calculating boundaries. 

 

And as other colleagues on this side of the House have said, it 

rings, it rings ironic. It rings hollow. It rings hypocritical that 

for the many times that people rise on their feet in this 

Assembly and say welcome to school groups and welcome to 

your Legislative Assembly, that those very students have been 

incorporated into the counts since 1993 for the building of the 

very basic block of our electoral democracy in Saskatchewan, 

which are the constituencies. 

 

So at the very tail end of the legislative agenda, as it was 

introduced back in the fall — it wasn’t raised in the election; it 

wasn’t in their platform; it wasn’t anticipated in the earlier 

platforms, wasn’t raised in the Throne Speech — that that gets 

tacked into the mix at the very end of the agenda leaves us with 

a lot of questions on this side of the House. 

 

Now we know that other jurisdictions have different ways of 

doing this, but a strong majority of Canadian provincial 

jurisdictions use the total population when it comes to counting 

for constituency boundary construction. And the fact that the 

federal government right now uses total population for 

construction and all of the different questions that are going on 

about how democracy is practiced in the federal House of 

Commons, the fact that even in the federal government, they 

use total population for the purposes of building constituencies, 

that should give us pause for thought. So how is it that in the 

province of Saskatchewan we want to go back and not forward? 

 

It was interesting. They introduced the Premier and his 

comments yesterday in question period, talked about a measure 

from 1979. And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, because the ’71 

election when Allan Blakeney was elected premier of the 

province of course, electoral reform was an issue in that 

election as well. And the question at that time was on the 

variance in population between the individual constituencies. 

And you had a situation where Regina Centre, which is my 

home constituency and which was represented in that election 

by Allan Blakeney, had over 19,000 electors. And that was 

compared to under 5,000 electors in Regina South, the boutique 

riding that had been carved out in the backrooms of the 

Thatcher Liberal government to ensure that it was a safe Liberal 

seat in the face of the ’71 election. 

 

So one of the things that we had in the ’71 election was a 

discussion about an independent boundaries commission. And 

some of that discussion evolved, and they improved upon the 

situation where boundaries were no longer being drawn up 



582 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2012 

under the desk of Ross Thatcher or whoever the government of 

the day was, but it put power and authority in the hands of the 

citizens to draw up those boundaries. 

 

Things have changed around the question of electors and the 

number of constituencies, but there was a discussion that went 

on through the ’70s in terms of what is that adequate 

representation. How does it work in terms of ensuring that you 

balance off the tremendous geography? Well it’s interesting. I 

hear the Minister for the Environment, the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy, weighing in and of course, he was born 

in 1979 which was interesting. For all the railing they like to do 

against the NDP and history and this, that, and the other thing, 

that they had to reach so far back into history yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker, for their defence was mightily interesting. 

 

So I’m glad that they’ve suddenly got an interest in history, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. It’s good to see that they’re interested in 

what’s happened in this province because I’ll tell you what. The 

fact that they want to take a measure that takes us backwards is 

very interesting, take us backwards in time, backwards in 

history. It’s like these things don’t evolve. It’s like standards 

don’t ever get refined, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s very interesting 

that they want to go back to the ’70s. And I thought for all the 

guff we hear from that side about being forward-looking and 

forward, not back, you’d think that the ’70s wasn’t a place they 

didn’t want to get into the time machine and travel back to. 

 

But this is a measure that we have that does just that, Mr. 

Speaker. It takes us back through time when total population 

didn’t count. So for members on that side, especially younger 

members . . . They like to talk about the youthful nature of the 

Sask Party and this, that, and the other. The fact that they now 

want to discount young people in this province is cause for 

alarm. The fact that they want to implement a constituency 

boundary change that takes square aim at urban Saskatchewan 

and takes square aim at younger Saskatchewan is offensive, Mr. 

Speaker. The fact that they want to put Saskatchewan in a select 

group with a distinct minority of other provincial jurisdictions 

says a lot. The fact that the federal government sees fit to count 

total population says a lot as well. 

 

So what’s really afoot here, Mr. Speaker? We know that in the 

United States of America there’s a great amount of attention 

that gets paid to the questions of redistribution, and we know 

that that has been part of the history in the past of 

Saskatchewan as well. So why are they trying to sneak 

something like this in that they didn’t have the guts to come 

clean with for the people of Saskatchewan in the election? Why 

would they want to be doing that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Is it 

because they’re so scared and jealous of their political 

advantage that they can’t be straight with the people of 

Saskatchewan? I think that’s the case. 

 

I think there are members on the side of the House over there 

that don’t really understand what this was about. I think there’s 

an in-group over there that understood very clearly what this 

was about, and there is an outgroup that said, well, if the bosses 

in the caucus want this to go forward, that would be a good 

thing. 

 

But they’ve got to wake up to the fact that this takes square aim 

at urban Saskatchewan and undercutting the representation 

there. It takes square aim at young people in Saskatchewan. 

When they talk about growth, they should be counting those 

young people, counting on them now more than ever. But what 

they’re doing, Mr. Speaker, is discounting them. They’re 

counting them out. They’re saying you don’t matter. Sure, all 

the constituency offices should be providing service for the 

total population in these constituencies. But when it comes to 

the young people, in the very founding of the electoral . . . the 

basic building blocks of our electoral process in this province 

with constituencies, they’re looking to count them out. 

 

So how the heck does that work, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Why are 

they taking such square aim against young people in this 

province who — I might add as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 

are in very large part young First Nations people, young Métis 

people which, you know, you’d think they’d be interested in 

counting them in instead of counting them out. But they’re not, 

Mr. Speaker. They’re counting out young people, and it 

undercuts the electoral fairness that should exist in this province 

between regions and for people. 

 

And I guess with the First Nations and the Métis, the way that 

this legislation goes at them in a sort of a circumnavigated sort 

of way, the way it goes at them in a sneaky way, Mr. Speaker, it 

reminds us of what happened in the advance of the election 

with photo ID [identification] and the way that photo ID was 

played out and played out and played out to the point where 

attestations were going to be finally allowed for people in soup 

kitchens, people in long-term care homes, but people 

on-reserve, on First Nations, were counted out. And it took the 

acting electoral officer, the Acting Chief Electoral Officer to 

step in and put a stop to that attempt by that government to 

single out on-reserve First Nations in that way. 

 

And the fact that again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, attestations had 

worked in the federal election, that it was part of the federal 

election process, the fact that they tried to sneak it into the back 

door on the eve of the election goes to the kind of paranoia that 

I think exists on those benches, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the 

way that they’re so desperate to not just get power but to keep 

power and to do it in a way that counts people out, that do it in 

a way that sets up barriers for people that should be going to the 

ballot box, and instead this government tells them, no we don’t 

want you there. We don’t want you participating. They want to 

make it harder for them than it is in the federal jurisdiction. 

 

So we’d seen that movie in the federal situation, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and we’d seen what had happened there, and we saw 

that it was the Chief Electoral Officer that had to step in and put 

a stop to the efforts of that government. And we saw that that 

government had nothing to say about this measure in the 

election, but now we see it coming forward as part of what 

they’re doing. And again, Mr. Speaker, I think it speaks to a 

paranoia. I think it speaks to a bitterness on the side of members 

on those benches opposite when it comes to dealing with urban 

Saskatchewan and when it comes to dealing with young people 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

And why the heck would you approach people like that, Mr. 

Speaker? Why wouldn’t you want people to count? Well it’s 

because it’s about their attempt to sharpen their own electoral 

advantage as they see fit. And I’ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker, 

the more that people wake up to this, they’ll see them for what 



March 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 583 

they’re doing. And the more that people wake up to this, the 

kind of advantages that they campaigned on in the election and 

the way that they said, oh we’re just, you know, just humble 

folks and straight up and this, that, and the other. We’ll see how 

that lasts, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’ll see how it lasts when they 

take such a cavalier approach to the young people of this 

province. We’ll see how First Nations and Métis people react 

when they realize that. We’re a young population. Why don’t 

we count in the building of our constituencies? Why are we 

being counted out by this government? What is that about? 

 

People are going to wake up to that question, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and when they wake up to that, what is being 

attempted by this government, what is being snuck in by this 

government, they’re not going to think too highly of it. And the 

members opposite can talk about the mandate they got in the 

election, and that’s fine. That’s the rules of our democracy. But 

part of our democracy is also they should be straight with the 

people of Saskatchewan with what you’re going to do when 

you get the power. And this measure was glaringly absent, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

So it’s with a certain . . . I said bewilderment at the start, but I 

think it’s with a fair amount of . . . This makes me angry, Mr. 

Speaker, to see people playing games like this with our 

democracy. So I move that: 

 

This Assembly support the inclusion of all young people 

under the age of 18 in any consideration of constituency 

boundary changes and reject expanding the number of 

constituencies in the province by three. 

 

I so move, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre has moved that: 

 

This Assembly support the inclusion of all young people 

under the age of 18 in any consideration of constituency 

boundary changes and reject expanding the number of 

constituencies in the province by three. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The constituencies 

boundary amendment Act contains three major provisions 

which, in summary, will serve to increase the number of 

constituencies from 58 to 61 by adding three seats south of the 

dividing line. The Act will define total population under the Act 

to mean those individuals in the province over 18 years of age 

as determined in the last census rather than using the entire 

population of the province. 

 

The Act will direct that a commission that is already 

established, once this Act comes into force, shall proceed to 

report based on the new provisions and not on the provisions in 

force at the time the commission was established. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s population is now at an all-time 

high of 1,063,535 at last count. It has grown by 15,241 people 

in the last year alone, making Saskatchewan the second fastest 

growing province in Canada. The province’s population has 

now increased for 22 consecutive quarters, and in the past five 

years, Saskatchewan has grown by over 70,000 people. This is 

the fastest and most sustained period of population growth in 

many decades, in fact since the early days of the development 

of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Under the constituencies boundary Act of 1993, boundaries are 

drawn every 10 years. It is the view of this government that this 

boundaries process should reflect the over five per cent increase 

in population that has occurred since the boundaries were last 

drawn, and the increase in population that we feel will continue 

to occur until the next commission is struck based on the ’20-21 

census, Mr. Speaker. A move from 58 to 61 seats is also a five 

per cent increase in seats. 

 

Saskatchewan has a vibrant economy with a growing 

population. It’s important that the new voters in our province be 

recognized and that their votes be counted equally to any other 

voters and that they receive adequate representation in this 

Assembly by their MLA. These amendments will ensure that 

this is the case. 

 

Under an Act passed by the previous NDP government, Mr. 

Speaker, the constituencies boundary Act, 1993, boundaries are 

to be redrawn every ten years based on the decennial census. 

This requirement is not changed and nor are the criteria on 

which the constituencies are to be determined such as 

geographical conditions. The commission continues to be 

independent and continues to have the same mandate. It will 

simply be creating three more constituencies and basing the 

permissible variance between the constituencies on the number 

of people eligible to vote, rather than on the entire population in 

each constituency, which strikes normal people out there in the 

real world, Mr. Speaker, as a more sensible and fair way to do it 

than base the count on every person regardless of age. 

 

We are not interfering in the process in any way, Mr. Speaker. 

We are providing no direction in the Bill or the legislation itself 

as to where these three new seats may be situated. This will be 

for the independent Electoral Boundaries Commission to 

determine under its standing terms of reference in the Act. The 

provinces of Quebec, Prince Edward Island, Nova Scotia, the 

Yukon Territory, have counted electors rather than total 

population for many, many years, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 

will be the first province, however, to use the census rather than 

a voters list to determine who was of voting age in a particular 

constituency. 

 

The change from using total population of the province versus 

the total population based on the number of individuals who are 

18 years of age and over according to the recent census is based 

on this government’s conviction that constituencies should be 

based as closely as possible on the number of voters in a 

constituency rather than the overall number of people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is voters who elect their members of the 

Assembly. It is voters whose votes should be made as equal as 

possible and to the degree possible, and accordingly, it is voters 

who should be counted for this purpose. People understand that 

this exercise is all about eligible voters, Mr. Speaker, and that 

no one will be disenfranchised under this Act — quite the 



584 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2012 

contrary. The fundamental Canadian principle for elections, Mr. 

Speaker, is that each vote should have reasonably similar value 

between areas of jurisdiction, in this case, Mr. Speaker, the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

In the 1970s, Mr. Speaker, under the late Premier Allan 

Blakeney, some age . . . the same age criteria was used to 

realign seats in this province. I heard the member go back into 

the 1960s to criticize the government of Liberal Premier Ross 

Thatcher, but I didn’t hear him fess up to the fact that the Allan 

Blakeney government, the NDP Allan Blakeney government of 

the 1970s, used the same criteria that we are planning to use 

now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In Saskatchewan we have one of the lowest permitted variances 

of plus or minus five per cent between constituencies. British 

Columbia, Alberta, Quebec, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward 

Island, and the nation of Canada are at 25 per cent for some of 

their ridings. These changes will ensure that votes are of equal 

value in Saskatchewan rather than that constituencies are 

roughly the same size in terms of population. Using the census 

to determine who is 18 years of age enables the commission to 

use the best information available. 

 

The commission is struck every 10 years based on the most 

recent census, Mr. Speaker. This will use the most recent 

census to establish who is eligible voting age. Using the voters 

list is a much less accurate method in that an enumeration is not 

mandatory to start with like a census is, and further, that in 

future years at a time of commission, the provincial voters list 

may be out of date by as much as three years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has reduced spending on 

government communications by about $5 million a year 

compared to the last year of the previous NDP government, Mr. 

Speaker, and reduced spending on government travel by about 

$3.5 million a year from the last year of the previous NDP 

government. Insofar as we are saving millions in these areas 

alone, an additional $675,000 investment on improving and 

enhancing democracy in the province of Saskatchewan is more 

than appropriate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s examine for a moment the real motives of the 

NDP for opposing this Act, and particularly, particularly that 

member that brought this debate to the floor of the legislature, 

Mr. Speaker, that member for Regina Elphinstone, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Seats like Saskatoon Silver Springs, Saskatoon Southeast — I 

have those numbers in front of me — my constituency is very 

similar. Other large rural constituencies have voting, voter 

numbers similar to those seats, and Saskatoon Silver Springs 

weighs out at 16,180 voters. Saskatoon Southeast weighs in at 

16,343. My constituency is a little less, but not much. Let’s 

compare that to Regina Elphinstone, Mr. Speaker, at 6,313. 

Saskatoon Centre, Mr. Speaker, had only 7,409. Saskatoon 

Riversdale, Mr. Speaker, 8,388. Saskatoon Massey Place, 

eleven thousand five. Regina Rosemont, 9,713. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s clear. That member, that member from 

Elphinstone with a 60 per cent turnout, which would be high I 

suggest for Elphinstone, could win with 1,893 votes. Allow for 

a little vote splitting, Mr. Speaker, under 1,500 votes would be 

more than enough to get that member elected. I am on a 

first-name basis with more than 1,500 voters in the massive 

constituency of Thunder Creek, more than 200 kilometres 

end-to-end. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s no wonder they defend the old way, and it’s 

no wonder they’re trying to discredit this great legislation that 

we’re bringing forward to make the system more fair. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Today I’m 

very pleased as always to weigh into the 75-minute debate. And 

the motion before us is around Bill No. 36, which is before the 

Legislative Assembly for discussion right now. 

 

So what is this Bill about? It’s a Bill that’s been introduced by 

the government that will add three more politicians — this, as 

the government likes to say, at the time of austerity — as well 

as ensuring that close to half a million citizens will be left out 

of the equation used to calculate our new constituency 

boundaries, close to . . . constituents who will be left out of the 

count when it comes to determining constituency boundaries, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is an interesting proposal, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that didn’t get raised during the election. It’s a 

good question to ask: why wasn’t this on the radar? Why wasn’t 

this on the people of Saskatchewan’s radar? What were they 

afraid of, talking about this during the election, Mr. Speaker? 

 

These are pretty significant changes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

I think the first one that I’d like to focus on is the fact that this 

government wants to add three more politicians — three more 

politicians, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the things that we’ve heard from this Premier . . . We 

get incredibly mixed signals from this Premier. On one side, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we hear the Premier say we need three 

more MLAs to serve the public. But he’s publicly given the 

blessing to one of his new backbenchers to work part-time. That 

issue’s now resolved itself, but basically he was saying we need 

three more MLAs. We need three more MLAs. But in the 

meantime he’s saying, well you know what, one of my MLAs 

can work part-time and not serve his constituents in a full-time 

capacity. So again, this would be out of both sides of our 

Premier’s mouth, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So which is this? Which 

is this, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Is this a job that MLAs can do 

part-time? Or do we need more of us to do the work? I think 

we’re hearing mixed messages from this Premier. 

 

So another question is, what is this addition of three more 

MLAs going to cost the citizens of Saskatchewan? Well it’s 

going to cost close to $1 million, Mr. Speaker. Close to $1 

million, again, at a time when the Premier . . . That is close to 

$1 million every year, every year, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again 

this is at a time when the Premier has warned us of budget cuts 

and austerity measures. So I don’t think the average citizen 

would be really keen on spending another close to $1 million 

every year for three more politicians when we’re being told that 

there are budget cuts coming. 

 

At the same time, this government has been cutting the civil 

service. They’ve got their 16 per cent plan over four years. So I 



March 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 585 

would actually suggest that perhaps the Premier and his 

ministers think about applying their own lean processes that 

they’re so proud of to this notion of more MLAs, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So we cut the civil service, the people who are doing the 

non-partisan work of delivering the services, the non-partisan 

work of delivering the everyday services to citizens, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. This government is okay with cutting those 

individuals, but keen to ramp up the number of public servants 

— MLAs, politicians — engaged in the more partisan activity. 

So the Premier can’t have it both ways, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So 

is it about cuts? Or is it about increasing the budget for the 

people who are not necessarily required, especially when you 

look at the numbers comparatively to what other provinces have 

in terms of representation? 

 

I think one of the other things that I’ve heard — I believe it was 

the member for Kindersley talking about — he expressed the 

concern about large geographic rural constituencies. And 

obviously there are plusses and minuses to both being a rural 

MLA and being an urban MLA. There are challenges and there 

are really good opportunities on both sides of the equation. We 

have to work and figure out how to do our jobs well, whether 

we’re in rural Saskatchewan or urban Saskatchewan. 

 

And we have as MLAs, we have as MLAs sufficient resources 

to be able to serve our constituencies, I would argue, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. I would suggest that, perhaps, I think that 

there’s some really creative things we could do on some of 

those large, urban ridings. And we have those large ridings in 

the North, Mr. Deputy Speaker, two very large ridings in the 

North. But you have to, as an MLA, figure out how you serve 

your constituents. So part of it, one suggestion would be 

part-time office hours in different parts of the constituency. I 

know even in my constituency, which I can get across very 

quickly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I have to look at different 

ways of outreach and connecting with the citizens in my 

constituency. 

 

It’s not just about geographic space, but it’s about figuring out 

those ways to ensure that we are connecting with our 

constituents. One of the awesome things about living in 2012 is 

technology, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We now have telephone, 

Internet — thank you here in Saskatchewan to our Crown 

corporation, SaskTel — we have great means of being able to 

communicate at a distance with people not only in our own 

constituency but around the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I think that that’s the large . . . The large size of a riding I 

think can be dealt with. And there are members on this side of 

this House who are also dealing with large ridings. It’s about 

being creative but acknowledging that there are plusses and 

minuses, or positives and challenges, no matter where we serve 

constituents here. 

 

I think for me, the second part of Bill No. 36 is even more 

problematic. So the new members, I would actually argue that 

perhaps there’s a new member on the government side of the 

House — that would be mister gerrymander who is representing 

the subversion of democracy. That is exactly what we on the 

opposition believe are happening, and people in the public. And 

actually there’s a quote from, there’s a quote from The 

StarPhoenix who suggest that as well: there’s a whiff of 

gerrymandering going on here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And what this Bill is proposing is the change in the way we 

determine constituency boundaries. The Premier wants to move 

from counting the total population, like the census does, to 

basing boundaries on those who happen to be 18 or of voting 

age at a particular snapshot in time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Not at 

the time of the election, but a small snapshot of time. Again, no 

word about this in the election platform, so I don’t know why 

the Premier wouldn’t want to talk about that. Well I actually do. 

I think many, many people who are concerned about democracy 

and gerrymandering would have not been very happy with that. 

 

[11:30] 

 

I know in my own household, I have an almost 14-year-old 

daughter. Hennessey will be 14 at the end of this month. She’ll 

have spent the next two elections not being counted, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. She will be 18 at the time of the next election, 

but she will not have been considered in the drawing of the 

constituency boundaries. There are a number . . . All our young 

people will not be considered in the drawing of the constituency 

boundaries, so I don’t know why we wouldn’t want to count her 

and her contemporaries in voting in the next election. 

 

I think one of the other things, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . Well 

actually, you know what, I would like to quote the Premier. He 

had said here, “Elections are about people who are of the age of 

majority, 18 years and older, who can cast the vote, but the 

services, the representation of government is for all.” 

 

And actually the member from Thunder Creek said the very 

same thing. I’d like to draw the Premier’s mind and the member 

from Thunder Creek’s mind back to a time not really so long 

ago, to yesterday. March 14th was the 96th anniversary of the 

Royal Assent of the Bill of women’s right to vote on equal 

terms to men here in Saskatchewan. So less than a hundred 

years ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, women got the right to vote 

here in Saskatchewan . . . Or actually to be more clear, white 

women got the right to vote. First Nations people didn’t get the 

right to vote until 1960, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So the elections are about those who can’t cast the vote, if 

elections are about the people who . . . Sorry, pardon me, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. If elections are about those who can cast the 

vote, is the Premier suggesting and saying that elections 

weren’t about women until 1916 or not about First Nations 

people in 1960? So who were those elections about, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? So elections, in fact, are about all citizens. That is 

who elections are about, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There are 

newcomers here to Canada. Are elections not about them? 

 

So I would argue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I think the Premier 

is completely off base here. Elections are about citizens, not 

about voters. And who do we represent? We represent all 

people here in Saskatchewan, not just those who vote. But 

perhaps that’s a bit telling about what the government side of 

the House is about. Elections are just simply about voters 

apparently, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So elections, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, are about all of us. This is a dangerous precedent. 

We’re taking a step back here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We are 

taking a step back. 



586 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2012 

So with that, I’ve had an opportunity to say my piece here, and 

with that, I would like to support the motion. Thank you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Martensville. 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Considering I only 

have 10 minutes, I would like to take the opportunity to respond 

to all of the talking points from the other side, but there’s so 

many to respond to, I’m not quite sure where to start. So I’m 

going to begin by talking about the actual commission. And I’m 

quite disturbed actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that heckling 

from her chair, the new member for Saskatoon Nutana was 

accusing this commission, before it’s even begun, of 

gerrymandering the constituencies, the boundary changes that 

are coming to this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the past, people who appeared on or were 

members of this commission included people like Judge 

Malone, Judge Barclay, Justice Ellen Gunn. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it’s an outstanding group of individuals who take the 

time to participate in this commission. And it is independent. It 

is independent, set up by legislation. 

 

And I would also point out to the members opposite, who are 

apparently quite disturbed about having their words used 

against them, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of the Opposition 

and the opposition members have full input into who the 

members are on this commission. So if they have any concern 

about the goings on of this independent commission set up by 

legislation, that they have full input on who those people are. 

And we welcome their input, Mr. Speaker, because this 

province doesn’t belong to one party or the other. It belongs to 

the people of this province. The NDP do represent a certain 

constituency, and their voice is valid at those discussions about 

who is going to be part of this commission. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I said, the commission will be 

established. It’s nothing new. It’s the way it’s always been. 

Two members will be appointed following, as I said, 

consultation with the Leader of the Opposition. And it is 

mandated through legislation, the boundaries Act in 1993, that 

we have a change in boundaries based on the current census. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen in this census an unprecedented 

growth in our province. And I have to say, coming from my 

constituency, the brand new city of Martensville is the fastest 

growing community of its size . . . second fastest growing 

community of its size in all of Canada. It grew by 55 per cent 

since 2006. Warman has grown by 46 per cent since 2006. Mr. 

Speaker, the growth is unprecedented. I know that not all 

ridings are growing as fast as others, but when I look at mine, it 

really is unprecedented, the growth that we’ve been 

experiencing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been an MLA now for five years. And I 

have to say that when it comes to representation, for some 

reason the NDP think that because we are changing the 

boundaries to reflect voting age and over, that somehow 

children are completely disregarded, there’s entire groups of 

people that are completely disregarded. Mr. Speaker, nothing 

could be further from the truth. I think, quite honestly, it’s a bit 

of a ridiculous argument. 

 

I was voted in as an MLA in March of 2007. And when people 

phone my office, I don’t care who they are. I don’t care how old 

they are, how young they are. I don’t care if they voted for me, 

if they didn’t vote for me, if they didn’t vote at all. I have 

people who phone me up and say, by the way, I didn’t vote for 

you, but will you still help me? And of course I will; that’s my 

job. I’m an MLA for everybody in my constituency regardless 

of who voted for me, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also want to touch on the member for Elphinstone who was 

completely outraged, apparently, that we were using the NDP 

record from 1979 to show that this is — the approach of using 

voters — is nothing new. And then he went back to 1971 to 

somehow make his point. So we can’t go to ’79, but they can 

go back as far as Tommy Douglas. Apparently there’s a certain 

amount of time range in our province, but we’re not allowed to 

talk about it. I’m not sure why. But going back to 1979, Mr. 

Speaker . . . And the member from Elphinstone had pointed to 

1971 and said that electoral reform was an issue that year. The 

NDP’s answer to that in 1979 was to use a voters list to set the 

boundaries. And I think it is an absolute valid argument on our 

point, Mr. Speaker. That was their answer to electoral reform 

issues, was to use the voters list. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re not doing that. Those voters lists are 

outdated very quickly. They’re not necessarily accurate to begin 

with. We’re going to be using census data, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

which is incredibly accurate. So once again, Mr. Speaker, what 

was good enough for the NDP is not good enough on this side 

of the House, and I’m not sure why. But we’ve seen so many 

flip-flops, Mr. Speaker, from the NDP that I’m not surprised 

that the arguments that they present don’t always make a great 

deal of sense to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member for Saskatoon Centre had said earlier, 

when we had referenced the member for Athabasca’s comments 

on Bill 36, that we should take those in context. So I went back. 

I’ve read the speech from the member for Athabasca several 

times. And taking it completely in context, when it comes to 

our proposal — this motion is in part about the three additional 

MLAs, so I’d like to speak to that — the member from 

Athabasca said, and I quote: 

 

There is no question that as our population growth 

continues that the question has to be asked when we’re 

getting more seats. Because right now in the Assembly, 

we have a certain amount of seats, and as the minister 

alluded to, as the population grows, do we . . . need . . . 

more seats . . . more MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly]? And the obvious answer is yes, as the 

population grows. And you should have more MLAs as 

the population should reflect that in the number of seats 

that we have in the Assembly. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, their motion today says that we’re supposed to 

disregard the requests for three additional seats to reflect the 

increase in population in our province, yet the member for 

Athabasca was completely in support of this. Mr. Speaker, it 

wasn’t just once. As I said, I went through the speech several 

times. He went on to say, Mr. Speaker, and I quote, “So we on 

this side of the Assembly generally agree. If you have a 



March 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 587 

growing population, have more MLAs.” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s several other points in his speech 

where he says that the call for additional MLAs is completely 

valid, that he supports that position because of a growing 

population. Our population has grown by 5 per cent. The three 

additional seats that are being requested reflect that 5 per cent 

increase in population. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, again they can’t keep themselves on their 

own same page. The new member for Nutana in her speech on 

March 13th said, “It’s not really clear why the need is now” for 

this increase. Well the need according to the member for 

Athabasca is the increase in population. And she went on to 

say, “Certainly this province has had more MLAs in the past, 

and the government saw fit . . . [at that] time to reduce them.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, their reduction in MLAs, there was a 

massive decline in our population under the NDP. People were 

leaving this province in droves, so her argument actually 

supports us. If you have less population, fewer MLAs. That’s 

what happened under the NDP. Population left our province. 

Mr. Speaker, our population is growing. It will continue to 

grow, and I think the request for three additional MLAs is 

completely justified. 

 

But perhaps the member’s comments are based on the fact that 

. . . I don’t know that she’s quite — I know she’s new — but I 

don’t know that she’s quite aware of what her job is. She seems 

to think, Mr. Speaker, that our job is part-time. She said in her 

speech that we get Fridays off. I don’t know what she does on 

her weekends, Mr. Speaker, but I’m working. We have Fridays 

off from the legislature. I go home to my office. I meet with 

constituents. I have meetings on Saturdays. I have functions on 

Sundays in summer. I don’t have weekends free. I have 

parades. I have fairs I have to go to. And apparently the 

member for Nutana thinks that she gets Fridays off. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this is a complete disconnect with what 

happens in rural Saskatchewan. We don’t have just . . . Oh we 

have so many towns that we represent and so many functions 

that we have to go to. And, Mr. Speaker, her complete 

disconnect with rural Saskatchewan when she said people don’t 

want to meet with us in person . . . Well I can’t speak to her 

constituents, but I know that when I go home the one thing I 

hear is we don’t see you enough. You’re in Regina a lot. We 

don’t see you enough. We’d like to see you more. They never 

come up to me and say oh I wish we could email you more. I 

wish we could send you text messages more. I wish we could 

phone you more. No, they want to see us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when it comes to rural constituencies, that is difficult with 

the size that they are currently. And to expand those 

constituencies to be even larger is really going to limit the 

ability of rural MLAs to meet with their constituents because, 

unlike apparently the member from Nutana who works 

part-time, we want to meet our constituents when we’re home 

on the weekends, including Fridays. We work Fridays. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I just don’t think there’s a great understanding on 

the other side of the House about what happens in rural 

constituencies. 

 

I’m very fortunate. I have a densely populated constituency. It’s 

a rural constituency. It only takes me about half an hour to get 

from one end to the other. And I count myself incredibly 

fortunate, but that is not the same for all of our colleagues. So, 

Mr. Speaker, while the member for Nutana takes the weekend 

off — I wish her a happy Friday tomorrow — I will be in my 

office working. 

 

So I will not be supporting the motion put forward by the NDP. 

I think our population has determined that the need for MLAs 

has increased, and we look forward to the continued population 

growth in our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 

pleased to enter in on the debate that’s on the floor here today, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m disappointed that we’re having this 

discussion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because it’s a direct 

consequence of changes brought forward by this government 

that simply don’t make sense and aren’t in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

I know when we’re looking at . . . This is all in relation to this 

Bill 36 that’s been put forward that’s been widely criticized 

across the province and rightfully so, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

it has . . . You know sometimes when we look at a piece of 

legislation, we talk about that there’s intended consequences 

but that we need to watch out for the unintended consequences. 

What’s sad about this piece of legislation is it’s in fact the 

intended consequences that are the very problem with it, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And when we look at the changes that we see to the democratic 

process and desire to control that process in the best interests of 

that political party as opposed to serving the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people, it’s most disappointing to see that being 

a priority and focus of government. I know that the changes that 

have been put forward certainly are offside with the research 

that exists in this area, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Certainly it’s 

offside with the evidence that exists, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

certainly it’s offside with the public, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And it’s very much representative of misplaced priorities of this 

government. And it has Saskatchewan people both frustrated 

and angry when a government, as this government is, is in fact 

increasing the number of politicians at a significant expense to 

the Saskatchewan public — almost $1 million to increase the 

number of politicians — something that wasn’t promised in the 

last election, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but then is something . . . 

They’re moving forward at the same very time, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, if you can imagine, at the same very time as this 

government’s moving forward with cutting and reducing core 

programs and services in communities across Saskatchewan — 

reductions and cuts in the classroom, reductions and cuts in 

health services, reductions and cuts as it relates to retirement 

security. And yet this government forges ahead with pushing 

the expenditure to increase the number of MLAs. This is offside 

with the public, and it’s a case of misplaced priorities. And it 

serves one purpose: to advance the political agenda and fortune 

of this government and as a party as opposed to focusing on the 

best interests of Saskatchewan people. 

 



588 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2012 

[11:45] 

 

There’s significant consequences when we’re looking at the 

changes that are proposed and what we oppose here today. 

Certainly we oppose adding the new MLAs and the expense 

that comes with it, particularly at a time where we have a 

growing population in the province that requires programs and 

services. And instead of meeting the needs with programs and 

services to meet the needs of Saskatchewan people, this 

government’s moving forward with making cuts on that front 

and wants to create more MLAs and to then control that process 

. . . That somehow those MLAs and that electoral process will 

somehow serve this party’s best interests. And it’s shameful 

that we’re having this discussion here today, but I weigh into 

the discussion with great importance. 

 

I also am incredibly disappointed with the changes that 

eliminate the voice and the role of youth in the process, that 

discount youth in the electoral process, with removing 

individuals under the age of 18 from the constituency count. 

And it is a real disconnect from what we should be embracing 

in this province. What we should be doing is embracing this 

young population and young communities and making sure 

we’re setting out to address the needs of these young 

communities, these young families, by way of programs and 

services and solutions and making sure that their economic 

fortunes are improved as they move forward, that they’re a full 

part of our economy as we move forward. Instead we’re 

discounting that role. 

 

I have a quote here from the Premier, a very sad quote from the 

Premier of Saskatchewan. I quote, “Elections aren’t about 

everyone you represent. Elections are about people who can 

cast a ballot.” Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s entirely, 

entirely offside with the reality of what we should be doing. 

The Premier of Saskatchewan, I quote, “Elections aren’t about 

everyone you represent. Elections are about people who can 

cast a ballot.” Mr. Speaker, that’s wrong. 

 

What we need to do is embrace the voice, the needs of young 

families, of young constituencies . What we need to recognize 

is that this is occurring all across Saskatchewan, but in many 

ways this sets out to disenfranchise and disadvantage First 

Nations and Métis communities in a significant way as well, 

and young communities across this province. 

 

But if you look at the numbers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a 

burgeoning young First Nations-Métis population with 

significant needs and opportunities that we need to be 

identifying and speaking to by way of policy. And instead we 

see a government that’s more interested in marginalizing those 

voices, discounting them from the process, and what we need to 

understand is the ramifications this has for us as a province 

from an economic perspective, from a social perspective, but 

also from a perspective of how we need to be able to empower 

and improve the lives of individual youth across this province. 

 

So certainly we’re disappointed with the changes that are put 

forward. I know that there’s been wide critique in the public at 

large. Question here from political columnist in the 

Leader-Post, Murray Mandryk, “Do we really need three more 

MLAs?” is the title. And I know the closing line in this article, I 

quote, “You might want ask your nearest government MLA . . . 

if he or she’s not too busy.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that’s a good question for so many that are 

sitting over there right now, Mr. Speaker, and so many, Mr. 

Speaker, that I would suspect have a little bit of extra time to do 

a better job of serving their constituents and the province as a 

whole. 

 

Certainly there’s the articles in The StarPhoenix, an editorial 

that lays out that there’s a poor rationale for more seats, taking 

to task a government that’s pushing ahead this agenda. And I 

know I’d also like to quote Dr. Dennis Pilon, certainly a leading 

academic as it relates to political science in Canada, political 

studies, and from York University, and couple of comments 

that I’ll take from some of the information he’s provided. I 

quote, “While these people are not voters, they nonetheless 

draw on services of MPs or MLAs.” And I quote on further, 

“The Bill will advantage the Sask Party.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s disappointing that at a time in our province 

where we need to be addressing the needs of our growing 

population, where we need to be bringing forth solutions that 

are in our economic and social best interests as it relates to our 

demographics, that we have a government instead focused on 

making changes that only serve the best interests of that 

political party as opposed to Saskatchewan people. We stand 

opposed to these sorts of changes. 

 

When we look at where this government has meddled with the 

democratic process in the past, we can only look at examples 

where they interfered with the hiring of the independent Chief 

Electoral Officer of this province, Mr. Speaker. We can look at 

specific actions and provisions in legislation that was brought 

forward to suppress the involvement of young people and First 

Nations and Métis and seniors in this province from the 

democratic process from voting, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

that’s a shameful record, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as it relates to 

what a government should be doing. 

 

And then it gets to a whole other notion about simply being 

straight with Saskatchewan people. And this is a government 

that just came through an election. They earned a mandate. But 

this was not a single part of that platform and was a complete 

surprise to Saskatchewan people. So you know, we’ve got 

circumstances that are sad, where we hear voices across the 

province talking about gerrymandering and controlling the 

political process, about suppressing vote, about serving their 

best interests ahead of that of Saskatchewan people. That’s a 

shame, Mr. Speaker, and something that we oppose. 

 

We believe fundamentally that when we have students that 

come in to this Assembly from our constituencies and they sit 

in the galleries, and when we introduce them and say welcome 

to your Assembly, we mean it, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the 

Assembly. We stand to represent all citizens of this province. 

We will never discount the voice of young people in building a 

better future in this province. And we’ll never discount the 

importance of government serving the greater good of making 

sure that they’re representing those needs, putting forward 

policies that improve the economic and social fortunes of that 

next generation, and we’re incredibly disappointed to see the 

changes that are put forward here today. 

 



March 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 589 

You know, this government’s more focused on spending money 

to inflate their number of seats or to serve their interest. We 

believe we should be bringing resources to bear, to improve the 

lives for Saskatchewan people. It’s a line of distinction between 

that side of the Assembly and this side of the Assembly. 

 

Certainly as such, I’ll be supporting the motion put forward 

today by the member from Elphinstone who knows all too well 

the realities and the needs and pressures within his own 

constituency that need to be served, that are under-served by 

this government. And that’s where we will be bringing our 

attention, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s been my pleasure to weigh 

in, in debate here today. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a great 

pleasure that I am able to take part in this debate because I 

believe, among the many things that have been said, I think the 

NDP have to be called on their comments about what the 

Saskatchewan Party government, our Premier, and our 

commitment is to youth and young people in this province. And 

we really need to set the record straight about those comments 

were totally unfair and inaccurate. 

 

This government under our Premier, the member from Swift 

Current, our cabinet and our caucus . . . I think every decision 

our government has made since we became government in 2007 

is about children, is about families. We have certainly a 

different way of trying to improve their lives but every, every 

decision we make is about improving the lives of the 

constituents in Saskatchewan, the families and the children of 

Saskatchewan. Our approach to that is by growing the 

economy, by creating more jobs, by creating higher paying 

jobs. And guess what? What does that do for families? It 

improves their lives, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is something the 

NDP never, they never seem to figure it out. And after 16 years 

of government, they never did come to the conclusion that you 

have a growing economy, which would mean a growing 

population, higher income, more jobs . . . is good for families. 

Well this is what we have been doing, and we will continue to 

do in this province. 

 

And I want to point out some of the areas where specifically . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I am having some difficulty hearing 

the member. I’d ask the co-operation of all members so that the 

member can make his comments. I recognize the member from 

Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — [Inaudible] . . . that the members from the 

opposition don’t want to hear about the good record of the 

Saskatchewan Party and all the good things that we’ve done for 

the citizens and the families and the children of this province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I will point out a few of the wonderful things we’ve done 

for the families and children in this province since we formed 

government November 2007. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

increased the funding to the Child and Family Services by 124 

per cent — 124 per cent increase to Child and Family Services. 

After 16 years of NDP rule, they did nothing, but we increased 

it by 124 per cent. 

 

Our government set up a child welfare review with a seven 

cabinet-member committee to look into issues around children 

and families, Mr. Speaker; invested $34 million in the first ever 

child and youth agenda budget. It’s all about children. It’s all 

about families, something the NDP never figured out. 

 

We signed an historic letter of understanding with First Nations 

and Métis people; hired 85 new child protection workers — 85 

new child protection workers, Mr. Deputy Speaker; increased 

funding to extended family caregivers and family finders, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And what are we doing going forward? 

Fifteen million dollars invested in a new case management 

system that we rolled out this spring, going to bring down our 

second government child and youth budget which is essential to 

what I’ve been saying and about what our government has been 

doing. 

 

The result of all these initiatives, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 

number of children in care down for the first time in over a 

decade — down, Mr. Speaker. A 48 per cent reduction in 

children living in overcrowded foster homes. And I can’t wait 

for the part where I’m able to talk about what the NDP did and 

their record. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I’d ask members to allow the 

member to make his comments. And so that he can make his 

comments with regards to the motion before the floor, I’d ask 

members to allow that, and I ask for their co-operation. The 

member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Increase the number of children placed 

permanently with extended family by 44 per cent since 2007. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to talk about the NDP 

record over 16 years of their government. And what happened 

under 16 years of the NDP? They’re so concerned about 

families and children. Well the caseloads grew by 53 per cent 

between 2000 and 2007. They had a serious problem of 

overcrowding. It was identified as early as 1986. What did they 

do? Nothing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The NDP actually had a 

foster home with 21 children in it. It was totally unacceptable. 

 

In 2000, the Children’s Advocate identified a serious gap and 

major disconnect in child welfare services. That’s under the 

NDP. At that time, the Provincial Auditor and Children’s 

Advocate continually called on the NDP to develop a new 

tracking system. The NDP put a press release out in January 

2004 stating it was moving ahead, but did nothing. When asked 

why the NDP didn’t have the political will to confront problems 

in child welfare, the member from Saskatoon Centre said, 

“Many initiatives were started, but unfortunately they weren’t 

sustained.” Clearly more needed to be done. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

under 16 years of NDP rule, they admitted total failure helping 

families. 

 

Now this is something very . . . has been a very good initiative 

of our government, is the active families benefit. It was . . . 

 



590 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2012 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’d ask the members to come 

to order and allow the member to make his comments. Member 

from Biggar. 

 

[12:00] 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The active 

families benefit was legislated by the Saskatchewan Party 

government and has been in effect since January 1st, 2009. 

Now the members might want to listen to this. The active 

families benefit provides a tax benefit of up to $150 per child to 

help Saskatchewan families with the cost of their children’s 

sport, culture, and recreational activities. Originally the benefit 

was just for children aged 6 to 14, but listen up — now, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, our government has promised to expand the 

program to include all children under the age of 18. 

 

To date, the active families benefit has provided tax rebates to 

nearly 26,000 Saskatchewan families, with the majority having 

a household income of less than 80,000 people. The active 

families benefit makes sport, culture, and recreational activities 

more accessible and improves the quality of life for 

Saskatchewan families. Again, more examples of great things 

we’ve done for families and children in this province. 

 

Other initiatives that we’ve done is the Saskatchewan 

advantage scholarship — $2,000 for Saskatchewan high school 

graduates attending post-secondary education in the province. 

They’re used directly for tuition and up to a maximum of $500 

per year. The Saskatchewan Youth Apprenticeship Industry 

Scholarship, Mr. Deputy Speaker, $1,000 to be awarded to 80 

eligible high school students who have completed the 

Saskatchewan youth apprenticeship program. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government has done amazing things 

for families and the opposition just do not recognize or want to 

recognize all the good things we’ve done for families and for 

children in this province. 

 

I want to speak . . . I was elected in 1999 in a constituency 

called Redberry Lake. We went through redistribution. 

Redberry Lake as a constituency disappeared. I ran in what is 

now Biggar constituency three times. I know something about, 

you know, when the census is done every 10 years and there’s 

population shifts. I, as one member, have been through that. 

And I certainly understand that every 10 years there’s a census 

done and we have to — by law, that is — a commission is set 

up by legislation, that this commission looks at boundary 

changes and all those issues. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our 

government, since we’ve been government in 2007, has grown 

this economy and grown the population by 5 per cent. And 

what we’re doing now is increasing the number of 

constituencies by 5 per cent. 

 

In just the few seconds I have left, I want to address the 

member from Saskatoon Nutana who said, well I guess she 

doesn’t work on Fridays. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know I 

work on Fridays. This Friday I’ve got meetings booked in my 

constituency in the morning, and I’m driving to Borden, 

Saskatchewan — which is about an hour and a quarter, hour 

and a half away — to a grand opening of a private care home. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to put on many miles and make 

many phone calls and meet many people in my office on 

Friday. So I tell you what. Maybe they don’t work full-time 

over there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but members on this side work 

full-time. And many times we’re on the phone at night and have 

events and functions on Saturdays and in the evening, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. So the member from Nutana maybe should 

learn how to do her job rather than complain and make 

accusations about . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time for debate has expired. Oral 

questions. I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, today’s motion for 

debate asks for the government, and I quote, “reject expanding 

the number of constituencies in the province by three.” 

 

However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on March 5th, the member from 

Athabasca said in this House, and I quote, “There is no question 

that as our population growth continues that the question has to 

be asked when we’re getting more seats.” 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Riversdale: does this 

conflicting comment reflect division within your own caucus 

over this issue, or are you people making it up as you go along? 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The bottom 

line is the Sask Party should have been straight with voters 

during the election. They didn’t make any mention of this 

during their campaign, and the bottom line is the government 

should withdraw this Bill. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

My question is for the member from Thunder Creek. 

Oftentimes in these debates he likes to talk about the virtues of 

smaller government and cuts to government and, you know, the 

perils of big government. When was that member on the road to 

Damascus? When did he undergo his conversion, and when did 

he become a fan of bigger government, moving forward for 

three extra MLAs, especially when he didn’t campaign on it, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m more than happy 

to answer that question. We do believe in smaller government 

and that’s why we cut $5.5 million out of their budget and 3.5 

additional million out of their travel costs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I’m a little confused on this 

issue from my colleagues on the other side of the House, 



March 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 591 

because depending on which day of the week that they speak 

on, their position on Bill 36 seems to change. 

 

On March 5th, Mr. Speaker, the member for Athabasca said, 

and I quote: 

 

The obvious answer is yes, as the population grows. And 

you should have more MLAs as the population should 

reflect that in the number of seats that we have in the 

Assembly. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, the NDP, and I quote, “reject expanding 

the number of constituencies in the province by three.” So to 

the member from Saskatoon Riversdale: do you agree with your 

friend and colleague, the member from Athabasca, that we 

should increase the number of MLAs by three, or do you just 

disagree with the number? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well it’s 

pretty clear that we’re a united caucus here, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And we do not support the addition of three more 

MLAs. A united caucus does not support the addition of three 

more MLAs. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

guess, to the inconsistent members opposite, my question to the 

member from Thunder Creek would relate to how does he 

square the circle, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we have a 

government that’s increasing the cost to increase the number of 

MLAs that only serves their party’s best interests as opposed to 

meeting the needs of Saskatchewan people, and at the same 

very time as they’re cutting services for policing, cutting 

programs in the classroom, and cutting health services. How 

does the member from Thunder Creek square that circle, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — I heard part of that question and, I’m sure, 

enough to get the gist of it. That member, Mr. Speaker, 

speculates on what may be in the budget. He doesn’t know 

what he’s talking about as usual, Mr. Speaker. What we have 

done is cut five and a half million dollars out of Executive 

Council, compared to their last year, and $3.5 million out of 

their travel budget. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — During the last four years of the NDP 

government, there was a marginal population increase at best. 

Since our government was elected in 2007, Saskatchewan’s 

population has grown by 58,452 people. 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Riversdale: given your 

record-breaking population growth and the fact that the member 

from Athabasca said just last week, and we quote, “we need 

more seats,” why does some of your caucus insist that our 

government do nothing for electoral representation? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There’s no 

doubt Saskatchewan’s a great place to live. We love our 

citizens. This is a fabulous place to be. But we certainly don’t 

need more politicians, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As you count the 

nine of us around here, we are a united caucus, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. We do not support the need for three more MLAs. 

Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

had a hard time getting a straight answer from the member from 

Thunder Creek, so I’ll try this again. Sometimes they say you 

should beware of the small print in advertising, so I guess 

maybe they could point out for us, where was the small print 

that said ready for growth in the number of MLAs? If the 

member for Thunder Creek could point that out for us. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for the 

last 16 years this government has . . . or the previous 

government, the NDP government was focused on decline. 

We’re focused on growth, Mr. Speaker. And we expect that the 

people that are coming to this province in droves will be 

represented fairly by MLAs, and that’s part of the growth. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — On March 5th the opposition member from 

Athabasca said, and I quote: 

 

. . . there’s a growing population and we need more seats. 

We agree with that, that there is a growing population and 

more seats are necessary. We would applaud that . . . 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Riversdale: what has happened 

between then and now for your caucus to contradict the 

statement made by that member? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this was such a bright 

idea, where the heck was it in this government’s election 

platform? Why did this government not have the guts to bring 

this forward during the election, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Thank 

you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The reason 

Saskatchewan people don’t trust members opposite when it 



592 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2012 

comes to our electoral system is that we’ve seen them 

politically meddle in the past. In the previous term, Mr. 

Speaker, there was a bipartisan agreement for a new Chief 

Electoral Officer. That decision was vetoed by the Sask Party 

caucus. My question to the member from Thunder Creek: 

around the caucus table, did he support vetoing the decision that 

had been made about the Chief Electoral Officer? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — I thank the member for that question, and 

thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course that decision was made by 

both parties through the Board of Internal Economy. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ve been 

listening to the debate quite intently. And through the 75 

minutes, we heard over and over again about this 

cloak-and-dagger, this secretive, secretive idea by the Sask 

Party government. It’s so secret it’s put forward in legislation, 

in proposed legislation. In 2003, I think it was, the election 

when the then Finance minister Harry Van Mulligen said — 

and I think that would be more cloak-and-dagger type initiative, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker — where he said, well we don’t talk about 

tax increases during election; it’s not popular. 

 

Well this is something that’s totally out in the open. I don’t 

want to, you know, pick on the member from Riversdale. 

However there was something that she brought up about being 

a united caucus. And, granted, that could be the case. But I find 

it interesting that . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’d ask the opposition 

members to allow the member to put his question. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I find it 

interesting that the member from Athabasca talks openly about 

the need for adding three more seats, but yet the member from 

Riversdale says that they’re united in saying they don’t need 

three more seats. So I’d ask the member from Riversdale: 

which is it? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Just for the 

record, I need that member to know that I don’t feel picked on. 

Just for the record, I think I can hold my own. Again, this was 

not in the Sask Party platform, wasn’t even in the Throne 

Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This government had the 

opportunity to bring this forward in their Throne Speech. This 

is a pretty big piece . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 

expired. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 1 — Support for the Keystone XL Pipeline 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Stewart.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 

Hills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure for me to enter this debate again. I think it’s two or 

three months since we began this particular conversation on the 

Keystone XL pipeline, and it’s my privilege to speak on the 

merits of this project once again. 

 

I’m quite familiar with the project, as I indicated in my opening 

comments, because a leg of the pipeline actually goes through 

the constituency of Cypress Hills, entering the province of 

Saskatchewan from the Alberta side right in the vicinity of the 

community of Burstall and working its way in a southeasterly 

direction until it comes to the community of Monchy, which is 

right on the Montana-Saskatchewan border immediately south 

of Val Marie. 

 

And we’ve watched the contractors move pipe into our area 

where it’s being stockpiled. We’ve seen a lot of activity in 

preparation for actual construction. There’s been a huge influx 

of both trucks and workers into the Shaunavon area and other 

small communities along that area as preparation for the 

construction, the actual construction of this pipeline gets under 

way. 

 

[12:15] 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk about the Keystone 

XL pipeline as it impacts Saskatchewan, as it impacts the 

province of Saskatchewan and our neighbour to the west, the 

province of Alberta, and how it will benefit both the Canadian 

economy and be of ultimate benefit, both in terms of economic 

and energy security, to the Americans. 

 

You know there’s a lot of controversy around this pipeline 

project that is actually driven by . . . I would characterize it as 

misinformation in a more generous way and outright ideology 

in a more specific and direct way. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve 

heard things said about this pipeline project and the deleterious 

effect it will have on the environment and on sensitive areas in 

both Canada and the US [United States] that are based on pure 

ideology. It’s almost of myth proportions. 

 

And I want to, in the few minutes I’ve got today, to try and 

establish for the record and for our viewers how significant the 

impact of this pipeline was evaluated by the proponent, 

TransCanada Corporation. They understood the significance of 

this pipeline economically, but just as importantly, they 

understood the importance of this pipeline from an 

environmental prospective. And so they have undertaken very 

extensive review of environmental requirements and risks to try 

and mitigate them to the best level possible. 

 



March 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 593 

As you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as anybody who is familiar 

with advances in new technology, you may or may not have 

100 per cent accuracy in your predictions and in your projects. 

But without the assurance of a full fail-safe project, should we 

not proceed? And if that’s the benchmark by which we make 

our decision on whether or not projects should go ahead, then 

we would indeed be in big trouble. 

 

Somebody said one time, if a fail-safe or zero prospect of 

damage was the standard by which we evaluated progress in 

our society, we would be living without fire today. And we all 

know that fire does have some damaging aspects to it, but it’s 

essential to the way we live our lives in terms of heating our 

homes and moving products forward in all kinds of different 

applications. Fire is an important part of our life. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about 

what the reality is in terms of this pipeline project versus what 

the mythology and the ideology opposing this pipeline 

continues to be. 

 

Pipelines have been around for a long time. Canada has utilized 

pipelines very effectively in terms of providing energy to 

communities and areas of our nation and also to the Americans 

for several generations already. And if you look at a map of 

North America, there are pipelines criss-crossing the continent 

in all sorts of directions to provide that energy security and that 

comfort quality that natural gas and oil bring to consumers in 

North America. 

 

And I don’t think anybody, you know, looking at this situation 

realistically, would say that that’s a bad thing. We have, as our 

number one export market today in terms of Saskatchewan, our 

number one export market is the state of Illinois. We sell far 

more natural gas and oil into Illinois than any other market. So 

the state of Illinois is actually the number one trading partner of 

the province of Saskatchewan, and that’s a little-known fact. 

But it’s such an important part of our economy that has gone 

under the radar, under observed and realized by the citizens of 

this great province, that here is a pipeline project that has 

allowed the state of Illinois to become our province’s number 

one trading partner. 

 

And so because there are pipelines all around North America 

and we have benefitted economically from the use of pipelines, 

I think it’s only safe to assume — and we can be really quite 

assured of this — that more and more study goes into 

improvements in the quality of the product, the steel that’s used 

to build pipelines, the welding that is required and utilized to 

seal the junction points of two pieces of pipe. More and more 

study has gone into how we can best lay these pipelines, how 

we protect the environment when we’re doing that, how we 

operate them, how we monitor them. All of these elements, all 

of these different elements of pipeline production and 

installation have improved dramatically over the last 50 or 60 

years of pipeline experience. 

 

And I know that there have been recent instances of failure in 

pipeline. We’ve heard about some dramatic cases where one of 

our pipeline companies experienced failure in the United States 

recently. But having said that, the technology and the 

improvements to pipeline construction over the years have 

mitigated a lot of the environmental concerns that have existed 

previously and will give us a better and safer pipeline product 

for future use. 

 

I want to just confirm a few things as part of this debate today. 

Saskatchewan knows and recognizes that pipelines have been 

operating safely and in accordance with high standards for 

decades. I’ve just elaborated on some of that in my opening 

comments. And constant improvement is part of the, is part of 

the industry because they know they are under greater and 

greater scrutiny by public officials and by society at large and 

by the environmental community who is insisting on constantly 

higher standards. 

 

So those improvements are being made. They’re being made 

and, as I indicated, the strength of the metals that are utilized in 

pipeline construction and in the very welding . . . If you’re a 

pipeline welder, you’re a highly trained and skilled artisan. You 

know, you can’t have just anybody who knows how to hold a 

welder in their hand get out on a pipeline project and do the job 

because perfection is required when you’re welding a pipeline. 

 

The lack of pipeline capacity in North America has resulted in 

challenges for some of our own oil producers in the province of 

Saskatchewan. We know that oil production in some areas of 

the province is moving ahead so quickly that available pipeline 

capacity has limited the amount of oil that they can move. And 

even though there’s a market there, even though there is a 

demand there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, without the pipeline 

capacity to move that oil production, there’s only a couple of 

other options available for the movement of that product. 

 

One of them of course is trucks. And if you look around the 

province today, if you go to areas that are the home to a lot of 

oil production, you’ll find that there’s trucks on the road 

constantly. In my own community — and we’ve got a pretty 

good handle on what kind of a truck count there is on the 

highways moving oil — but our area isn’t nearly as heavily 

concentrated with this type of activity as, say, the heavy oil area 

around the Lloydminster region or in the Southeast where the 

Bakken play is one of the biggest oil activity areas of not just 

Saskatchewan but even in North America. 

 

So the alternative to pipelines in many, many areas are trucks. 

And so locals identify trucks as pipelines on wheels, and we 

know the impact that heavy traffic has on our roads and our 

highways. We know that the more trucks you have on the road, 

not only is there a negative impact on the condition of the 

highway but there’s always the additional environmental risk of 

mishap and rollover and accident. 

 

And so in bad weather, in bad road conditions, in all kinds of 

erratic circumstances, you have trucks on the road. Those oil 

tankers have to move. They have to keep moving the oil from 

where’s it’s pumped out of the ground to a battery or a deposit 

point where the oil can actually ultimately enter the pipeline 

system. So that’s the other alternative to pipelines. 

 

And I guess a second alternative would be railcars. And we’re 

hearing more and more about how oil is being moved by rail. I 

am familiar with one class 1 railway, one of our major railways 

in Canada, that thinks that there is a big opportunity for moving 

oil by rail from Canada to US markets. And we don’t want to 

deny them that opportunity. If they think there’s a business case 



594 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2012 

for it, and they can help the industry out and provide a benefit 

to both the oil industry and the end consumers by moving the 

product by rail, that’s probably an acceptable alternative. But it 

isn’t, it isn’t for one moment seen as safer from an 

environmental perspective than a well-constructed pipeline. 

 

And so while there might be alternatives to a pipeline, they all 

bear their own level of risk. And that’s part of the reality that 

we face as a society that is very much dependent on energy and 

expansion of the oil industry. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the growing economy of Saskatchewan 

and the growing demand from the American consumer market 

for this product makes the construction of the Keystone XL 

pipeline not a certainty just yet but an absolute necessity. And 

there is a conflict between the need and the political will to see 

this done that is impacting the construction of this project. 

 

The construction of the Keystone XL pipeline will result in 

literally hundreds of jobs for Saskatchewan people and 

considerable economic benefits for communities and businesses 

in the area around the construction and in supply industries that 

will provide materials and goods for the construction project. 

And I think there’s an estimate out of the US that says if the 

entire project were built, it would require about 20,000 

labourers to complete. And at a time when both the Canadian 

economy and the American economy are looking for 

opportunities for real job growth, then a project of this 

magnitude and this necessity is a great avenue to achieve that 

job creation objective. 

 

And expansion of pipeline capacity, going both north and south 

and east and west, is critical for the continued expansion of 

Saskatchewan’s own oil and gas industry. I mentioned earlier 

that there are pipeline networks running in all directions across 

North America, virtually trouble-free. And in some instances 

where there has been trouble, response has been quick and 

sufficient to address the negative impact of a spill. So we have a 

conscientious and active industry that will operate these 

pipelines in their best interest, in society’s best interest. And 

I’m sure in terms of environmental impact, they will have that 

interest as part of their priority as well. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, with all the positive elements of a project 

of this magnitude, the benefits it would bring both to the 

economies and to the trading relationship of our country and 

our province with our neighbours, in view of the ongoing need 

for energy self-sufficiency and reliability, a project of this 

magnitude can hardly be doubted. I would, if I had more time 

today, I would like to go through step by step all of the 

environmental and regulatory activities that have taken place in 

preparation for this project to be constructed. And I may get an 

opportunity at another time, at a future date, but suffice to say 

that right now the most lonesome voices against this project 

come from the federal NDP. 

 

And we would call on all members of this legislature and all 

members of the federal House of Commons to get behind this 

project because of the value to the Canadian people. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 

move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Biggar has moved 

to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I moved that 

this House be now adjourned. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved to adjourn the House. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 

Monday at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:30.] 

 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................... 571 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 571 

  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 571 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 571 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 572 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 572 

  Phillips ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 572 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 572 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 573 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 573 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 573 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 CTV Saskatoon Citizens of the Year 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 573 

 Moose Jaw Warriors 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................... 574 

 Colorectal Cancer Awareness Month 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 574 

 Saw Mill Operation 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................... 574 

 National Recognition for Agri-Retail Accomplishment 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 574 

 Youth Science Festival Month 

  Steinley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 575 

 St. Patrick’s Day 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 575 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Caregivers 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 575 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 575 

 Collective Bargaining at Cancer Agency 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 576 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 576 

 Funding for Education 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 578 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 578 

 Water Supply 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 579 

  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 579 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 FoxValley Counseling Services Inc. 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 580 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 580 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Constituency Boundary Changes 

  McCall ............................................................................................................................................................................... 581, 590 

  Stewart ............................................................................................................................................................................... 583, 590 

  Chartier ............................................................................................................................................................................. 584, 590 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 586 

  Wotherspoon ..................................................................................................................................................................... 587, 591 

  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 589 

  Jurgens ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 590 

  Doherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 590 

  Steinley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 591 

  Moe ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 591 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 591 

  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 592 

 

 



 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 1 — Support for the Keystone XL Pipeline 

  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 592 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


