




















































Hansard: April 03, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 26A  TUESDAY, APRIL 3, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 927 

 April 3, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Since I 

was about in grade 1, Hitachi, that great international company, 

has been a partner of the province of Saskatchewan, 

significantly through SaskPower and increasingly as years went 

on in other ways. Mr. Speaker, today it’s a pleasure to introduce 

to you and through you to all members of the Assembly, some 

senior officials who have joined us from Hitachi. Joining us 

today is Mr. Hitoshi Isa, he’s the senior officer of thermal 

power plant business, Hitachi Ltd.; Mr. Yoshio Sumiya, general 

manager, Hitachi Power Systems Company, thermal power 

division; Mr. Masafusa Atsuta, general manager, Hitachi Power 

Systems Company, thermal power division; and Tom 

Kishchuk, president and CEO [chief executive officer], Hitachi 

Power Systems of Canada Ltd. 

 

Mr. Speaker, earlier this day Hitachi has announced the 

amalgamation of its Canadian headquarters to Saskatoon from 

some operations in Ontario. They’ll be operating under the 

name Hitachi Power Systems Canada. We’re going to be 

hearing more about this development later in today’s 

proceedings. But I want to say that it’s another positive sign, 

Mr. Speaker, about the provincial economy and the ability of 

the economy to attract interest and support from partners from 

companies, literally international companies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Hitachi’s role in the province is key in terms of 

our desire to lead in carbon capture storage and clean coal 

technology, Mr. Speaker. Their partnership is absolutely 

linchpin at the University of Saskatchewan nuclear research 

centre, and we look forward to that increased presence in the 

years ahead and an ongoing partnership with an excellent 

company. I want to welcome these officials to the Legislative 

Assembly here and thank them on behalf of the province of 

Saskatchewan for their partnership with Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

welcome the special guests from Hitachi here to the legislature 

on behalf of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. It’s quite a 

number of years ago, when I was the minister of SaskPower, 

that we had a group of the senior executives from Hitachi at the 

Queen Elizabeth power station in Saskatoon. And that was 

important because that was the opportunity for Hitachi to bring 

their technology for the use in natural gas-powered turbines for 

SaskPower. And it was also at that time that the Hitachi 

officials said very clearly that this is a chance to see whether 

the North American market will be important for Hitachi 

power. 

 

So I’m very pleased today to welcome you today because 

clearly the foresight of your leaders, probably about 14, 13 

years ago, has borne fruit. I’m also pleased to say that I have a 

photograph of that particular event in my office that reminds 

me each day of how all of these things take some time but they 

work to build Saskatchewan. So thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of First Nations and 

Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It is indeed a pleasure to introduce to you and through 

you three members of the Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 

that are in our gallery today. I had the opportunity to table the 

annual report for the Gaming Corporation. 

 

And we welcome today Twyla Meredith, who is the president 

and CEO. Twyla does an excellent job at Sask Gaming 

Corporation, and she was also named one of the 100 most 

powerful women for 2011 by the Women’s Executive Network. 

So, Twyla, congratulations on that award. Also doing a great 

job at Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation, we have Susan Flett, 

vice-president of marketing and corporate relations, and Jan 

Carter — if you wouldn’t mind giving us a wave — director of 

communications. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Sask Gaming Corporation welcomes 3.5 million 

guests on a yearly basis. They have a thousand employees, 42 

per cent of which are of Aboriginal descent. So, Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to welcome these fine individuals to their Legislative 

Assembly this afternoon, and I ask members to do the same. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, lots of 

welcoming spirits on this side of the House. I’d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming Twyla Meredith and the officials 

from the Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation to their Legislative 

Assembly. A special word of congratulations joining with the 

minister to Twyla Meredith on the prestigious 100 most 

powerful women designation. You can almost feel the power 

exuding from the gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But again, these are people that work very hard on behalf of the 

Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation and provide a very positive 

return to the people of Saskatchewan. Please join me in 

welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the Assembly, seated in the west gallery 

is a good friend of mine named Rick Floer. I’ve known Rick 

since our days back at university. He’s a proud alumnus of the 

University of Saskatchewan, College of Agriculture and agro. 

And Rick and I had the opportunity to work together. 

 

Although he and his wife live out in beautiful White Rock, 

British Columbia now, Mr. Speaker, he gets home every year to 

help on the family farm down in Minton, Saskatchewan. And 

he tells me their family is celebrating the 100th anniversary of 

their family farm this summer, so congratulations. 

 



928 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2012 

And he also tells me he had the opportunity to meet the member 

from Regina Dewdney, that he still goes to all the Rider games 

out in BC [British Columbia], and still cheers for the green and 

white. So welcome here, Rick. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives 

me great pleasure to rise today to welcome some very important 

guests in my life and folks that travelled all the way from 

Ile-a-la-Crosse to be here today. I want to welcome my uncle 

Gordon Aramenko. And with Gordon today are his 

granddaughters Bailey who’s 13 and Brandy who is 5. Brandy’s 

just sat up here. But, Mr. Speaker, you should know that these 

are very, very special people.  

 

And Gordon runs a cattle operation up in Ile-a-la-Crosse. He’s a 

great uncle. He’s a great husband and a great dad and a great 

grandfather. He’s also a good wrestling partner. You should 

know, Mr. Speaker, that I often put him down on the ground 

when I want. But as tradition in our Assembly, because Gordon 

comes from a Ukrainian background, I wanted to address him 

in his home language. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to Mr. Aramenko: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to this Assembly, I have a handful of 

people in your gallery I’d like to introduce. 

 

First of all, folks, just give him a wave when I introduce you, is 

a good friend of mine from Milden in the Rosetown-Elrose 

constituency, George Hanna. With George are Marion and 

Michael McNulty. Now Marion and Michael are visiting here 

today from Wicklow in Ireland. Wicklow is about an hour south 

of Dublin. And the really great news, Mr. Speaker, is the reason 

they’re here visiting today. They’re visiting their daughter Katy 

McNulty and her partner Gus Robinson who are just, who have 

just moved to Milden. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Katy’s going to be opening her own business. Gus 

is working for a local businessman. We’re absolutely delighted 

to have them in Milden and in the great province of 

Saskatchewan, and I’d ask all members to please give them a 

warm welcome. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for greater protection for 

late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know 

in the early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray 

Wiebe was shot twice and died from his injuries. He was 

working at a gas station in Yorkton, alone and unprotected from 

intruders. 

 

We know provinces such as British Columbia and others have 

brought several safety precautions through law, including a 

requirement that workers cannot be alone during late-night and 

early morning hours if they are required to work. There must be 

protective barriers such as locked doors and protective glass. I’d 

like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the greater government 

. . . cause the Government of Saskatchewan to 

immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s law, to ensure 

greater safety for retail workers who work late-night 

hours. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

the city of Moose Jaw. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to education in our province. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to make education a top priority by 

establishing a long-term vision and plan, with resources, 

that is responsive to the opportunities and challenges in 

providing the best quality education and that reflects 

Saskatchewan’s demographic and population changes; 

that is based on proven educational best practices; that is 

developed through consultation with the education sector; 

and that recognizes the importance of educational 

excellence to the social and economic well-being of our 

province and students for today and for our future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned citizens of 

Moose Jaw and Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m presenting a 

petition on behalf of my constituents who live in Dundonald 

and Hampton Village concerning the need for a new school or 

schools in the neighbourhood of Hampton Village. And the 

prayer reads: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

children in Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend 

school in their own community instead of travelling to 

neighbouring communities to attend schools that are 

typically already reaching capacity. 



April 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 929 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current 

regulations being enforced are creating challenges that are a 

concern for our traditional trappers. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued; and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation and 

regulations with respect to trapping regulations and 

firearms use in consultation with the traditional resource 

users. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 

so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Breakfast for Learning Volunteer Award Recipients 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today, I’d like to take this opportunity to congratulate 

Saskatoon Centre constituent Dorothy Ross and her colleague 

Sylvia Woodward who received the National 2011 Breakfast 

for Learning Volunteer Award for inspiration and leadership. 

This annual award recognizes a person that is making an 

outstanding impact in the area of child nutrition by helping to 

ensure all children are well-nourished and ready to learn.  

 

Dorothy and Sylvia were featured in April’s edition of 

Canadian Living, where it was written, and I quote: 

 

As much as the kids at Pleasant Hill Community School in 

Saskatoon love having Cream of Wheat and oatmeal for 

breakfast, it was the weekly treat of pancake Wednesday 

that left them looking for seconds. Dorothy Ross and 

Sylvia Woodward were responsible for providing a 

healthy start to the day for 50 of the school’s 150 students 

who may otherwise have gone without their morning 

meals. 

 

Dorothy Ross has managed the breakfast program at Pleasant 

Hill Community School for the past 28 years, and Sylvia 

recently retired from her role as a nutrition worker after 17 

years of dedicated service. Their longstanding commitment to 

the nutrition program saw them serving several generations of 

families at the school’s breakfast and lunch programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Dorothy Ross and Sylvia Woodward for receiving the National 

Breakfast for Learning Volunteer Award for inspiration and 

leadership. Thank you. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Junior Achievement Business Hall of Fame Awards 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

Thursday, March 29th, I along with the hon. member from 

Saskatoon Southeast and the hon. member from Indian 

Head-Milestone had the pleasure of attending the 35th Annual 

Junior Achievement of Saskatchewan Business Hall of Fame 

Awards banquet. This annual event is an opportunity to 

celebrate the achievements of the students participating in the 

company program, as well as acknowledge the contribution of 

the company program advisors. 

 

Some of the winners include: Jonah Hills and Alesi Lubchenko, 

they won the Spirit of JA [Junior Achievement] Award; 

Thomas Conway and Nimish Baswal, they won the Salesperson 

of the Year Award; and Travis Kinsella, who won the 

Production Excellence Award. 

 

The night included the presentation of the Junior Achievement 

Lifetime Achievement Award to Pat Broberg. Pat, who has 

been involved with Junior Achievement in Saskatchewan for 

over 19 years, was recognized for her being at the forefront of 

evolution and management of JA through her years of service 

with the organization. 

 

I would also like to recognize the two individuals being 

inducted into the Junior Achievement Business Hall of Fame, 

Mr. Bill Peterson of Creative Fire and Mr. Doug Gillespie of 

Saskatoon Fastprint. These two individuals have not only made 

significant contributions to Saskatoon by fostering successful 

businesses but also by being mentors to young entrepreneurs 

within their community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 

congratulating all participants in the Junior Achievement 

program and the volunteers who make JA possible. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Caring for Our Watersheds 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise in the House 

today to highlight Caring for Our Watersheds, an environmental 

education competition which rewards students for their 

creativity in identifying solutions to local watershed issues. 

 

Each year Agrium, in partnership with Partners for the 

Saskatchewan River Basin, invites students to submit proposals 

that answer the question, what can you do to improve your 

watershed? The program recognizes students and schools who 



930 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2012 

come up with the most thought-provoking and innovative ideas 

to promote stewardship and sustainability for the Saskatchewan 

River Basin, an international watershed stretching over three 

prairie provinces and a portion of Montana. 

 

The contest, open to students who live in the Saskatchewan 

borders within the South Saskatchewan River Basin, allows 

students to compete for $6,000 in rewards. Participating schools 

are eligible for $11,000 in rewards and students who implement 

their ideas are eligible for additional funding. 

 

On March 31st, Mr. Speaker, the final competition was held at 

Saskatoon Inn, and I was one of the judges as was the hon. 

member from Saskatoon Fairview. I’m delighted to report that 

the submissions ranging in solutions involving composting, 

innovative sensor taps and filters showcased the exceptional 

hard work and resourcefulness of the students. And I’m pleased 

to note that one of the finalists, Alana Krug-MacLeod, is one of 

my constituents. She is doing Nutana proud, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would like to ask my colleagues to please join with me in 

congratulating the participants, teachers, community volunteers, 

partners, and finalists for engaging in this very worthwhile 

competition. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Company Consolidates Operations in Saskatoon 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to rise in the Chamber today to share some important 

news that is further proof that our government’s efforts to 

create a positive investment climate in Saskatchewan are 

paying real dividends. Hitachi Ltd. has announced that they 

plan to amalgamate current Canadian operations into a single, 

newly formed entity called Hitachi Power Systems Canada, one 

which will be based at its existing manufacturing facility in 

Saskatoon. 

 

Hitachi’s decision to headquarter its Canadian operations in 

Saskatchewan is a natural one, Mr. Speaker, if you consider the 

long history that exists between this province and Hitachi. It is 

a relationship that dates back to 1970 when SaskPower 

purchased a Hitachi turbine for its Queen Elizabeth power 

station in Saskatoon. And that partnership has grown to the 

point where Hitachi is one of SaskPower’s most trusted partners 

in plans to construct a $60 million carbon capture test facility 

adjacent to the Shand power station in the Estevan 

constituency. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, Hitachi is playing an important 

role in SaskPower’s $1.24 billion Boundary dam integrated 

carbon capture and storage demonstration project in Estevan, 

supplying the steam turbine and generator for this 

world-leading project. 

 

Hitachi’s decision to consolidate its natural operations in 

Saskatoon proves that our government’s plan to help grow the 

province’s economy are working. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and 

welcome Hitachi. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

Judge of the Provincial Court Appointment 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you well know 

that I come from a fairly small town of Bladworth, yet that 

small town has produced professional football players, 

professional hockey players, a senator, MP [Member of 

Parliament], and then also an MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly], and now a judge. 

 

The province recently announced the appointment of Inez 

Cardinal, QC [Queen’s Counsel] to the position of Judge of the 

Provincial Court in Melfort. Ms. Cardinal was one of 11 

children, daughter of Tony and Doris Cardinal of Bladworth. 

She received her diploma in renewable technology from the 

Kelsey Institute and her Bachelor of Law from the U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan]. In 1991 she joined public 

prosecutions in Regina. In 2006 was appointed Queen’s 

Counsel responsible for environmental offences in Saskatoon. 

In addition, Ms. Cardinal is a sessional lecturer of human 

justice and indigenous studies at the First Nations University 

campus in Prince Albert, has been an active member of the 

Canadian Bar Association. 

 

Also, on a personal note, it’s quite common now for boys and 

girls to be playing on the same hockey team. But 40-plus years 

ago, my earliest memory of Inez is when she joined our boys’ 

10-and-under hockey team in Bladworth. And all I have to say 

to that is, if she’s half as tough a judge as she was a hockey 

player, I wouldn’t want to challenge her in a court of law. I 

would ask that members join me congratulating Inez Cardinal 

on her well-deserved appointment to the Provincial Court of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Wascana Centre Celebrates 50th Birthday 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, always just a little 

difficult to follow the senior member in front of me. 

 

Anyway thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise today to 

recognize Wascana Centre’s 50th birthday. For 50 years, people 

have made their way down to Wascana Park to enjoy the scenic 

beauty, visit with their neighbours, participate in countless 

sporting activities, and get a bit of exercise. 

 

Created in 1962, the city, the province, and the University of 

Regina envisioned a beautiful site that would develop the seat 

of government, improve educational opportunities, advance the 

arts, provide recreation activities, and conserve our natural 

environment. Needless to say, their incredible vision continues 

to grow. Looking across the park at the over 100,000 planted 

trees, it’s hard to imagine how it would have looked five 

decades ago. In my case, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have to imagine. 

 

The 2,300 acre Regina landmark has been a work-in-progress 

since 1962, and countless employees, board members, and 

volunteers have used their initiative and vision to transform the 

once bald prairie into a true, urban oasis. Wascana Centre 

includes six parks, all with different available activities from 

children’s apparatus, football, track and field, tobogganing, 

skiing, barbequing, a game preserve, the bandstand, and of 



April 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 931 

course the Royal Saskatchewan Museum. 

 

Years from now, the citizens of Regina will reflect, as we do 

today, on the great work and partnerships that created this 

unique urban getaway. Please join me in congratulating the 

Wascana Centre and all those that have made the park the 

provincial landmark it is today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Bank Donation to School of Business 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Scotiabank Canada made a very significant announcement last 

night in Saskatoon, an announcement that will have a very 

positive impact on the Aboriginal community. The Deputy 

Premier, the Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations were 

pleased to be in attendance at the Scotiabank reception as their 

President and CEO Rick Waugh announced a gift to the 

University of Saskatchewan’s Edwards School of Business in 

the amount of $200,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this announcement was made at the Scotiabank’s 

annual general meeting, the first time it was ever held in 

Saskatchewan. This incredible donation from Scotiabank will 

support Aboriginal students pursuing a business education. 

Scotiabank is one of North America’s premier financial 

institutes and Canada’s most international bank. I can assure 

you, Mr. Speaker, there will be a brighter future for many 

Aboriginal students that will benefit from the generous 

contribution. 

 

The Edwards School of Business has done a wonderful job 

supporting Aboriginal education, providing guidance and 

preparation for the next generation of Aboriginal leaders. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, in 2008, our colleague from Saskatoon 

Fairview won the Scotiabank Aboriginal Business Education 

Award which partially removes financial barriers for these 

students seeking an M.B.A. [Master of Business 

Administration]. Scotiabank leadership is a prime example, Mr. 

Speaker, of the continuing growth in our province that 

contributes to the Saskatchewan advantage. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Combatting HIV 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last fall when the 

Sask Party laid out its agenda in the Throne Speech, there was 

not one mention of HIV [human immunodeficiency virus]. Two 

weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, when the Finance minister delivered 

his budget, there was no mention of HIV. Yet we know here in 

Saskatchewan we’re facing the worst HIV epidemic in the 

country. One-quarter of all HIV-related deaths that occur in the 

country occur here in Saskatchewan. Now perhaps it’s easy for 

us to keep our head in the sand on this issue, Mr. Speaker, but I 

can’t understand why we would take that approach on 

something so serious. My question to the minister: does the 

Sask Party not recognize that we face the worst HIV epidemic 

in the country? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we in this government, 

as well as the Ministry of Health and health regions across the 

province, certainly know the importance of HIV, the increased 

numbers, Mr. Speaker, of infections. Part of that is due to the 

increased testing which is also part of the exact opposite of 

what that member implied about sticking our heads in the sand. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in December of 2010, we and the health regions 

approved a Saskatchewan HIV strategy. Part of that strategy 

was to make sure that people were tested. Because what was 

happening is people with HIV didn’t know they had HIV, 

shared needles, Mr. Speaker, and the spread continued. It’s 

extremely important that we test to make sure people can know 

whether they’ve got HIV, and if they do, they take the proper 

precautions so that it isn’t spread further on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That’s only one part of a total strategy, Mr. Speaker. That total 

strategy talks about increasing capacity through front-line 

services, Mr. Speaker, enhancing capacity through training, 

engaging our communities to address the HIV/AIDS [human 

immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune deficiency 

syndrome] prevention, education, treatment, and awareness, 

Mr. Speaker. This strategy is only a couple of years old. It will 

run to 2014. It is a far cry from sticking your head in the sand. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It ought to be a huge 

concern that we’re facing the worst HIV epidemic in the 

country. And, Mr. Speaker, it ought to be a concern that 

one-quarter of the deaths that are HIV related that occur in the 

country happen here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The government’s own documents say this: “A conservative 

estimate of direct cost to the Saskatchewan health care system 

is approximately $40 million per year.” When you factor in the 

indirect cost, Mr. Speaker, that amount jumps to $136 million, 

by the government’s own documents. Yet the response by the 

Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, has been $2.5 million per year. Those 

that are working on the front lines, Mr. Speaker, don’t think 

that this makes sense and recognize that this is a simply a drop 

in the bucket. 

 

So my question to the minister: why is the Sask Party failing to 

invest the proper resources to address this epidemic and allow 

the province to curb some of the costs associated with the 

human, the social, and the financial costs for our province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when we saw the 

increase in HIV numbers, that’s when we put the strategy in 

place back in 2010. Also part of that strategy is to have an HIV 

provincial leadership team in place to work with facilities and 

implement the strategy. The HIV leadership team is working 

with the Ministry of Health, First Nations health authorities, 

regional health authorities, to address this issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 



932 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2012 

Mr. Speaker, we recognize this is a very complex issue. This is 

a community that is very, very tough to get in front of, Mr. 

Speaker, and to change lifestyles. And that’s what has to 

happen. But, Mr. Speaker, this government has seen the issue; 

we’ve reacted; we’ve put funding towards it. We’ve put into 

place a committee, Mr. Speaker. We’re only two years into a 

four-year strategy. We understand the issues, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

not quite as simple as that member may think it is to solve such 

a complex problem that other provinces have faced before. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, many of the steps that the 

minister identified are good, and I hope that they are very 

successful in addressing the epidemic that we see in our 

province. But it’s also important to look at the resources being 

allocated by members opposite. And when we see a $2.5 

million response to an issue, by the government’s own 

admission, is well over $100 million in costs, I think that is a 

concern. 

 

Those who are working on the front lines, Mr. Speaker, 

emphasize that prevention, treatment, and supports are very 

important. And, Mr. Speaker, they’re not satisfied with the 

response that members opposite have put forward to date. But a 

common theme that one hears when speaking with front-line 

workers is that we need to properly address the social 

determinants of health. And that will be, Mr. Speaker, in the 

end, the most effective response in addressing this crisis. My 

question to the minister: does he recognize that the social 

determinants of health need to be properly addressed? And if he 

does, when will he start doing so? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we understand there’s 

more work to do in this area. Every province is grappling with 

it, Mr. Speaker. But I too have met with front-line workers, Mr. 

Speaker. I’ve met with a couple of nurses that work in the front 

lines here in Regina Qu’Appelle. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I’ve 

been with those nurses at times when there’s been the needle 

. . . the clean-up program. I have a fairly good understanding of 

what’s being delivered, and have heard first-hand from 

front-line caregivers, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely they’ll say there 

needs to be more done, and we agree with that completely. But 

they’ll also say, Mr. Speaker, prior to 2010, Mr. Speaker, we 

could go back many years when there was HIV in this province 

and there was no strategy in place. This government has heard 

from front-line workers. We’ve also heard from the community. 

We’re taking steps, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he can question the resources that we put into 

battling HIV but, Mr. Speaker, I would just be so scared had 

they ever got into power — $550 million more spending, Mr. 

Speaker. They were throwing money around out of the back of 

the wagon like they were drunken sailors, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — It’s a bit of an unsettling tone, Mr. Speaker, for 

the minister to be using that type of language when we’re 

dealing with an issue that is so serious and affects so many 

people here in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only do we need to address the social 

determinates of health, but we need to do a much better job of 

treating those with addictions. And that also includes, Mr. 

Speaker, addressing issues of shared needles with injection drug 

use. We know that the vast majority of new HIV cases here in 

the province are due to injection drug use. So, Mr. Speaker, we 

need to improve addiction services throughout the province. 

And I would say especially that is the case in certain parts of 

the province, with the North included. 

 

My question to the minister: does he agree that we need to do a 

better job of providing addiction services and treatment 

throughout the province, and if that is the position that he has, 

when will he start acting and improving addiction services 

throughout the province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, in my previous answers 

I’ve laid out what we are doing on HIV since 2010. There was 

no strategy in place before, even including under the NDP 

[New Democratic Party], Mr. Speaker. Our strategy is two 

years in. We have more work to do. 

 

As far as addiction services, Mr. Speaker, we are continuing to 

work on that front. I can tell you that up in Prince Albert there 

will be a new youth addiction treatment centre, Mr. Speaker, 

that has come to place under our government, Mr. Speaker. We 

understand there are issues throughout the province. We work 

closely with health regions to make sure they have the proper 

resources to deal with these issues, Mr. Speaker. And we are 

seeing it spread throughout the province. It’s not just one area; 

it’s not an isolated problem. It’s throughout the area, out the 

province, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we work closely with our 

health regions to ensure that they’ve got the proper complement 

of resources and the proper complement of health care 

professionals to deal with these very, very important issues. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Federal Crime Legislation 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, Sask Party politicians 

have stated repeatedly that they just don’t know the cost of the 

federal Conservative crime Bill. We’ve asked the Minister of 

Corrections. He has no idea. We’ve asked the Minister of 

Justice. He’s been equally unhelpful, and I quote from 

yesterday: “We can pick numbers out of the air as long as we 

choose to.” 

 

Last night in committee, the Minister of Corrections again 

refused to answer the question. But he did say we should go and 

talk to the Minister of Finance. All this confusion despite the 

deputy minister of Finance saying in the budget day briefing, 

quite simply, that this government is expecting 200 more 

inmates as a result of the federal crime Bill. 

 



April 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 933 

To the Minister of Finance: does he stand by the information of 

his top official? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, at the present time we 

cannot accurately assess or determine the number of additional 

inmates that the effect of Bill C-10 will have. We know that the 

desire of Bill C-10 is to have a precise, measured, proportionate 

response to serious crime. We want to ensure that that Bill 

removes child sexual predators from our streets and people that 

are organized drug traffickers. 

 

I can tell the House, Mr. Speaker, that at the present time we 

have in our province space for 1,575 inmates. Earlier today 

announcements were made to increase both the capacity of Pine 

Grove and also one of the male facilities in Prince Albert, 

which will increase it by the year 2016 by an additional 204 so 

that we will have spaces for 1,779 inmates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can also advise the House that we know that we 

have pressures in the area of remand space and we will work 

our way through that as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the question was to the 

Minister of Finance. That answer is simply not good enough. It 

raises some other concerns around what we’re building as far as 

infrastructure in this province for this crime Bill. But the 

question was to the Minister of Finance, and the question merits 

a straight answer. The Corrections minister says he has no idea 

of the costs. The Justice minister says he’ll pick numbers out of 

the air. Mr. Speaker, this is about the integrity of this budget, 

and a straight answer is required. 

 

To the Minister of Finance: does he support the answer of his 

head official that this will add 200 more inmates per day to the 

correctional system? Quite simply, yes or no. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I answered the question 

earlier and I stated the number of beds that we have for the 

facilities that we have, what the plans are to increase them over 

the next two years. Mr. Speaker, those are the type of things 

that we can and will do. 

 

In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, we have increased, over the 

last four years, the number of police officers in the province by 

120. We are increasing them by a further number in this 

mandate, Mr. Speaker. We will go ahead and we will ensure 

that we have sufficient resources in our province to protect our 

people from child sexual predators, from violent people, people 

that are preying on our children. We will ensure that we have a 

safe, secure province for people to live in. We know that we 

will have additional demands placed on our correctional 

facilities. We’ve outlined what our plan is to deal with some of 

those. We cannot accurately assess or determine what the effect 

of the impact of Bill C-10 is because some sentences that would 

have been conditional sentences may well become probation or 

other methods of disposition. Those are the type of things we 

cannot accurately determine, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that’s entirely 

unacceptable by way of an answer. And the question was to the 

Minister of Finance. His deputy minister was crystal clear in a 

technical briefing to the opposition that this Bill would add 200 

more inmates — pretty specific, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What adds confusion to the mix here, Mr. Speaker, is while the 

Minister of Corrections last night in committee wouldn’t stand 

up for the Finance top official, he did share that an additional 

100 inmates on a per-day basis or on an annual basis would cost 

at least 6 million per year. So we pieced together the 

information before us along with that of the top Finance 

official’s information. This means Bill C-10 would cost 

taxpayers or will cost taxpayers at least $12 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people of Saskatchewan deserve better than 

piecing together of information. They deserve an answer from 

the minister, and they deserve a budget they can count on. To 

the Finance minister: what will the cost of Bill C-10 be? And 

why isn’t it in your budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we are a competent 

government, and we are not going to engage in wild 

speculation. We do not know what the impact is going to be. 

We do not know what the courts are going to decide. We do not 

know how charges are going to be laid. We do not know what 

matters will be dealt away by way of alternate plea bargains. 

And we are not going to engage in wild speculation. We are not 

going to spend money unnecessarily. We have indicated over 

the next three or four years we are going to increase the number 

of spaces in our correctional facilities by some 204. 

 

In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, if the effect of this Bill requires 

us to increase the spaces further, we will deal with that in due 

course. But we will not plan for something that we do not know 

what it is, cannot accurately determine. We will wait and we 

will see and we will make an accurate, fair, reasoned 

determination. The federal government has indicated to us that 

this Bill may well be implemented in stages. They will give us 

reasonable notice. And we will work through with them, and 

we will look to the federal government for an investment in our 

infrastructure as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — We have no answer to the questions 

here today, and we’re left with more questions than answers. 

The Minister of Finance leaves us with the suspicion that 

whether or not we can even trust what his government’s putting 

forward as far as a budget. He won’t stand up, he won’t stand 

up for his own top Finance official who was crystal clear in a 

technical briefing to the Saskatchewan opposition on budget 



934 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2012 

day. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people deserve better than 

this. The question to the Finance minister: does he believe and 

stand up for those numbers put forward by his top official, Mr. 

Speaker, and if not, what’s his answer to Saskatchewan people 

as far as how they can trust the budget put before us? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the effects of Bill C-10 are 

complex. It does away with conditional sentences. It imposes 

certain minimum sentences for some offenders. We cannot with 

any degree of certainty determine what the effect of those are. 

We are not going to engage in unnecessary or inaccurate 

speculation. 

 

We know that we will have an increase in our need for our 

correctional facilities. We have indicated that we have an 

increase of some 204 scheduled now and, Mr. Speaker, if there 

is need for more we will deal with it appropriately in time, but 

we will not go out and engage in unnecessary speculation, 

unnecessary planning. We will treat things with a proportionate, 

reasoned, and fair response. We will not engage in the type of 

things that that government did, that opposition did prior to the 

election where they planned and spent literally billions of 

dollars of expenditure that there was no basis for, no need for, 

and not something that was wanted for by the citizens of this 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for Culture and Heritage 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re hearing from 

many Saskatchewan people who don’t understand the 

government’s decision to provide a zero per cent increase in 

funding for Saskatchewan’s Western Development Museum, 

causing them to close their doors on Monday. 

 

A Saskatoon teacher has written, “They [the Western 

Development Museum] deserve to be supported when times are 

good in our province.” Another individual points out that the 

WDM [Western Development Museum] has four huge 

buildings to heat, light, and maintain, along with parking lots 

and grounds to keep up and 80,000 artifacts to store, preserve, 

and exhibit. She asks that the budget allocation reflect the place 

the WDM holds in the hearts of Saskatchewan people. To the 

minister: how can this government have millions of dollars for 

three more politicians, yet no extra money to help the museums 

that tell our unique Saskatchewan stories? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We 

welcome the member’s question. The Government of 

Saskatchewan of course does value the preservation of our 

province’s heritage and applauds the good work being done by 

the Western Development Museum. That’s why in 2011-2012, 

that fiscal year, the provincial grant to the WDM was increased 

by $60,000 or one and a half per cent to offset inflation. But 

more importantly, Mr. Speaker, in the last five years the 

museum has received a 35 per cent increase to its budget, 35 

per cent. Additionally the WDM has also received $5.3 million 

in funding for special projects over the last few years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do respect the work done by the WDM at their 

four locations. We understand their financial pressures, and 

we’ll continue to work with them to develop the most efficient 

and effective program delivery possible within our balanced 

budget. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that that minister’s 

words make it all better for the Western Development Museum. 

The WDM is a source of pride for Saskatchewan people. It 

showcases the creative and entrepreneurial spirit of our 

province. The WDM is also a source of education. Not only 

does it teach our history; it also provides valuable skills training 

through courses such as blacksmithing that are not available 

elsewhere. 

 

To the minister: how can this government talk about pride in 

the province, education, training, and job skills when it is 

handcuffing one of the very organizations that champion these 

issues? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you for the question, Mr. 

Speaker. Once again, Mr. Speaker, the Western Development 

Museum has received an increase of 35 per cent during the first 

term of this government. In 2008-2009, for example, the WDM 

received an $830,000 increase to their base funding, followed 

by another $154,000 the next year, and then just last year they 

received a further one and a half per cent as well. 

 

Our government considers it a priority to conserve our heritage 

resources, which have environmental, recreational, and cultural 

significance as we understand. The WDM does a fine job of 

preserving and displaying our province’s historical character. 

We do sincerely thank them for their work, and we’ll certainly 

be talking with them in the near future about how to best 

manage their financial pressures. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s more than a 

little ironic that this government talks about growth and a 

booming economy, yet has no extra money for the Boomtown 

museum. 

 

Not only is this government failing the Western Development 

Museum; they are also failing the Saskatchewan Archives. As a 

result of this year’s budget, the archives will be cutting four 

full-time jobs and 10 part-time jobs as well as reducing their 

hours of operation. Students around the province use archives 

to do research and learn about the province’s history. 

Genealogy is becoming more and more popular, and 

Saskatchewan people go to the archives to learn more about 

their ancestors and about themselves. To the minister: how does 



April 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 935 

he justify forcing Saskatchewan Archives to cut staff and hours 

of operation when they are already backlogged with requests 

for services? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once 

again we thank the member for her question. The history of our 

province is indeed important to the people of Saskatchewan. 

We all understand that. The Saskatchewan Archives Board has 

the important responsibility of preserving and protecting our 

history for this and future generations. Mr. Speaker, we are 

aware that the Archives Board is experiencing staffing and 

capacity pressures, as is the same with many other 

organizations, no doubt. And they understand that the Archives 

Board is meeting to examine options for maintaining service 

levels. 

 

In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, the 2012-2013 provincial budget 

provides the Archives Board with an additional $174,000 to 

help with salary and in operational costs. We are confident that 

the board will make decisions about staffing and operations that 

will be prudent, cost-effective, and in the best interests of the 

people of Saskatchewan. And we’ll continue to work with the 

board. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is a 

distressing pattern occurring with this government, Mr. 

Speaker. They’ve cut the legs out of the film and television 

industry. Mr. Speaker, as a percentage of overall government 

spending in this budget, the Saskatchewan Arts Board has 

dropped to a measly point zero five seven per cent. That’s the 

lowest funding level in 25 years, according to the Saskatchewan 

Arts Alliance. And this government is failing to adequately 

fund the Western Development Museum, the province’s 

archives, and other arts and cultural organizations. It’s clear that 

arts and culture are not a priority for this government. 

 

To the minister: When is he going to stop selling out the sectors 

he’s supposed to represent in cabinet and when is he going to 

stand up for arts and culture here in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, we thank 

the member for her question. Let’s talk about dollars for arts 

and culture and heritage, shall we? 

 

The total of the NDP spend in their last four years for all of 

these activities, $60.49 million. Our total for our first four-year 

term, $81.4 million. Mr. Speaker, that’s an increase of 20. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Speaker, everybody’s enthusiastic about the spending on 

this side of the gallery, Mr. Speaker. The increase amounts to 

$20.9 million. Mr. Speaker, that’s a 35 per cent increase in four 

short years. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Plans for Forestry Operations 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, late last year, forest planners 

were planning cuts near Big River which are right next to their 

ski hill and other areas of local significance. This created 

uncertainty and confusion with local residents, trappers, and 

tourism operators because the minister is required to conduct a 

public review before any cutting is approved, which had not 

happened. Cutting plans are currently being done annually. The 

community is anxiously waiting for the required long-term 

planning process to be finally put in place for the Prince Albert 

Forest Management Agreement. 

 

To the minister: can he reassure the people of Big River that the 

ministry will take their concerns into account while reviewing 

and approving these plans? And can he assure us proper plans 

are in place before the logging starts? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With respect to 

Big River, we were very pleased a number of months ago to 

announce the restarting the facility after a lot of work with the 

forestry companies and First Nations leaders in the area to 

restart the facility. It’s going to be started up sometime soon. 

They have submitted a plan with respect to logging operations. 

Of course, the ministry will be taking a very serious look at it to 

ensure that it meets the environmental standards as well as 

logging standards that are appropriate for the area. No plan has 

been determined at this point in time, I understand, but we’ll be 

certainly awaiting the plan that’s put forward and assessing it 

accordingly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, as a result of the concerns raised 

by the local municipal authorities and citizens, a meeting was 

finally held last week in Big River with foresters and 

government officials. I understand that the meeting was 

attended by 120 people who were mostly upset and frustrated 

with the come-and-go format of the consultation and the poor 

responses they were given, both by forest company reps as well 

as government officials. The companies themselves were 

apparently shocked by the turnout and the level of unhappiness 

expressed. 

 

There’s absolutely no direction in the legislation or regulations 

as to what the ministry will do with these concerns. The local 

people are left holding their breath. To the minister: what does 

the ministry intend to do next? How will he deal with these 

legitimate concerns of the citizens and when will he let them 

know? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 



936 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2012 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, as always is the case, forestry 

companies submit a plan in terms of their forestry activities that 

they are planning in the upcoming year. The ministry takes a 

very serious look at it and determines whether it meets the 

requirements in the Act. Of course that will be the case in this 

situation as well. 

 

I think the important thing to note is, is under the NDP the 

facility closed. Under this administration, the facility reopens 

and hires people back in the local area, increasing the amount 

of investment in a dramatic fashion. It’s good, clearly, for the 

area. It’s probably the reason why we see the member elected 

on this side again from the area. And I think it’s very important 

to note that it is a facility that will create employment and 

investment in the area and it will be done with a forestry plan in 

mind. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Funding for Student Housing Project at 

the University of Regina 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, along with the member from Regina Douglas Park, I 

had the pleasure of participating in an event this morning at the 

University of Regina where an announcement was made that 

the Government of Saskatchewan, under the leadership of many 

people on this side, people who are connected to the 

community, as well as people connected to the campus, that our 

government’s going to provide $1 million through this budget 

cycle, the 2012-13 budget, for the initial planning of a new 

student housing project at the University of Regina. The 

proposed project includes a student housing complex, child care 

facilities, and other amenities including underground parking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government is aware that our strong provincial 

economy is having an impact on the availability of student 

housing. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, over the course of our 

first four years in office, Mr. Speaker, we’ve increased funding 

for student housing by more than 3,000 per cent — 3,000 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker. What that means in tangible terms, Mr. 

Speaker, is that there are more than 1,000 new beds now 

available for students. And the announcement today 

demonstrates that we continue on this path for progress. 

 

What this facility will mean, Mr. Speaker, is that more students 

at the University of Regina, where enrolments are on the rise, 

Mr. Speaker, are going to be able to focus more of their 

attention on their studies, ultimately being more successful in 

their studies and therefore more successful in their pursuit of a 

career right here in Saskatchewan where today there are more 

than 12,000 jobs open and available and we have the lowest 

unemployment rate in the country. 

 

Our government also understands and has a solid track record 

regarding the significance of child care. And that’s why we 

continue to make sure that there are investments under way, in 

this case looking at up to 90 seats within this new child care 

facility, Mr. Speaker. We know that’s going to help out the 

campus community, but we also know it’s going to serve to 

help out the broader community in and around Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is just one more example of our overall efforts 

to invest in and support post-secondary education. What we’ve 

done is ensure that we have invested more than $3.5 billion, an 

all-time record, in post-secondary education here in 

Saskatchewan over the course of five years, Mr. Speaker. We 

know there’s more to do. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to do 

that with our partners at the University of Regina as well as 

private sector partners that are going to be involved in this 

initiative. I am very, very pleased to be able to announce this 

investment that’s under way, and we just made that 

announcement with our partners today. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I would like to 

begin by thanking the minister for providing his remarks earlier 

on in the day. I appreciate those being sent across. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that issues of housing, issues of child 

care are most certainly important for the entire province. We 

know that is the case on our university campuses. And we know 

that the students at the U of R [University of Regina] and the 

administration have been calling for this project, and so it is 

good to see that steps are being made. 

 

I note, Mr. Speaker, this is funding that has been provided now 

for planning. And I most certainly will be interested in the plans 

that are coming forward, especially around the issues of cost, 

but issues of how it will be paid for and what are the debt 

implications for either the university or the province. We’ve 

seen some recent developments especially as it relates to the 

Health Sciences building at the U of S, Mr. Speaker, where it’s 

not totally clear from the minister how the debt will be handled 

in the years to come. 

 

So those will be some of the questions that I’ll have as we see 

the plans develop on this project, and I once again thank the 

minister for sending his remarks across earlier. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Minister of Health on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To make a 

personal statement with leave. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has asked for leave to 

make a personal statement. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

Withdrawal of Comment 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end 

of one of my answers during question period, I referred to a 

commonly used metaphor, Mr. Speaker, that was probably 

inappropriate. I would apologize and ask to withdraw that 



April 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 937 

remark. 

 

The Speaker: — I would caution members on both sides to 

choose their words carefully and cautiously as all members of 

this Assembly are deemed to be hon. members. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 36 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 36 — The 

Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

very pleased to stand in the Assembly today and to offer my 

comments on the plan that this government has in relation to 

adding three more MLAs to the Assembly. And they’re doing 

this through this particular Bill which is called The 

Constituency Boundaries Act, Mr. Speaker. And I wanted to 

explain a bit to folks that may be watching this particular 

exercise on television, or maybe they’re looking through 

Hansard, that clearly from our perspective this particular Bill 

offers nothing but three more MLAs to the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think in general terms, the people of Saskatchewan do 

not want three more politicians when you see services being cut 

and we see programs being axed and when you see the amount 

of cuts in general to the many things that people in 

Saskatchewan treasure, Mr. Speaker. Whether it’s the arts, 

whether it’s the whole notion around the film and tax credit, 

these are some of the things that are really important to the 

people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And what this particular 

Bill does, Mr. Speaker, as you would know, is that it really 

redraws the boundaries throughout Saskatchewan to 

accommodate what the Sask Party want. And they want three 

more seats and therefore three more MLAs. 

 

Now we have stood up in the Assembly before, certainly 

myself, and I’ve offered our initial comments, Mr. Speaker, on 

how we perceive the purpose and the meaning of this particular 

Bill. And there’s no question in my mind, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve 

said in previous statements, that if there is improved services, if 

there’s greater opportunity for staff increases and so on and so 

forth, then in theory then obviously you would look at the 

option of adding more MLAs. 

 

Now we’re seeing, Mr. Speaker, that this is clearly not the case. 

This Saskatchewan Party government has cut programs. They 

have cut services. They have done a tremendous amount of 

harm to various sectors through the province and, Mr. Speaker, 

their answer to that particular group of people or those people 

in general is that we don’t value your work because we want to 

have more MLAs. 

 

And I look to again to Hansard and to a number of other 

information that we’ve received on this particular Bill and, Mr. 

Speaker, nowhere does it say in their platform, nor have they 

said it any of their speeches when they ran in these elections, 

that hey, one of the biggest things we want to do is we want to 

increase the amount of politicians we have throughout our 

province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you one thing for certain: that the 

people of Saskatchewan don’t want more politicians. They want 

to make sure that they have more workers to clear the roads. 

They want to have more, make sure they have more workers 

front line to battle against HIV. They want to make sure that 

they have more opportunities to protect the environment. And 

the list goes on as to what is much more important to the people 

of Saskatchewan as opposed to having more MLAs. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I find it absurd in many ways that they 

would bring some of these arguments forward because 

obviously it wasn’t part of their election platform. And 

certainly now they’re beginning to roll out this agenda of theirs 

where you not only have cuts, but obviously you’re going to 

start going after the Crown corporations, and then you’re going 

to start going after organized labour. And we’re going to do 

something that the people of Saskatchewan want: we’re going 

to add more politicians to the payroll that the taxpayers 

obviously are paying. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let us make it very clear that from our 

perspective as New Democrats, we don’t in any way, shape, or 

form support the notion of having three more politicians. That 

is not what the plan is, Mr. Speaker. When you see the amount 

of cuts that these guys have done, they have not kept up with 

the opportunity to provide services, Mr. Speaker. They have 

slashed those services. And every single one of my comments, 

Mr. Speaker, when we initially spoke to this Bill, is we said, if 

in relevance they have more services and they have more 

programs, then that opportunity may exist, Mr. Speaker. But 

what we’ve seen is they’ve done totally opposite, Mr. Speaker, 

totally opposite. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Now I hear some of the chirping from some of the MLAs 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. And one of the points I would raise with 

them, that if they wish, one of the challenge I want to present 

today is that, let’s have a plebiscite. Let’s go back to the people 

of Saskatchewan. Let’s have a binding plebiscite on this 

particular Bill and say, do the people of Saskatchewan want to 

see more politicians in this Assembly? And I don’t hear very 

many voices chattering any more, Mr. Speaker. You know 

why? Because the people of Saskatchewan would give them a 

resounding absolutely not. They would say absolutely not. They 

don’t want more politicians, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So all of a sudden, the Sask Party benches are pretty quiet 

because they’re afraid of a plebiscite. And that plebiscite would 

tell them, we don’t want more MLAs as proposed in this 

particular Bill, Mr. Speaker. We want more front-line workers, 

as we initially pointed out, to do the things that the people of 

Saskatchewan wanted and that is to protect our interests in the 



938 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2012 

long term and build a growing, sustainable economy and a great 

province that is inclusive of all people when it comes to sharing 

benefits and making sure everybody’s needs are met. 

 

So again as I pointed out at the outset, that if the Sask Party is 

so solid in their beliefs that they need three more MLAs, then I 

challenge them today to have a plebiscite, a public vote for the 

people of Saskatchewan to see if they support that notion. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s very quiet over there. It’s very quiet because I 

think the message is getting to them, Mr. Speaker, that the 

people of Saskatchewan are saying to them: where in your 

election document, where in your platform, where when you 

came to knock on my door did you tell us you wanted to add 

more MLAs, that you wanted more politicians at millions of 

dollars more, over time, and where was that that you told us? 

And, Mr. Speaker, it was very, very quiet. 

 

So I’ll say it again the third time to the Assembly and to the 

Sask Party and government, to the Minister of Justice, let us 

have — the person that is proposing this Bill — let us have a 

public vote, a plebiscite, if you will. If the people of 

Saskatchewan want three more MLAs, let’s have a binding 

plebiscite where if they say, absolutely not, then you take this 

Bill and you put where it should be. And that’s in the shredder 

or a garbage can, Mr. Speaker. Because people know this is not 

what the Sask Party were proposing when they ran, and there’s 

nowhere in their platform did they mention they want to have 

three more MLAs. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that what they’ve done, Mr. 

Speaker, was they started cutting services. They started cutting 

front-line staff. They started reducing everything that’s 

important to the people of Saskatchewan, like the film and tax 

employment credit, like northern forest fire protection workers, 

and like the highway workers. They haven’t filled those 

positions. All these things, Mr. Speaker, are important to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And what the Sask Party done was they cut all those programs. 

And they hailed this particular Bill as their bellwether Bill, 

saying look, we want to get more politicians. And the people of 

Saskatchewan feel betrayed. And they’re starting to feel angry 

about this notion because that money could’ve been used better 

elsewhere. And certainly the people of Saskatchewan have been 

telling not only us as MLAs but the Sask Party MLAs as well. 

 

So as I say it here today in this Assembly and I tell them right 

in front of the entire Sask Party caucus, come on, let’s have a 

public vote on this. Let’s have a plebiscite to see if your 

constituents wanted this. Let’s have a binding plebiscite. Let’s 

not be afraid to go back to the people of Saskatchewan and say 

to them, did you vote for this? Did you accept this? Did you 

want this? Tell us yes or no. Make the question very clear. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we need to look at some of the arguments 

that some of the media have also joined us in this debate. And 

they point out some of the challenges behind why they can’t 

defend what the Sask Party is trying to do. And you look at 

some of the examples. For example in Saskatchewan, we have 

an average of 17,000 voters per constituency or per riding. In 

Manitoba, in northern Manitoba, they have 21,000 voters for 

each of the ridings. In Alberta they have 43,000 voters per 

riding, and yet British Columbia has 51,000 voters per riding, 

Mr. Speaker. And then you look at Ontario which has 120,000 

voters per riding, Mr. Speaker. So the logic behind the Sask 

Party’s quest for more politicians, it’s just totally beyond the 

average person, Mr. Speaker. They’re trying to figure, what is 

up with that? What is the game plan there, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And again as I pointed out, these numbers certainly are 

numbers that the media have presented to the public, and the 

public is reading all this information. And I know that the Sask 

Party MLAs are getting that pressure because nowhere in their 

document and nowhere, as I mentioned, when they were 

knocking on doors, did they say, hey, guess what? As a 

footnote on your visit, on this visit, I’m going to tell you we’re 

going to have a . . . propose a Bill that will require us to hire 

more politicians. 

 

Imagine the voters now, Mr. Speaker, that feel betrayed 

because you see front-line staff members being cut. You see all 

these programs that offer significant value to the people of 

Saskatchewan — they’re being cut, Mr. Speaker. There’s 

questions on the integrity of the budget, everything from the 

debt at the U of S and now for the crime Bill that the federal 

conservatives are putting in place that’s going to cost the 

provincial government money. Then you begin to wonder about 

the competency of this particular government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Are we going back to the days of deficits, Mr. Speaker? And 

how you do that is you begin to hide that debt in various forms 

and various locations. And all of a sudden the people of 

Saskatchewan will be left holding the bag several years from 

now. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen that act before. We’ve seen 

this movie. And what the people of Saskatchewan don’t want is 

a rerun of that particular shameful history where the people of 

Saskatchewan were saddled with a $15.5 billion debt a number 

of years ago. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I go back to these numbers and I think these 

numbers are really, really telling in terms of what this 

government is planning to do in their political quest to add three 

more MLAs. And I go back to these numbers. I think it’s really 

important that people remember these numbers. Again 

Saskatchewan has 17,000 voters per area or per riding. And you 

go back to Manitoba, they have 21,000 people per riding, and 

again to Alberta, they have 43,000. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 

what’s important is that the 43,000 in Alberta is more than 

almost double of what we have in Saskatchewan. And yet they 

don’t ask for MLAs in Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then you go on to places again as I pointed out, to Ontario 

that has 120,000 voters per riding compared to Saskatchewan’s 

17,000 voters, Mr. Speaker. So Ontario has 120,000 voters per 

riding. We have 17,000 voters per riding, Mr. Speaker, and this 

Bill says, okay, well based on that information, we need three 

more MLAs. We need more politicians in the province. To heck 

with the front-line workers. That’s what these guys are saying. 

To heck with the people that help us protect the environment, 

people that pave or keep our streets safe and clean and clear, the 

people that keep our communities safe. All these resources, Mr. 

Speaker, are really important to the people of Saskatchewan. I 

don’t know how many more ways I can tell you that this is 

really, really key to some of the arguments. And the points that 

we’re hearing throughout Saskatchewan is that people think 

that this is a huge waste of money and that the Saskatchewan 



April 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 939 

Party got it totally wrong. They got it totally wrong when they 

proposed a Bill of this sort, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what I want to point out as well is that we see there is 

always a devious presentation that . . . or a devious thought that 

I have when I hear something about when the Saskatchewan 

Party talks about democracy. Mr. Speaker, we have seen 

evidence time and time again of how they’re trying to thwart 

the ability for people to vote, that they’re trying to suppress the 

opportunities for many people to participate in the democratic 

process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that democracy was won and hard fought by our veterans, 

Mr. Speaker. That democracy and the right to have a free vote 

was afforded to us by our veterans, the many people that fought 

in World War I, World War II, the Korean conflict. The list 

goes on, Mr. Speaker, of the thousands of people that sacrificed 

their lives and their freedom to go and do one thing, and that is 

to protect Canada and the democracy that we enjoy. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s when I begin to get really angry and I 

get very upset as an MLA sitting in this Assembly, because I’ve 

spoken earlier in my career about the values that I learned from 

my father who was a World War II veteran. And, Mr. Speaker, 

he really, really loved this country and he was very, very proud 

of his service. And, Mr. Speaker, he told us every day of some 

of the challenges that he had as a young man going overseas to 

fight for liberty and for freedom, Mr. Speaker. Those are some 

of his words, you know, in terms of the sacrifice and the 

admiration he’s had for his fellow troops and the fact that he’s 

seen people out there that were very . . . he was very close to 

and they died on the battlefield. He spoke highly of his sergeant 

— I don’t have the sergeant’s name — but of how he admired 

that sergeant, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you listen to some of the stories of the other veterans in the 

community of Ile-a-la-Crosse and the communities of Beauval, 

of Buffalo Narrows, you know, where these veterans spoke 

with great pain at times, certainly, but with great memories of 

the people that they served with. And they’re all there to do one 

thing, and that was to promote democracy and to promote 

freedom for their country. And they paid many times over, Mr. 

Speaker, with their lives, with their challenges, with their health 

problems as they aged with some of the challenges that they 

went through in the war. And, Mr. Speaker, what they clearly 

told us is that that’s something that we need to appreciate more. 

That was the resounding message. 

 

And I go to a lot of veterans’ day activities, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re a great opportunity for us to honour our soldiers, our 

veterans, and of course all those people that served in the 

military. And when I come to the Assembly today and I see 

some of the activity happening around this particular Assembly 

with that government, I begin to question the motivation behind 

all that work being done by the many veterans in our country as 

to why they would do certain things in certain fashions to 

thwart democracy, Mr. Speaker, to thwart the democratic rights 

of people to come out and express their willingness to support 

one party over another, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we within the NDP certainly support the whole notion of 

having a booming economy, of having people moving to 

Saskatchewan, of building a strong, prosperous future, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s exactly some of the things that we spoke of and 

will continue speaking of, Mr. Speaker. We want to welcome 

the business community. We want to welcome the working 

families and the men and women that can really help build this 

province. And, Mr. Speaker, a big part, a big part of that is the 

youth and the children because they are going to be the promise 

of tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I spoke about my father who was a veteran . . . And this Bill 

also excludes anybody under 18 in doing their plan and 

assessing of where these constituencies go, Mr. Speaker. They 

are excluding those young people, Mr. Speaker, that could add 

so much. So in one fell swoop, the Saskatchewan Party 

excluded my grandchildren, and will exclude many other 

people’s children throughout the province. I don’t have any 

children under the age of 18. But this Saskatchewan Party 

government said, you don’t count in this assessment because 

we’re going to determine where the constituencies are. And 

unlike any other, the historical precedence here in the province 

of Saskatchewan, we’re going to now exclude you guys for the 

first time. So anybody under 18 years of age no longer qualify 

as citizens under this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker. So they’re 

not going to include anybody under 18. 

 

So not only have they thwarted democracy, Mr. Speaker, 

they’re putting something in place that the people of 

Saskatchewan don’t want in this Bill. And I want to go on the 

other point of how they’ve excluded many, many young people 

in doing their population assessment as to where these 

constituencies go. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that the young people in 

the province of Saskatchewan, First Nations, Métis, 

non-Aboriginal people, people of all kinds of ethnic 

backgrounds and from different cultures and different countries, 

you know, they all make up what Saskatchewan is. I think the 

provincial motto is, “from many peoples, strength.” And the 

last time I looked under a dictionary, “people” also included 

youth and children, Mr. Speaker. They also included youth and 

children. And this particular government has said, no, we’re not 

going to include them. And of course, you know, their 

argument is, of course, we value them. 

 

Well if you value them, you include them in the political 

process to determine which seats and how many seats we have 

in the province. You don’t exclude them, because they have to 

be part of the equation for the future of . . . the formula for the 

successful future of our province as a whole. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, I look at what is happening here and 

look at whether it’s the boundaries document that we’re 

speaking about today — the boundaries Bill — or whether it’s 

the voter ID [identification] Bill that was put in place earlier by 

this particular government. These are all plans and efforts to 

simply thwart democracy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’ve said it once and I’ll say it again, that I challenge any 

member across the way in the Saskatchewan Party caucus — 

including the Premier — that if he wants to have this issue 

moved forward, let’s have a public vote. Let’s have a plebiscite 

on this issue. Will he do that, Mr. Speaker? Will he agree to 



940 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2012 

having a plebiscite on whether the people of Saskatchewan 

really support this particular Bill that sees us increasing the 

number of seats in the Assembly, therefore the number of 

MLAs by three, thereby wasting millions and millions of 

dollars over the term of this government simply to have more 

politicians and less workers, Mr. Speaker? 

 

That is a crying shame when you see the action that they have 

done to hurt different organizations, to hurt different groups and 

workers and yet turn around and saying we’re going to replace 

all these quality people with more politicians, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s not what the people of Saskatchewan want. 

 

So again I point out in the document . . . and I want to do these 

numbers again, Mr. Speaker. I think these numbers are very 

telling, are very telling to the people of Saskatchewan. 

Saskatchewan has an average of 17,800 voters per riding. 

Manitoba has 21,200 people per riding. And you look at 

Ontario. They’ve got 51,765 voters per riding. Alberta has 

43,000 voters per riding, and of course Ontario, as I mentioned 

earlier, has the highest number. I got my numbers mixed up, but 

the highest number in the country is Ontario which has 120,000 

— 120,000 — voters per riding, Mr. Speaker, compared to 

Saskatchewan’s 17,000. And yet the Saskatchewan Party says, 

oh we need more politicians. Less workers, less front-line staff, 

less programs, less services, less opportunities for a number of 

different groups, but they’re going to give us more politicians. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would say again, I would say again, let’s 

have a plebiscite. Let’s have a plebiscite on this particular Bill 

where you would see three more MLAs added, three more 

politicians at the expense of many front-line working staff 

throughout the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again you can hear absolute silence from across the way 

because, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party knows, they 

know exactly what the problem is. The people of Saskatchewan 

don’t want this, this Bill through, that adds more politicians to 

the payroll and less workers and less programs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I spoke a bit about the young people being excluded in 

their assessment, and how they’re going to redraw these 

boundaries and add more MLAs. And I think that’s shameful, 

Mr. Speaker, because many parents — and there’s a lot of 

parents throughout our province, and grandparents and aunts 

and uncles — that encourage and foster a different kind of 

positive attitude within the younger generation. And yes, some 

of them may tell them, you know, for example you might want 

to look at politics in the future, or you might want to be part of 

the public policy process, or you might want to work for 

government. But until you’re 18 years of age, under the Sask 

Party game plan here, you don’t count. And I know that upsets 

a lot of parents and grandparents that say you have no right to 

do that. You come knock on my doorstep; you’re going to do 

this Electoral Boundaries Commission, and what you’re going 

to do is you’re going to exclude many of my children and my 

grandchildren in the process. And why in the heck didn’t you 

tell us that before the election, Mr. Speaker? 

 

I’ll tell you why they wouldn’t say that before the election — 

because they’d get a lot of doors slammed in their face. 

Because this is actually against democracy, against the many 

things that many people fought for over the years to bring that 

here to Saskatchewan. Now what happens, Mr. Speaker, is now 

it’s now being turned into a political game as opposed to the 

value of democracy. It’s now a political game for the 

Saskatchewan Party. 

 

And that’s what gets me so upset, Mr. Speaker, is that you see 

these kind of activities happening within the Sask Party on a 

continual basis. And I think the people of Saskatchewan are 

starting to get the message that these guys are going to 

manipulate, as much as they can, the political process for their 

own purposes. And that is shameful and that’s certainly a 

challenge to democracy and freethinking, Mr. Speaker. And we 

don’t expect the people of Saskatchewan to know this on the 

first few months. But they’ll certainly hear about this over the 

next few years, as I think the Saskatchewan Party MLAs are 

also hearing it now, and they’ll continue to hear it. 

 

So any Sask Party MLAs that go to any assemblies or any 

gathering or any meeting or any forum, I tell the people of 

Saskatchewan, approach them and ask them, we don’t 

remember you telling us you’re going to hire three more 

politicians there in the campaign. Why are you doing that to us 

now? That’s what I’ll ask the people of Saskatchewan right 

now to do, is to approach their MLAs, their Sask Party MLAs 

and say, why are you guys supporting this Bill? This Bill was 

not well thought out, and it is contrary to a lot of things that we 

believe is valued in a democratic and free world. And that, of 

course, is to stop the manipulation of a political process to 

better that particular party overall, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I find that some of the other activities that we see 

happening within the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, is that 

you look at all the arguments that we have made on this 

particular Bill, and yet when we hear the request, the request of 

us as opposition to have a public vote on this . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . The member from Kindersley keeps chirping 

from his seat. Will the member from Kindersley agree? Let’s 

have a public vote. Let’s have a plebiscite on this issue, and 

let’s have a binding plebiscite. If the people of Saskatchewan 

say no to you, sir, if they say no to you, then drop the Bill. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the member from Kindersley’s pretty quiet 

now. You know why, Mr. Speaker? Because the member from 

Kindersley knows that that plebiscite will be a very strong 

message delivered in that plebiscite saying, you guys got it 

wrong, and here’s the message that nobody wants more 

politicians. They want more front-line workers. They want 

more programs, and they want more fairness. And above all, 

they want accountability from all those Sask Party MLAs that 

were knocking on their doorstep asking for their vote last fall, 

and they didn’t tell them about this particular plan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The other part of the Act that I really get upset about, Mr. 

Speaker, is some of the activities that this particular 

government has undertaken. This Bill is one problem, but 

there’s other Bills, Mr. Speaker, as I’d spoken about earlier, 

where you have to have voter ID to go and vote, Mr. Speaker. 

You have to have a voter ID to go vote in these certain ridings. 

And I found that really, really, really surprising, coming from 

this government that’s supposed to be accountable and 

respectful to their people, Mr. Speaker. They are not. They are 

absolutely not because nowhere did we see in any of the 



April 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 941 

election where there were some major problems with people 

that have traditionally always voted in their particular area 

where they had to show ID. 

 

Many senior citizens walked to some of these polling stations, 

Mr. Speaker, they walked to some of these polling stations, and 

when they got there they said, hello, I want to vote. And they 

said, okay, we know who you are, but we can’t let you vote 

unless you have a photo ID of yourself. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

old people are saying, well I don’t have a driver’s license, or 

the people that obviously come from different backgrounds or 

may have moved to Saskatchewan, well we don’t have a photo 

ID right now. Well you can’t vote. Well, Mr. Speaker, that is 

absolutely silly. 

 

A declaration is there for people to sign and to declare that 

they’re eligible to vote at that station, Mr. Speaker. And many 

of those people that have worked in these elections, Mr. 

Speaker, many of these people that have worked at these 

elections, they’ve worked there for a long time, and they’ve 

worked through many elections, so they know generally which 

people are allowed to vote. And if they have any questions, they 

ask for information. They’re asked to sign a form, and generally 

they are allowed to vote. But these guys don’t want that to 

happen. They don’t want the free vote to occur, Mr. Speaker. 

And that was a shameful attack I think on a number of different 

groups, and I think it’s areas especially in the Aboriginal 

community, Mr. Speaker. I think there was some major, major 

mistakes made in that regard. 

 

And one of the examples I would use, Mr. Speaker, is that one 

time we were pushing very hard. I think the member from 

Cumberland was arguing very adamantly that there be a system 

allowed where a band administrator or a band-appointed person 

could sit at the voting station, and they can actually confirm if 

that member is a member of their band and is allowed to vote 

without having a photo ID, without having a photo ID. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I think that due to the pressure from some of the 

First Nations communities that the government said, yes, I 

think that’s an acceptable process. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, a lot of the other groups, like the Métis, 

wanted a similar process where somebody sat in the hall, and 

they could verify for hundreds of people that they’re from the 

community, they’ve lived there, and that that they’re allowed to 

vote at that particular poll, Mr. Speaker. That was not afforded 

to the Métis communities, and it was really stringently 

discouraged over process to the First Nations as well. 

 

So the First Nations and Métis people were trying to fight back 

to let their people vote, Mr. Speaker. But all these rules and 

regulations and barriers that this particular government put in 

front of them was intended to do one thing. And it worked very 

well when people got discouraged, walked out of the hall and 

said, well I’m not going vote. I’m not going to go back home 

and find my ID to come back and vote, and you know who I 

am, and so on and so forth. 

 

And one of the things that’s really important, Mr. Speaker, is 

that when I went to vote in Ile-a-la-Crosse, Mr. Speaker, I 

walked into the polling station, and the lady that was at the 

front there said, well hi, Buckley, how are you? I said I’m fine. 

I came here to vote. Well, I need to see your ID. I said well — 

because I had mentioned this before in the Assembly — well I 

am Buckley. I’m here to vote. I’m the candidate. No, no. I’m 

sorry, we can’t give you a ballot unless we see your ID. We 

can’t give you a ballot unless you have your ID. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s got to be the silliest notion I’ve ever 

heard in a free democratic world of our country of Canada. Got 

to be absolutely silly. And the reason why they’ve done that, 

Mr. Speaker — the question was asked, why did you do that? 

— they said, oh there was some discrepancies. That was what 

the Premier said. Well we asked, what discrepancies? Can you 

explain to us what discrepancies? Oh there are these 

discrepancies, and that was it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, clearly it runs right to the top in terms of what 

is happening in terms of voter suppression. And part of the 

voter suppression tactics is to insist on photo ID from different 

groups and organizations that have a difficult time providing 

that. And that includes the elders. That includes many people 

that don’t have licenses. That includes people that have 

disabilities that walk a long way. They aren’t going to come 

back because it takes a lot of work to get to these polling 

stations. And this government was very effective at suppressing 

those particular votes. 

 

And to me, Mr. Speaker, that is a great disservice to the people 

and the women and men and many other people that sacrificed 

their lives to bring democracy to the country called Canada, Mr. 

Speaker. We fought against this thing in different world wars, 

Mr. Speaker, and we’re very proud of some of the service of 

some of our elders and some of the people in our community. 

And in this fashion, in this fashion, to be treated like that by 

this government in suppressing our vote and discouraging the 

people from coming out and expressing who they wish to 

support, I think is very, very shameful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now you add that, Mr. Speaker, you add that to a different type 

of treatment that different groups got from this particular 

government, and now you throw in this whole new notion of 

having three more MLAs when nobody else wanted it. So, Mr. 

Speaker, we see the agenda of the Saskatchewan Party at work. 

 

And I ask the question today if they would agree to a public 

vote, a plebiscite on this particular issue, and not a peep from 

the members across the way — not one peep. You know why, 

Mr. Speaker? Because the people of Saskatchewan would give 

them a resounding no. You didn’t bring that forward during the 

election. You have no right to bring it forward after the 

election. And we know on this side, it’s all about manipulation 

of the political process. We know what they’re up to, Mr. 

Speaker. We know what they’re up to, Mr. Speaker . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . And that member will yap from his 

chair as well. Why doesn’t he stand up and say yes? Say yes. 

Say yes to it. Say yes. Say you’ll accept the challenge. Say 

you’ll accept the challenge. 

 

And all of a sudden they’re pretty quiet, Mr. Speaker. They will 

not accept the challenge of having a public vote, Mr. Speaker. 

They sink in their chairs, and they’re going to sit back and 

watch this thing unfold. And I think that’s shameful, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re going to watch it unfold when they know that 

the people that helped get them to where they’re at did not 

support this notion. They know it, and we know it, Mr. Speaker. 



942 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2012 

And that’s why today, when we stand up and challenge them to 

a public vote, a plebiscite, a binding plebiscite, they’re all very 

quiet, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the reason why is I don’t think half of them support this 

Bill at all. But, Mr. Speaker, they’re told what to do. They’re 

told when to say what they have to say, and that’s it. So I would 

say to them today, if the backbench hasn’t got no backbone, 

then don’t be yelling across the way on this particular Bill with 

advice for us in the opposition because quite frankly those 

words ring hollow, and there’s no truth to them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:00] 

 

So again I ask the question: a public plebiscite, will you accept 

that challenge on this particular Bill that sees us adding more 

MLAs? Do I hear a yes over there, Mr. Speaker? Do I hear a 

yes over there, Mr. Speaker? Pretty quiet over there, Mr. 

Speaker, pretty quiet because, Mr. Speaker, they know that this 

Bill is not what the people of Saskatchewan value, what the 

people of Saskatchewan want. And this is something that the 

people of Saskatchewan wouldn’t mind having a vote on or a 

say on in terms of whether they support this or not. 

 

And that’s why, from my perspective, I support the notion of 

having a plebiscite, a binding plebiscite to say, what do you 

guys think? You want this Bill that excludes our children from 

being counted? You want this Bill that adds more politicians 

and less front-line workers and programs? And, Mr. Speaker, 

what the Saskatchewan Party’s afraid of is they’ll be told, 

absolutely not. That was the wrong thing to do, and we’re quite 

frankly going to tell you that, and we’ll do it by way of a 

binding vote called a plebiscite. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they won’t accept that. They won’t accept 

that challenge today. And that’s the important point to note on 

this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker. And that goes to my argument 

and my point that this is an affront to democracy, that they’re 

not allowing the democratic process to unfold, and to go back 

to being accountable to their constituents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s why we don’t in the opposition support this Bill in 

any way, shape, or form, Mr. Speaker, in any way, shape, or 

form, when you’re seeing them doing exactly opposite when it 

comes to cutting services and cutting programs that were 

essential to many people and certainly impacted many people’s 

lives and livelihood, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I go back, and I want to do it one more time. I think it’s 

important for people of Saskatchewan to hear these numbers 

again. These numbers are important. Saskatchewan has an 

average of 17,000 voters per riding. Manitoba has 21,000 voters 

per riding. Alberta has 43,000 voters per riding. BC has 51,000 

voters per riding. And of course Ontario has 120,000 voters per 

riding. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, what happened when this Bill was 

introduced? I think they brought up, Nova Scotia’s done this. 

That was what they compared Saskatchewan to in terms of 

population and distribution of seats. They said, oh sorry to tell 

you guys, but we’re doing this because Nova Scotia’s done this. 

And on one hand, they want to be partners with BC and 

Alberta, and yet on the other hand, when it comes to doing this 

seat analysis and determining how many MLAs we need, oh, 

we’re going to go all the way to the East Coast there, and oh, 

there’s Nova Scotia here. This is how they do it. 

 

And that’s part of the silliness of this Bill, Mr. Speaker. The 

absolute silliness of this particular Bill is that (a) they never 

asked the people of Saskatchewan if they wanted this, and 

they’re afraid of a public vote on this. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, 

they’re also trying to thwart democracy in many ways. And I 

attach the other Bills to this particular Bill because they all do 

the same thing in suppressing the vote from certain particular 

groups. And these groups know who they are. And I also point 

out that when they do the comparative analysis of which other 

jurisdictions do this, they’ve got to go all the way down to the 

East Coast of Canada to find some other province that does this. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate, but that’s exactly what the 

Saskatchewan Party’s about. 

 

Our party warns the people of Saskatchewan what would 

happen, Mr. Speaker, and a lot of our projections are coming 

true. And people are beginning to see the error of their ways in 

terms of believing these guys were going to do something 

different. Mr. Speaker, I think they betrayed that trust. And 

that’s why I think that the vote should go back to the people of 

Saskatchewan and tell them, do you want more politicians at 

the cost of millions of dollars more — yes or no? Make it very 

clear. Yes or no? And I can almost guess, Mr. Speaker, that the 

vote would come back 99.999 per cent in favour of not having 

more politicians. You might get 49 votes over there for it, but 

that’ll be the 0.001 that would be supportive of that, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s shameful. That’s absolutely shameful. 

 

So the headlines from the media, the headlines that are 

screaming across the province: “Do we really need three more 

MLAs?” And I think the resounding answer is no, Mr. Speaker. 

The resounding answer is no. And, Mr. Speaker, as long as 

some of the members from across the way won’t accept the 

challenge, I say to them, that’s another example of how they’re 

thwarting democracy. That’s another example that we on this 

side of the Assembly look for. And, Mr. Speaker, when it 

comes to that particular aspect of making sure, of making sure 

that the people of Saskatchewan have the opportunity to vote on 

these particular Bills, these guys say no to that. And that’s why 

it’s very quiet over there, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll tell you, I’d be 

very quiet too if I’d done something totally different than the 

people of Saskatchewan asked during the election campaign 

and while I was knocking on their doors. 

 

Now again the question we have, the headline that’s screaming 

across Saskatchewan: “Do we really need three more MLAs?” 

And the answer is no. And if you don’t believe it, let’s have a 

public vote. Let’s have a binding plebiscite, Mr. Speaker. Let’s 

have a binding plebiscite and to see if the people of 

Saskatchewan want that. And if the people of Saskatchewan 

say, yes, we want that, Mr. Speaker, then guess what? We 

accept what they’re saying. But the only problem we have is the 

Saskatchewan Party will not accept that challenge, Mr. Speaker. 

They will not accept that challenge. 

 

And the challenge was made very clear. It was made on 

numerous occasions. It was quite, I think, straightforward and, 

Mr. Speaker, all we were met with is silence. And you know 

why, Mr. Speaker? Because it supports our notion that they are 



April 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 943 

here to thwart democracy and manipulate the process for their 

own political benefit. And that is a great, great challenge to 

democracy. 

 

And their names will live in infamy, Mr. Speaker, because 

history will be judging us, not each other. History will judge 

who done what, when, and where. And I pray that those names 

are just really big in terms of who’s responsible. And I think, in 

general, history will say, well this occurred during this time and 

these were the people that were in charge of that particular 

exercise, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as we get older and as we age, and one thing I’m going to 

say when I’m sitting . . . I hope I’m sitting around when I’m 75, 

80 years old, and I could tell my grandkids and other people, 

no, we didn’t try and suppress votes. No, we didn’t try add 

more seats for political purposes. And no, we didn’t try and 

exclude certain groups from the process, Mr. Speaker; we 

didn’t do any of that. But those guys will have a tough act or 

they’ll have a tough way of explaining how they were 

responsible putting these kind of Bills forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’ll say again, the answer we’re getting from the people of 

Saskatchewan, no way. They don’t want more politicians. No 

way do they want more politicians, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 

what this Bill does. They’re saying, we don’t want more 

politicians. Now try and get it through the Sask Party’s head. 

They don’t want more politicians, so pull this Bill and put it in 

the garbage can where it belongs, Mr. Speaker. Or better yet, 

put it in a shredder where it’ll never be pieced together again 

for eternity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would point out again that this is one of the reasons why, 

from our perspective as an opposition caucus, we look at this 

and we make reference to this thing on numerous occasions. 

Because people of Saskatchewan are beginning to realize and 

they’re saying one thing, that the trust that they gave a lot of 

MLAs on that side has been betrayed by this Bill that’s asking 

for more politicians, less workers, and less programs, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And that’s why I think it’s important that people in 

Saskatchewan know that the Sask Party put this in place. The 

NDP are opposing this and we would ask for your support, in 

not only writing letters or calling for a public vote on this, 

calling for a plebiscite, but to also talk to the Sask Party MLAs 

at their next function or their next walk to you. Or if they send 

you one of those householders — you know, have any 

comments? — just put, we don’t more MLAs. I think maybe 

they’ll get the message from you and if they don’t, then come 

2015, you can send them a good message, Mr. Speaker, a 

message that says, democracy is something that we cannot mess 

with, we cannot manipulate, nor can we try and gerrymander 

for our own purposes. That is not what is proper and that’s why 

I’m encouraging the media to continue focusing on this 

particular issue. 

 

And it’s going to be with a great amount of scrutiny, Mr. 

Speaker, to see what the next level of what this Bill is going to 

do. We’re going to look at who they appoint, Mr. Speaker, and 

whether there’s any connection there; how they appoint, if 

there’s a fairness and if there’s a neutrality to all the people that 

they appoint. We’re going to look at that aspect as well, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s the next round of fights that this caucus is 

going to undertake. 

 

And the first round of course is to challenge the Sask Party 

government right to the top, the Premier and the cabinet 

ministers and the backbenchers. Tell them right now, the 

challenge is to have a public vote. Let’s have a plebiscite on 

this and see if people of Saskatchewan want it. And I can tell 

you right now the answer will be a resounding no. And that’s 

why they won’t do it, Mr. Speaker, and they won’t do that 

plebiscite at their own peril because the people of 

Saskatchewan don’t like this Bill at all. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

rejoin the debate on Bill No. 36, An Act to amend The 

Constituency Boundaries Act, 1993. And I have to say my 

colleague from Athabasca raised some very interesting ideas 

about a plebiscite because clearly these issues were not brought 

up in the election. And we all knew, we all knew the census 

was coming. And we knew that the boundaries, The 

Constituency Boundaries Act would have to be revisited, but we 

never anticipated and nobody thought they’d be seeing the 

addition of three more MLAs. And actually nobody has actually 

raised this. And the government has failed, I think 

resoundingly, to make the case for why we should have three 

more MLAs. 

 

We know the population is growing and we all think that’s a 

wonderful, wonderful thing, and people are coming to 

Saskatchewan because this is the place where the economy is 

doing very well. And we think this is wonderful. But what we 

want to see and what people are thinking they would prefer to 

see spent with the money that’s going to be going to these three 

MLAs, by which the government’s own people are saying will 

cost some 240, $250,000 a year each — so that’s easily millions 

of dollars over their first term — people think they can see a 

better use of this money, clearly a better use of this money. And 

so, Mr. Speaker, we have some real concerns. We have some 

real concerns about this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have seen this before where the government has . . . You 

know, and they take a lot of pride. They say that they keep their 

promises. But that’s one thing. But then when they don’t say 

anything, and then people vote for . . . I mean this happens. 

Sometimes you vote for a party, and then all of a sudden they 

start to do other things that you never thought would happen, 

you never thought would happen. Because I think most voters 

use, as a rule of thumb, common sense. They use common 

sense as a way to measure, who should we vote for? And the 

common sense rule is people make a list of promises, pledges, 

commitments to what they will keep when they are elected. 

 

And this government has made a big deal, the Sask Party has 

made a big deal for many years now, and even going back prior 

to 2007, that they would be transparent and accountable, both 

transparent and accountable. And I don’t know what’s being 

transparent in this because nobody mentioned anything about 

three more politicians, and nobody mentioned anything about 

the millions of dollars it would cost. And nobody mentioned the 

fact that young people, younger than 18, would not be taken 

into account when drawing the boundaries of the new 



944 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2012 

constituencies. 

 

And some people might say, well that’s just a thing that we 

want to do. Well it’s a little bit more ethical, more important 

than just a shrug of the shoulders. I think this is a change that, 

as my colleagues talked about, that we should have a plebiscite. 

Many other provinces, when they’re considering this kind of 

change, would at least consult with the public. We know this 

happened in British Columbia when, just a few years ago, they 

were considering whether or not they should raise the number 

of MLAs they have. And they went through it because their 

population is also growing and they thought . . . And they have 

many more constituents than we do per riding. They thought 

they should ask that question. But clearly the answer 

resoundingly was no, we think that we should keep it the same. 

So the very least BC did was they had a consultation process. 

 

There is nothing here about a consultation process. There’s no 

choice going to be made about how many MLAs there are 

going to be. That will be the fact. The only thing this 

government or the commission that will go out will be 

consulting about is the size of the riding, the makeup of the 

riding. We will know how many MLAs there will be when this 

Bill is passed. And I think that’s very unfortunate. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Now I’ve said that this seems to be the track record for this 

government. You know, I think back to the last term of the 

government when . . . after it was elected in 2007. I just want to 

highlight four things that nobody had any idea were going to 

take place. But clearly this government had its mind set, and 

people were clearly surprised. 

 

One was Station 20 West in my own riding. Right after the 

election in 2007, this government pulled its funding. That 

caught everybody by surprise, caught everybody by surprise 

because we all thought this was a good idea. And in fact 

actually my colleague from Massey Place raised the issue 

around HIV and how we have to deal with the social 

determinants. And Station 20 West was really going to be a real 

initiative that would address those kind of issues. But this 

government in its short-sightedness decided that the first, one of 

the first things it would do in its first budget was to cancel that 

project. Five or $6 million was yanked away — 5 or 6. It might 

even have been 8 million. I’m not sure of the numbers right 

now. But I know that it turned back to the community to have 

to raise that money itself. And they did. And the Station 20 

West is now becoming a reality. 

 

So when this government does things like that — and it seems 

to be continuing that pattern of not consulting, not giving 

people advance warning of some of its more drastic measures 

— people will react; people will remember. And this is what 

my colleague was saying here, that when you add three MLAs, 

do not think this government should not be thinking that people 

are just going to quietly go into the good night and just forget 

about what government did this. They will remember that they 

had to make some choices when it came to what are the 

priorities of this government. There were choices that were 

made. And this government chose to have three more 

politicians. 

 

But they also chose in that same year to increase drug costs to 

seniors by $5. Now I think if we were to go out and ask the 

public and do this plebiscite and say, so what do you think are 

common sense choices we should have in a province that’s 

doing as well as we are? Should we be charging seniors five 

more dollars per drug prescription or should we have three 

more politicians? I think the answer would be very, very clear. 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s one example. 

 

And another example — and this one actually we’re dealing 

with the ramifications this year and will be for the next several 

years — and that’s Bill 5, the essential services Bill that has 

been struck down by the Court of Appeal as having severe 

flaws. And this government did not campaign on an essential 

services platform in 2007, did not say anything about that. And 

it was one of the first Bills that was introduced. And we’re 

seeing now, we’re dealing with the fallout of that very 

problematic piece of legislation. 

 

Clearly if they had done more work in preparing that and had 

given some advance notice that this was going to be a 

significant issue and that they wanted to address it, then people 

would have taken a common sense approach to it and said, what 

can we do? What can we do? But this government was caught 

up in ideology that it would take on labour, and we are now 

paying the price for that. And I think that this mirrors, this Bill 

before us, Bill 36 mirrors that same kind of ideology, that it will 

not listen to common sense, it will not listen to what the people 

on the street and people in the towns are thinking about what’s 

really, really important. So I have some real concerns about 

that. 

 

Another one, and this one was really a pretty major storm in 

this House, was The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act where once 

again this government did not consult, did not consult. And 

people, they thought it’s just a common sense thing that you 

would take out thousands of acres out of The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act, change its kind of protection. Well people were 

very concerned about that. And I think that it just shows, it just 

shows, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the kind of government that when 

these folks get elected . . . And they were elected to form 

government, and we completely acknowledge that, but we 

expect the kind of leadership that will listen to all people, do 

some consultations beforehand, and say, so what’s really 

important? 

 

And as I’ve said earlier, Mr. Speaker, if we were going to do 

this, if we were actually going to do these two things, the most 

appropriate way to have done this would have been about two 

years ago, before the last election, and it could have been, it 

could have even been done in a bipartisan nature to have a bit 

of a committee to go out and say, our population’s growing. 

Because we’ve known the population’s been growing now for 

about five years. And we could make a chart and do some 

predictions. And there’s no reason to doubt that the population 

will drop. And ask the public and say, what do you think? Do 

you want more people sitting in this House? Do you think that 

access to your MLA is hampered by the number of MLAs, or is 

there some other way to make sure you can contact your MLA? 

 

That would have been the time to do it, two years ago. And 

then, I think, we would have all been informed by the response 

from the public. And we could have also talked to young people 



April 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 945 

to say, so what do you think about the idea of not counting 

young people? What do you think about that? That’s a change; 

that’s a shift. We should be aware of it. Is it a right thing or a 

wrong thing? And we could put forward the arguments and say, 

so what should we do? What should we do? 

 

And I really think the public has a right to be heard in this. The 

public has a right to be heard. And I think everyone has a right 

to be heard, not only those who actually have the ability to vote 

but those who get services from their MLAs. Because it’s kind 

of an odd thing here: on one hand, we’re arguing about access 

to MLAs. That’s why we want three more MLAs. But then 

we’re then saying, but only those who vote count. Only those 

who vote count. 

 

And I know, I don’t think I’m alone in this, but I represent 

everyone in my riding, and I serve everyone. And I think, I 

would actually think most members if not all the members in 

the House have the same value that I do, that we represent and 

we work for everyone in our riding. And in fact we all, actually 

many, we actually work for each other too. When we have 

constituents come into my riding who don’t live in my riding, I 

let them know who their MLA is. And I say, you might want to 

talk to them and develop a bit of a relationship with them 

because, in the long term, this is who your MLA is. And we 

follow up to make sure we let the MLA know that this is 

happening. 

 

I think this is very important. This is critically important. And I 

think that this government has missed the mark on this Bill. It 

should have been something done two or three years ago, laying 

the groundwork for finding out what does the public, what does 

the Saskatchewan public want. They should be the ones making 

the choice on this because this is a fundamental change. 

 

And if we get into this habit of adding an MLA every time our 

population goes up by 20 or 25,000 . . . And the odd thing again 

though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is when we add them by that 

number, we haven’t yet figured out how many of that 20 or 

25,000 are young people who are not voters. We don’t know 

that yet because we haven’t seen the census with that specific 

demographic information. I understand it comes out in May, 

and so it should be out fairly soon. We know what the 

population is, but I don’t know if we know exactly what the 

demographics are. 

 

So I really think that this Act, I would have to say I agree with 

my colleague from Athabasca yet again. I would shred it, and I 

would recycle it. I wouldn’t throw it in the trash, but I would 

make sure that . . . This is not something that we would be 

proud of in the years ahead to come because it’s setting a 

dangerous precedent in terms of not consulting with people. 

And we have done that, you know, and it’s been a major thing. 

 

I think about Premier Romanow in the early ’90s in response to 

some of the gerrymandering that were going on in the ’80s and 

some of the court battles that happened. In fact there was quite 

a strong public consultation about where do we go, where do 

we go? And in fact Mr. Romanow at that time had to reduce the 

number of MLAs significantly because people felt strongly, 

people felt strongly that they would prefer to have services and 

not have more MLAs. It just wasn’t that critical, that there were 

ways of connecting with your constituents. 

So, Mr. Speaker, you know, as we’ve gone on, and I’ve had the 

opportunity to quote some of the academics in this area who 

have talked about the issues around the challenges of when you 

have . . . When you don’t count, when you eliminate those who 

are 17 and younger from the formula, the impact on 

communities can be quite profound. But when you take older 

communities, in a sense their votes become more meaningful, 

the numbers are more solid. And when you take a younger 

community — and a community is younger because they have 

more young people, those younger than 18 — it can have quite 

an effect. It can in fact skew the results that you may think 

everything’s fair and there’s a sense of equity, but in reality it’s 

not. In fact the results can be quite skewed. 

 

And I think in many ways the term gerrymandering comes to 

mind. Because I think, in effect, you have some questions that 

need to be addressed in terms of we all have services. We all 

have needs. And a senior’s needs are very different than a 

young mother’s needs who has two or three or four children. 

Unfortunately those children are not taken into account. Some 

may argue, well they shouldn’t be taken into account. But the 

fact is that they will indeed someday play a major role in our 

society, and hopefully they feel engaged. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that we do an awful lot to 

encourage young people and we often hope that young people 

will be involved and feel connected and engaged in the 

democratic process. And I worry an awful lot that this signal to 

young people that they’re not important, that they simply don’t 

count is the wrong message that we are sending. And I don’t 

think anybody wants to be sending a message that we have to 

explain, well you don’t count here, but we really do think 

you’re important. 

 

No, I think when they did count, and there’s no reason to not 

count them, no good reason, then we should keep counting 

them. It’s very important. 

 

And as I said, we often have school groups come to the 

legislature here. And they’ll be in the galleries and we will get 

up and we will say wonderful things about them, and then we 

will say, welcome to your legislature. But in fact, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, as I’ve said earlier, that we will all be hypocrites if we 

are . . . say that. Because it’s not their legislature. They’re not 

part of the formula that figured out how did we come to be in 

this Chamber? Today they were part of that formula. So today it 

is a fair thing to say, but in the future, once this Bill’s passed, 

and after the next election, they will not be in the same category 

because they just were not taken into account. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple of editorials that I think are 

important that we put into the record because I know many 

people will be looking at this. And it will be kind of after the 

fact, but I do hope that there is still time. And we’ve seen how 

this government has responded to some of these past Bills. Bill 

5, you know, we’ve seen the Premier and the Minister of 

Labour acknowledge that, the fact that they were incorrect and 

that they should’ve rethought these, and we’re back to the 

drawing board on this. So why don’t we do the same thing now 

with this Bill before we go too far? 

 

We saw that with the super ID Bill that the minister, the then 

minister of SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance], had 



946 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2012 

presented a few years ago, withdrew it because of some of the 

concerns that the Privacy Commissioner had. A very wise move 

because it was going to be problematic. We see now that this 

was going to be problematic. And we would really recommend 

the government do that. 

 

But I want to read into the record parts of these editorials 

because I think that they’re instructive for us all to be thinking 

about. And I want them to be part of the record because as we 

will be looking back to this time and saying, why did, why did 

this Chamber allow three more MLAs, three more politicians at 

the cost that they will incur, and what kind of choices were 

made in the spring of 2012? 

 

[15:30] 

 

This one, the first one is from March 13th, 2012, published in 

the Leader-Post. And it’s an editorial, a column by Murray 

Mandryk and the headline is “Do we really need three more 

MLAs?” And so I want to quote: 

 

So when’s the last time you’ve had to travel to your 

MLA’s office to deal with an issue? “Never,” say the vast 

majority of you? And why would I even ask such a silly 

question? 

 

Well, Premier Brad Wall is now saying we need to 

increase the legislative assembly by three seats, to 61, 

(including one more specifically in rural Saskatchewan). 

The premier argues that the province’s overall population 

of 1.05 . . . and the physical growth of some rural ridings 

makes it necessary to address the long drives some 

constituents have to make to see their MLAs. 

 

No, as a matter of fact, I haven’t met anyone outside the 

premier’s inner circle who thinks adding more MLAs is a 

good idea. And, no, I have no idea why he didn’t mention 

all this in the November election. But that’s a good 

question, too. 

 

Well, I’ll continue: 

 

What’s that you say? You’ve never had a need to be in an 

MLA’s constituency office in your life and can’t imagine 

any business you would have that you couldn’t conduct 

through electronic communication in today’s modern 

world? Yes, as far as I know, all our MLAs carry 

cellphones and can operate a fax, telephone or e-mail. And 

even if they can’t, they all have constituency assistants 

who can. You can even contact some of them through 

their Twitter accounts. 

 

So there you go. We’re talking about a modern world. We’re 

talking about a modern world. And I think this is a very 

important thing. So I want to continue again: 

 

So why - even in the inconceivable event that you would 

need access to your local MLA - is there any reason to 

think they are much busier now than they used to be, you 

ask? Well, if they are busier, it’s not likely busier working 

at government business. In fact, the Saskatchewan 

legislature actually sits fewer days than it did 20 or 25 

years ago, so there’s arguably less committee work for 

them than back in the late 1980s or early 1990s when the 

assembly swelled to 64, then 66 seats (before the Roy 

Romanow government, post-Grant Devine, had the good 

sense to scale it back). 

 

Come to think of it, there are even more backbenchers 

with time on their hands because all Saskatchewan MLAs 

are paid as if this is a full-time job and there are more 

backbenchers because cabinets are smaller. 

 

Now there’s a couple of points in there that I think are very 

important. Yes, we are full-time. This is what we do for a 

living. It’s our business, our business to make sure we connect 

with our constituents in whatever way we can. It’s not like any 

of us are part-time because we are paid a very good full-time 

wage. And I think this is important. So I think that the 

columnist makes a very good point. 

 

And the other point that he makes, and I don’t think a lot of 

people in the public know this, but this is why we go back to 

our constituencies on Fridays — to work. We’ve set up the 

committees now so they work back-to-back. You and I have 

both started in the day when there was only one committee at a 

time, the Committee of the Whole. We went through the 

estimates all in this Chamber and we would sit long hours and 

we would have some pretty long days and we would go into 

July to get the budget passed. But we have smartened up an 

awful lot since then because we know there’s a lot of value 

getting back to our constituencies on Friday and getting out of 

here earlier on Thursday because we start earlier in the day. 

And that was because of good planning from the MLAs here, 

good basic common sense planning about how can we do the 

job that’s needed here, the proper oversight, the discussion 

around budget, Throne Speech, Bills. How can we do that in a 

way that allows us to do the good work here but also make sure 

we get back in our constituency to do our work on Fridays, 

Saturdays, and even Sundays sometimes? 

 

You know, now we have a bigger time span to be back there 

and then to be back here for Monday to get back to work. So 

things have changed over the last . . . even in my time here. In 

the 10 or so years that I’ve been here, we’ve become much 

more efficient, much more effective. How can we make our job 

easier but more effective? And so I think this is important. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to go on and just read the last couple 

of paragraphs here because I think this is a well-written column, 

and I quote: 

 

What’s that? You say the need for MLAs to be closer to 

their constituents is a particularly ridiculous argument 

because your MLA lives in Regina anyway? Well, I can’t 

argue with you there. 

 

Now many of us spend time in Regina but I think that most of 

us live in our ridings or close to them. 

 

What’s that you say? You also can’t figure out why they 

are adding five per cent more Saskatchewan MLAs at time 

of “austerity” and when they’ve already set targets to 

reduce the overall civil service size by 16 per cent in four 

years through attrition. Yes, you’re right, this wouldn’t 

seem to make much sense given that you are far more 



April 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 947 

likely to need the services of a government employee than 

that of an MLA. No, MLAs haven’t taken on any 

additional roles as service providers that justify this need. 

 

What’s that? You’re concerned the budget might be 

cutting money for your local RCMP detachment or your 

school while the government is adding MLAs? No, I 

really don’t know why this government thinks more 

MLAs are more important than more cops. 

 

End of quote, end of column. So I think again I think he adds 

that final argument that we think is so right on. We’re making 

choices here. We’re making choices. This choice is going to 

cost us millions of dollars. When we add these three MLAs, it’s 

going to represent a choice of do we want to have more police, 

do want to have a better drug plan for seniors, do we want to 

have a film tax credit, all of those things. And so this has 

clearly been a choice, clearly has been a choice. And I think a 

poor choice has been made. I think a poor choice, and I can tell 

you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I know many, many people 

agree that this has been a very, very poor choice. 

 

We hope that the government takes some time over the next 

few weeks because the talk is we’ve got a few weeks left in 

session. So we would hope in the next week or two that we 

would see some signals from the government that they are 

actually going to withdraw the Bill. It’s very important, parts of 

the Bill . . . I mean it’s not a long Bill anyway, so I would just 

recommend that they — well actually — probably would be 

just as well to throw out the Bill and put it through the shredder. 

I think that’s the best thing to do. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said, there were a couple of 

editorials that were printed, and I think I want to read into 

record the one from the Star Phoenix from the day before, 

March 12th. The editorial board put these thoughts out for the 

readers in Saskatoon. And the headline is “Poor rationale for 

more seats.” And I quote: 

 

The Saskatchewan Party’s plan to increase the number of 

MLAs suggests this motive isn’t to improve representation 

as much as it’s to gain some [political] partisan political 

advantage. 

 

Saskatchewan already easily boasts the fewest average 

constituents per riding among the western provinces and 

Ontario, so the Saskatchewan Party’s plan to add three 

more seats in time for the next election makes little sense. 

Padding the legislature by adding three [more] MLAs at a 

cost of . . . $225,000 each per year flies in the face of the 

government’s preaching about fiscal restraint, and even its 

decision to trim the civil service by four per cent a year. 

 

Now it is interesting because this government while they’ve 

been trimming 4 per cent per year for four years . . . and we’ve 

talked about the lean process, and we had a good discussion last 

night in estimates. But the government has not yet done that 

within its own Executive Council. And they don’t seem in any 

mood to give up any of its employees that helps them do the 

work. They’re just saying that no, they need them, but yet 

others will just have to get by. Now I will continue in the quote 

here: 

 

Given its low numbers of constituents per MLA, 

Saskatchewan should be the envy of comparable 

provinces that have large geographic areas, growing cities, 

and declining rural populations. 

 

Saskatchewan has an average of 17,817 voters per riding, 

compared to 21,198 in neighbouring Manitoba. The 

difference is even greater when compared to Alberta, with 

43,919 voters per riding, [and] British Columbia with 

51,765, and Ontario, which has 120,110 voters per riding 

on average. 

 

So again, are we way out there in terms of too many 

constituents per riding? Not at all. In fact we’re at the very low 

end, quite close, much closer to the Maritime provinces. But the 

larger provinces in the West and Ontario, we don’t have any 

issues at all in terms of the number of constituents. We are very 

fortunate, and I think we can continue to be that way even with 

the population growth that we’re seeing. 

 

I want to continue to read the last couple of paragraphs and I 

quote: 

 

Premier Brad Wall’s plan to base future ridings on number 

of voters rather than total population also warrants some 

serious thought. With four years to go to the next election, 

it makes little sense to count only those who already are 

18 when those who are close to age 14 will be eligible to 

vote when the writ is dropped. Seats also could be shifted 

away from areas with a high First Nations population that 

consists mostly of young people. 

 

These substantial changes being proposed just months into 

a new mandate carry a whiff of gerrymandering by a 

political party that didn’t make a campaign issue of the 

need for better representation. 

 

So I have to say, a lot of these comments I have some concerns 

about, and it’s not just us. It’s people in the media, people who 

are thinking about this. 

 

Now we have not seen any flood of letters saying whoa, you 

know, this is a great idea. Let this one go through. This has got 

to go through quickly. People, on the other hand, say I can’t 

believe this. Where did this come from? This is not something 

we’ve heard of before. And we have to say, no, we didn’t hear 

about this either. 

 

We knew, as I said earlier, that there would be a Boundaries 

Commission. There is a census. That happens every 10 years. 

But this three more politicians that will end up costing millions 

of dollars, when we’ve made some choices that people have 

some real concerns . . . and we saw the galleries full of people 

last week around the film tax credit. And we heard questions 

about the Arts Board. We heard questions today about the 

WDM, and what does that mean? And you know, people have 

some serious concerns about some of the priorities, seniors’ 

medication. So I have some real concerns, and I think this is 

very, very important. 

 

And as I said, you know, for a Bill that’s so short, that is so 

thin, one page, it will certainly carry a lot of punch in terms of 

the future years of what this province may look like in terms of 



948 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2012 

democracy and the fact that we’ve added three MLAs without 

any consultation, any campaigning, anything for the public at 

large to say, yes, that’s a good idea. And my colleague from 

Athabasca, a very good idea about a plebiscite — I think that 

would be a very interesting idea that this government should do. 

 

But unfortunately, it’s a little too late. This should have been 

done about two years ago when we had some inkling this was 

going to be coming down the line because we knew the census 

was going to happen. We knew the population was growing. 

This is what you’d call good planning, good planning. And we 

could have said, we could have said, and it could have been a 

committee from the legislature saying, so what should we do in 

Saskatchewan? We know the population is growing. What do 

you think? We saw that happen in BC, and the results were 

clear. Yes, we’re growing, but we’d prefer to see the money 

spent on services. We know the MLAs can think about how can 

we do this more effectively. 

 

I mean the irony is, and we heard this in the committee 

meetings last night, where . . . You know, and it would be 

something interesting to think about, you know. The minister 

from Municipal Affairs went on talking about how some of the 

red tape or that they’d really cut through some of the red tape 

and reduced some of the times and some of their work from 80 

days down to 30 days and improving some of the subdivision 

work that they have to do. And we thought well that’s great. So 

how did you do that? Well they just took another look at how 

they did. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s what we did. We did that in 

terms of our committee work now, when we work back to back 

and we handle the estimates that way. And we have a published 

calendar so that we know when we’re going to be out of the 

Chamber and when we can be back in our constituencies. That 

published calendar is on the legislative website, and so we 

know, we know very well what our timelines can be. And so, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it just speaks volumes that we can 

plan, we can figure out how we can be much better MLAs. And 

that can be on both sides of the House. 

 

This isn’t a partisan thing about how do you connect with your 

constituents. We all try to do the very best, and we work on 

that. And we work on that through our CPA [Commonwealth 

Parliamentary Association], our Canadian parliamentary 

association, in terms of how do we represent our constituents 

the very best ways that we can. That’s not about a partisan 

interest. It’s about just doing our job as well as we can. We 

think we’re hired to do that. We think we’re paid as full-time 

employees, that we should be able to make the time to do our 

job well. 

 

And I recognize that some of the ridings are huge. I represent 

one that’s very dense, but I have my own challenges. We have 

challenges in the very small ridings. We have challenges in the 

big ridings too. And so I think that doing this kind of thing is 

wrong-headed. 

 

And I think that when we see the choices of not counting the 17 

and younger is that . . . And I think The StarPhoenix made a 

very good point, that you’re actually even discounting some of 

the people who will actually be voting. You know, here you’re 

making the case, the government’s making the case they want 

to count only the voters. But here you have a group that will be 

voting. And you probably should even go down to the 

10-year-olds because by the second election the 10-year-olds 

will be voting. 

 

So you know it just doesn’t make any sense. It just doesn’t 

make any sense. So you’re saying only those who vote in the 

past election, in the past election, count. But the future election, 

we’re talking about the older voters. I mean, like you’re 

discounting people that shouldn’t be discounted at all. And it 

doesn’t make a lot of sense, and I think this is something that’s 

clearly ideologically driven. 

 

You know it’ll be very interesting to see the report from the 

Boundaries Commission when it comes out — and that’ll be in 

a few short months — and the impact of this. I will be very 

interested in seeing. And we know that some ridings are very 

hard to enumerate. Mine happens to be one that is hard to 

enumerate. It was hard to get people identified for the vote. In 

fact the Chief Electoral Officer had to have other special people 

come in to help enumerate my riding just because some of the 

people live in difficult circumstances. Many don’t have ID, and 

so they have their own unique challenges. They may not be far 

away from each other, but they’re very hard to get to in a 

different way, you know. They don’t have phones, and they 

have doors that aren’t very welcoming. And yet that’s a 

different kind of challenge that I face in my riding. 

Unfortunately, in many ways there, it’s almost too dense for 

some people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that this Bill is . . . Well, we’ll be 

voting against it. That’s absolutely for sure. But we think, we 

would hope that we would never get to that point, that in fact 

that we will be having people . . . Having the government 

withdraw it would be actually the very best thing that we could 

do. And just let the other Bill go forward in terms of setting up 

a commission, and we’ll be back to how people expect it to be 

done in Saskatchewan like it’s being done in the vast majority 

of Canada. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know that other members have things to say 

and I’ll be taking my seat in a minute. But I do want to say that 

again the three more politicians issue, I have really serious 

concerns about. And the fact that we have people 17 and 

younger discounted, I have a problem with. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

rise again to speak to Bill No. 36, the last Bill of the legislative 

agenda of this Assembly, and certainly the first one on the 

schedule every day these days. So I’m pleased to rise to speak 

to it. 

 

This Act is an Act to amend an Act from 1993 called The 

Constituency Boundaries Act. And that particular Bill from 

1993 established the division of Saskatchewan into 

constituencies for election of members of the Legislative 

Assembly. So when this Act came in — the original Act came 

in in 1993 — it established a number of rules and procedures 



April 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 949 

relating to constituency boundaries. 

 

First of all, the first thing the Act did was to establish the 

commission itself. So it established the Constituency 

Boundaries Commission, and they were to start dealing with the 

census taken in 1991 and then each census taken every tenth 

year after 1991. So the original Bill has survived two censuses, 

and it’s now coming into its third. And this is the first change to 

the Act since the 1993 Act was established. And the purpose of 

the commission was to consider and report on readjustments of 

the representation of population in Saskatchewan in the 

Legislative Assembly, to be made based on a census. So that 

was the direction to the commission at that time. 

 

There’s various rules in section 4 of that Act dealing with the 

timing of the establishment of the commission. So the Clerk of 

the Executive Council would get a copy of the census showing 

the total population as soon as possible. And that’s what’s 

happening now, in 2012. And they also have to establish a 

commission within 30 days of receiving the notice, or the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council is required to establish the 

commission. In this case, we’ve had an extension already from 

the Lieutenant Governor in Council to establish the 

commission. No reason was given by Executive Council, 

although I’m sure there were good reasons for doing that, they 

just haven’t been shared with the rest of us. So we know that 

it’s already been extended 30 days under the provisions of this 

Act. 

 

And the Clerk of the Executive Council has to also get the copy 

of the part of the census showing the total population from the 

Chief Statistician of Canada as soon as practicable. And then 

the Clerk is to establish the commission within 30 days. So who 

is on the commission? That’s an important part of this Bill. And 

what it says is it consists of a chairperson and two residents of 

Saskatchewan. So the law requires that the Lieutenant Governor 

in Council shall appoint as the Chair, there’s three choices here: 

either a Judge of the Court of Appeal who would be nominated 

by the Chief Justice of Saskatchewan, or a Judge of Her 

Majesty’s Court of Queen’s Bench for Saskatchewan 

nominated by the Chief Justice after a consultation, or the third 

one is a resident of Saskatchewan nominated by the Chief 

Justice of Saskatchewan.  

 

So in the original Bill that established the boundary, 

constituency boundaries, there was direction there for 

establishing who was on the actual committee itself. And then 

following that the Chief Justice would make a nomination 

pursuant to that subsection only when requested to do so by the 

Clerk of the Executive Council. So it appears that process is 

unfolding right now for this particular census. 

 

And then how do you choose the other two members of the 

commission? What’s required by law is that the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council has to consult with the leaders of the 

Opposition and any recognized members of the Legislative 

Assembly and have to appoint members that are either residents 

of Saskatchewan, and they can’t be ineligible pursuant to a 

subsequent clause. They’re allowed to produce or appoint a 

deputy chairperson. And then there’s rules on vacancy if any 

member of the commission is not able to act for any reason. 

 

Who’s ineligible? Well there are three groups of people that are 

ineligible. First of all, all of us. None of us can be appointed to 

the commission — no member of the Assembly, no member of 

the House of Commons, and no member of the Senate. So that 

excludes a number of people from appointment, which makes 

sense. 

 

There’s provisions for allowances. And then how the 

commission will function is established in the next part of the 

1993 constituency boundaries Act. And there the Clerk has to 

give them a copy of the census, so that’s the first thing they are 

given. And then once they get it, they have to prepare an 

interim report and a final report with the recommendations 

respecting constituency boundaries. So that’s the basic process. 

 

In this particular iteration of the Bill, it’s clear that the 

commission has to divide the area of Saskatchewan north of the 

dividing line into two constituencies. So that was established by 

the Bill. And then the bottom was to be divided into 56 

constituencies. And then in their final report they would just 

recommend boundary descriptions for each constituency and 

the proposed name. So they actually get to pick the names of 

the constituencies as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in case you 

were wondering how constituencies were named. 

 

The quotient that exists in the current Bill reads like this. So it’s 

the constituency population quotient. You’ll see that CPQ 

[constituency population quotient] referred to in a lot of these 

discussions. So the quotient that they would establish is TP, 

which is total population, minus NP, the northern population, 

and then it’s divided by 56. So they take out the northern 

population because that’s established in other areas of the Bill 

and then the rest is divided into 56. Pretty straightforward, 

pretty clear. So that’s how they determine the quotient of each 

constituency. 

 

Then there’s a number of rules for fixing the boundaries found 

following that. And they have to ensure that the population is as 

nearly as possible equal to the constituency population quotient. 

So it’s a total population — no exclusion of anyone whether 

they’re eligible to vote or not eligible to vote either by virtue of 

citizenship or age. So that’s pretty clear that in this Bill it was 

intended that everyone who was living in the province was 

eligible to be counted as far as the establishment of the 

constituency boundaries. 

 

Some departures from the formula are allowed in this Bill. And 

it is indicated the reasons that they could deviate from the 

quotient was if there were special geographic considerations 

including sparsity, density, or relative rates of growth of 

population in varying regions. So that’s already in the Bill in 

terms of the growth of population, so there is no need to make 

any changes there. And then accessibility to the regions 

mentioned in subclause (i), so those are those sparse regions or 

the shape of the regions. 

 

They also allow for deviations on a special community of 

interests or diversity of interests of persons residing in regions 

south of the dividing line . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Some 

interesting noises coming from over on the other side there, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The commission should ensure that the population of each 

constituency south of the dividing line, however, would remain 



950 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2012 

within 5 per cent of the CPQ or the constituency population 

quotient. 

 

So it goes on with a number of clauses, and there’s actually an 

ability for hearings if people are interested in making 

representations to the commission. And then the interim report 

has to be prepared within three months after the date of the 

commission is being established. So we will know within three 

months what the interim report would look like, and then 

following that there could be further hearings after the interim 

report. They will provide copies of the report for public 

inspection after those hearings, and then finally we get the final 

report within six months after the date of establishment of the 

commission. 

 

So we will know by the end of this calendar year, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, how these new boundaries will look. And they will 

take the CPQ and do their recommendations, have their 

hearings, and then the final report would be adopted by the 

Legislative Assembly once it’s ready and ready to go. 

 

So the new Bill or the Act to amend the Bill, Bill 36 — again 

last on the legislative agenda for this session, but first in the 

hearts of the government — it shows up every day first thing on 

the list. It’s a simple Bill. There’s only eight clauses, and the 

thrust of it is found in clause, basically, clause 6 and I guess 

clause 3. So I’ll speak to clause 3 first and that’s of this Bill. 

 

What the clause 3 is going to do is amend the definition found 

in the original Act. In the original Act, the definition was 

population. And back in 1991, population meant “. . . total 

population of Saskatchewan as determined pursuant to the 

census that a commission is established to consider.” So that’s 

it. Total population — that’s the way we’ve doing it for 20 

years. And now that is being changed by adding a clause that 

says: 

 

. . . after “total population of Saskatchewan” [it says] . . . 

“that is 18 years of age or older” 

 

So here’s the wedge, Mr. Deputy Speaker, here’s the somewhat 

absurd change that I think is being proposed for this Bill, and 

it’s one that I think is kind of disturbing on a number of levels. 

 

I have two sons. And my oldest is 18, and he voted for the first 

time in this election and was very excited about it. Now of 

course his mother was running, so that was kind of exciting too 

I think, but overall he’s quite engaged. He’s very socially 

conscious. He’s very concerned about issues facing the world 

today. He’s very concerned about environmental issues, and 

he’s very curious about how things work and how the world 

operates. And he asks a lot of questions, a lot of questions about 

how things go. And it was very important for him to be able to 

cast his ballot, in fact he even worked for the electoral officer 

and did when they actually signed . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . enumerate, thanks to my colleague. He was an enumerator, 

so he got a really good sense of how elections work. And I 

think he sees it’s not a perfect world, in his view anyways, but 

it was an exciting and engaging process for him. And I’m really 

glad that him and his friends, they helped me put up signs, and 

they were really engaged in the election this year provincially. 

And even federally now he was really interested in the results 

of our party’s recent leadership convention in Toronto, and he 

wanted to talk about that. 

 

[16:00] 

 

I have a 14-year-old who will be able to vote in the next 

provincial and federal election. He’ll be old enough. And what 

this Bill will do if, well if he wasn’t old enough, if he was 13, 

he wouldn’t be able to vote and he would be counted out. If it 

comes in right now though, sorry, in the calculation of electoral 

boundaries, he will be excluded. If this definition is changed to 

add 18 years of age or older after the total population of 

Saskatchewan in the definition in the original Bill, my son who 

will be able to vote will not be counted. And there’s something 

wrong with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I just think we’re sending the wrong message to our youth. And 

we know we need them to be engaged in democracy and that 

voter interest is declining every year. That’s of concern to 

everybody here, and I think also in the House of Commons, that 

if we don’t have an engaged populace who are articulate and 

educated about the electoral process and the rules of democracy 

and how our House operates, how the House of Commons 

operates, why it is we live in a democratic country, what the 

essence of federalism is, how our constitution works, all those 

things that are critical to an understanding of what we do here 

and why we’re here. 

 

And if we’re telling young people that there’s no point getting 

engaged because even though you’re going to vote in the next 

election, if you’re 14 years or older, you’re not going to be 

counted in the boundaries, it sends a really mixed message to 

those youth who are just starting to become politically aware 

and active. And I think that’s a wrong message to send, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

But it goes further than that. I mean this is insidious in a 

number of ways. And I think many of my colleagues have 

commented on this too. But there’s demographics involved here 

and what is the true goal of this change in definition of 

population because there’s a number of impacts it will have. 

And first of all, if you have a population area where there aren’t 

a lot of people under 18, it actually gives them a better 

representation. It’s not total population anymore. It is people 

that don’t have the right to vote. If they’re not citizens, they’re 

counted. And again that’s a bad message to be sending to 

children if we can say people who are not even citizens of 

Canada are counted in the calculation, but we’re not counting 

our own children. There’s something really . . . A message there 

that just doesn’t sit well with me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I 

think it’s something to be gravely concerned about. 

 

So we have typically, I think some of the numbers show that the 

number of children that this is excluding, based on the previous 

census is the 2006 census, shows that there was 233,000 people 

in Saskatchewan under the age of 18, or if you want to calculate 

it in percentage, it’s 24.2 per cent of the population. So what is 

the goal to exclude 24.2 per cent of the population from the 

calculation when we’re forming electoral boundaries? 

 

Now the government has said that they’ve got good reasons for 

doing that and it has to do with . . . Let’s see, I know one of our 

political commentators has indicated what the Premier is 

looking for. And he says that the Premier is saying, we need to 



April 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 951 

increase the Legislative Assembly by three seats for population 

reasons. And then the argument about the younger children is, 

he says, that by eliminating those under 18 from the formula, 

the commentator said it “. . . might be advantageous to 

preserving Sask Party rural ridings (with fewer children) at the 

expense of the more-inclined-to-vote NDP urban seats (with 

more children).” 

 

So that’s one political commentator’s take on that. And there’s 

other comments as well that we’ve received from the press. It 

says the Premier’s: 

 

. . . plan to base future ridings on number of voters rather 

than total population also warrants some serious thought. 

With four years to go to the next election, it makes little 

sense to count only those who already are 18 when those 

who are close to age 14 will be eligible to vote [which is 

what I talked about earlier, and] when the . . . Seats could 

also be shifted away from areas with a high First Nations 

population that consists mostly of young people. 

 

And again, that’s borne out in the numbers, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, because from the 2006 census, we see that the 

Aboriginal population in Saskatchewan was 141,000. That’s 

14.9 or 15 per cent of our total population was Aboriginal, and 

of that group, over, about between 50 and 60,000 were under 

the age of 18. We have the age of 15. There were 50,000 under 

the age of age 15 and 66,000 under the age of 20. So I’m not 

sure where the age of 18 cut-off is for that, but if you do a quick 

math, that’s almost half. It’s probably like 40 per cent of the 

Aboriginal population is under 18. So it sends an even stronger 

message to any of the First Nations or Métis people that are 

living in Saskatchewan, interested in electoral reform, 

interested in democracy, interested in participating in the 

electoral process, and they are being told that they don’t count. 

 

And our colleagues have said, when classes come here to the 

legislature to see what’s going on and learn about their 

government and learn about democracy and learn about the 

process by which we arrive here and how laws are made and 

how the parliamentary system works, and then they’re being 

told, but, you know, when we create boundaries for 

constituencies so that your representatives can represent, that 

you’re not counted. I just totally think it sends the wrong 

message and it’s something that I am sure that members 

opposite are concerned about as well. 

 

They have given some justifications for this reason and part of 

it, they’re saying, is some members in rural ridings have to 

drive . . . constituents have to drive a long way to get to their 

MLA. I just wonder how that applies in the North, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, because surely if that was the driving reason for the 

changes to this Bill, this government would have introduced 

changes to the North as well because certainly I think everyone 

would agree that the most difficult place to get to in terms of 

constituency offices would have to be the two northern 

constituencies. 

 

So if what the Sask Party is saying is true, what this 

government is saying is true is that they want to have more 

access for rural constituents, then they are definitely leaving the 

North out and they forgot to include that in this Bill. So they 

may want to reconsider that as well. If they’re going to properly 

deal with the issue of distance to constituent offices, then I 

think the northern formula, we might need a few more 

constituencies in the North as well if that’s the true concern of 

this government. 

 

That’s the second part I’m going to talk about now, is the 

changes to the quotient. So currently, as I indicated, the 

constituency population quotient is a simple total population 

count. And now we’re eliminating those that are younger than 

18 years old. And I don’t know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is 

something that may have serious repercussions for our electoral 

reform and for engaging young people in the future. So on the 

young people side, on the elimination of children and youth that 

are under the age of 18, I think that’s not a well-formed public 

policy and it certainly shouldn’t be part of this legislation. 

 

And then there’s the second change that we’ve been talking 

about, which is in the proposed clause 5 of the Bill, which 

suggests that clause 12(2)(b) of The Constituency Boundaries 

Act, 1993 be amended by striking out the number 56 and 

substituting 59. So this is the clause where the government is 

suggesting that we need three more politicians to effectively 

govern this province. And many of my colleagues have 

commented on this, as certainly the fifth estate has as well, and 

there’s a lot of concerns about that proposal. Particularly first 

off, as indicated by my other colleagues, is that it wasn’t part of 

the election campaign. The people of Saskatchewan never got 

an opportunity to vote on this. They weren’t informed of the 

changes. There was no consultation. There was no discussion. It 

just showed up at the end of the first session in December as 

Bill No. 36, as I say, the last Bill to show up on the legislative 

agenda. If it was that important for the Sask Party, they may 

have wanted to include it in the election and talk to people 

about it and get some feedback and see if people really wanted 

this. And then secondly, it might have shown up a little early on 

the legislative agenda, but it showed up as 36 and now it’s 

number one in their hearts. So we’re commenting on it today. 

 

The change from 50, well 56 to 59, I’d like to just talk a little 

bit about what the numbers, what those numbers will look like. 

So we have some statistics here about the average size of 

ridings. And again one has to really question the logic here 

when other provinces haven’t gone this direction at all. 

 

Currently Saskatchewan has an average of about 18,000 voters 

per riding. So you’ve got 18,000 voters per riding here. I 

haven’t done the math to figure out how much it will actually 

drop when we add three more. But if, you know, we can easily 

do the math and we could see what that turns out. I know it will 

drop. I mean obviously that’s the math. The number will drop 

from average of 18,000 to a lower number, depending of course 

on how the boundaries are structured. But we know the 

directions to the commission are that the quotient shouldn’t 

vary more than 5 per cent from the average. So it’s going to 

definitely drop. Let’s say it drops 2,000 per riding. So we’re 

down to 15,000 instead of what other provinces have. 

 

So if this is so urgent and necessary, we have to look at our 

neighbours. We often look to our neighbours and certainly this 

government often looks to our neighbours for inspiration when 

making policy decisions. So let’s look to our neighbours. Right 

now in Manitoba, the average is about 21,000. So we’ll be 

looking at least 6,000 less voters per riding than Manitoba, 



952 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2012 

which has a large rural population as well and a large northern 

population. So obviously that was considered when this Bill 

came into being. 

 

The next difference we have . . . And our neighbour to the west 

is Alberta. And in Alberta the numbers are quite a bit higher. 

They have about 44,000 voters per riding. So we will have 

30,000 less voters per riding than Alberta. And it makes you 

wonder how Alberta’s managing then if the worry and the main 

concern that this government seems to have is the distance for 

voters to get to the MLA’s office. With 44,000 per riding in 

Alberta, I don’t know that they have a whole lot more seats. I 

don’t know the number of seats that they have, but obviously 

the number of voters per riding is not of concern in that way as 

much as it is for this government. 

 

Then well okay, so we now have about 30,000 more in Alberta. 

Let’s look at British Columbia. British Columbia’s average 

number of voters per riding is 51,000 voters. So if we drop 

down to 15 or lower, we’re now looking at — you can do the 

math — 35,000 more voters per riding in British Columbia. 

Okay, let’s take one more look. What about Ontario? In 

Ontario, there’s 120,000 voters per riding on average. So I 

don’t know about the size of the ridings in Ontario, but it’s a 

vast province, a huge province, and I assume there’s a lot of 

rural ridings as well there. But for whatever reason, the 

numbers will not add up, and they certainly don’t seem to be 

any justification for adding three more seats. 

 

I know that the members opposite have often commented on the 

fact that there’s more people living in Saskatchewan. Even with 

the increase in population that we’ve seen since the last census, 

we will nowhere at all get close to the averages of those other 

provinces that I mentioned, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So it really is beyond me why the increase in population is 

driving this. I think one thing that we might want to look at a 

little bit too, and this is something that’s commonly used in 

electoral boundary creation, and it’s a concept called 

gerrymandering. And it’s funny because I think I was in maybe 

grade 7 or 8, many, many, many, many years ago, and it was a 

social studies report, and I remember doing a report on 

gerrymandering. And in fact the whole notion of the word 

gerrymander, which I’ll talk about in a minute, is the idea of the 

salamander shape that this particular electoral reform created. 

And I remember drawing that salamander in my report, and it 

had a little map of what had happened. But it happened in the 

United States, and that’s where the name came along. 

 

So we describe gerrymandering as a practice that attempts to 

establish a political advantage for a particular party or group by 

manipulating geographic boundaries to create partisan or 

incumbent protected districts. And the resulting district is then 

known as a gerrymander, although the word can be referred to 

as the process as well. 

 

And gerrymandering can be used to get electoral results that are 

desired for a particular party or it can be used to help or hinder 

a particular demographic. So those are the types of things where 

gerrymandering has been used. And when it’s used to allege 

that a given party is gaining disproportionate power, the term 

has very negative connotations, Mr. Deputy Speaker. However, 

it can also be used for some purposes that are positive. And 

they’ve used that in the United States to create the voting 

district boundaries that produce the majority of constituents 

representative of, say, African-American or other racial 

minorities. So it’s been used in the United States for what has 

been perceived as a positive use. 

 

So this is the etymology of the word though, and I find it very 

interesting. The word gerrymander was used for the first time in 

The Boston Gazette on March 26th, 1812. And it was used then 

to, the word was created in reaction to a redrawing of the 

Massachusetts state senate election districts under the governor, 

Elbridge Gerry. So that’s where the gerry part came from the 

word. He signed a Bill in 1812 that redistributed Massachusetts 

to benefit his Democratic-Republican Party. And when the map 

was created, one of the contorted districts in the Boston area 

was said to resemble the shape of a salamander. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So the exact author of the term, gerrymander, may never be 

definitively established. It is widely believed by historians that 

the newspaper editors instigated the word, but there’s no 

historical record that gives definitive evidence as to who 

created the word for the first time. So certainly that’s the 

establishment of that particular term. 

 

And if you look at the two aims of gerrymandering in the 

electoral boundary reform process, are to maximize the effect 

of supporters’ votes and to minimize the effect of the 

opponents’ votes. 

 

The first strategy they talk about is packing, where they 

concentrate as many voters of one type into a single electoral 

district to reduce their influence in other districts. So for 

example, if you don’t count children and children are a large 

proportion of the people living in those particular districts, then 

it could be considered packing in terms of how this political 

term has evolved. And so that can be done, as I said earlier, to 

get representation for a community of common interest, rather 

than diluted over several districts to a point of ineffectiveness. 

 

But there is a second strategy and it’s called cracking, so it’s the 

opposite of packing. And in this way, the gerrymandering 

would involve spreading out voters of a particular type among 

many districts in order to deny them a sufficiently large voting 

block in any particular district. And I know there’s some 

sentiment about the federal boundaries in Saskatchewan where 

that’s indeed what has happened, and it may be seen as an effort 

to use the cracking version of gerrymandering. 

 

The strategies are typically combined, creating a few forfeit 

seats for packed voters of one type in order to get even greater 

representation for voters of another type. So the article . . . This 

is from Wikipedia, and the article says: 

 

Gerrymandering is effective because of the wasted vote 

effect. By packing opposition voters into districts they will 

already win (increasing excess votes for winners) and by 

cracking the remainder among districts where they are 

moved into the minority (increasing votes for eventual 

losers), the number of wasted votes among the opposition 

can be maximized. 

 



April 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 953 

So this is a very well-recognized term. It’s a well-recognized 

practice, and it’s well decried, obviously, by opposition parties 

wherever it’s being utilized. And this is one area I think that we 

need to look at closely here. What is the true intent of this Bill? 

If it’s to indeed bring voters closer to their constituency office, 

then we would have seen significant changes in the North. We 

would have seen a number more of constituencies created in 

order to make it accessible to the constituency office. So it 

doesn’t appear to me that the closeness to the constituency 

office is really driving this Bill because otherwise the northern 

boundaries would have been changed substantially. 

 

The idea that the population is growing and that we just need 

more politicians because we have more people doesn’t add up. 

Because in this case we have our neighbours to our east — our 

neighbours two provinces to the east, Manitoba and Ontario — 

our neighbours to the west, both in British Columbia and 

Manitoba, have not reacted in the same way to the increasing 

population numbers. So it simply doesn’t wash on that level 

either, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And so in this case, one is only left with the notion that the true 

intent of this Bill, as expressed by the way it’s drafted, is to 

provide an advantage to the government to ensure that they 

secure more seats. And that’s the only conclusion I can come 

to, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it’s sad to see that this is being 

utilized in this way by our government, especially, especially 

when no one was informed of this. There’s been no 

consultation. There’s been no inkling of it in the election. Our 

members opposite often say that, you know, the public chose 

this on November 7th. They didn’t choose this. They weren’t 

even asked. It wasn’t part of the platform. It wasn’t discussed. 

And no one, when I went door knocking, certainly there wasn’t 

a single soul that told me that what this province needs is three 

more politicians. 

 

Then on top of that, you have the problems that are going to 

present themselves with the costs that are associated with all 

these offices and new politicians. And as we’ve said, it will be 

in the millions. It certainly will be. After, you know, the first 

four years, we’ll be well into the millions, maybe 3 million by 

then or two and a half. And it goes on and on because as long as 

these new seats are there, it’s going to cost money. So that’s a 

concern as well. 

 

And I think my previous two colleagues who spoke said that, 

you know, if this is something that is really seen as important 

and valuable, then it should be put to the people. We could 

easily at least do an opinion poll, if not a full referendum. But 

there’s lots of ways to find out what the people think about this. 

And I would challenge the government to actually just see what 

people are saying about this particular Bill. You know, as I 

said, it’s not something that people have had a chance to weigh 

in on. And certainly I don’t think anyone, even on this side or 

that side, heard people saying during the election that they 

really thought we should get some more politicians. 

 

Excited about population growth? Of course we are. That’s 

something that’s a good sign for our economy and our province. 

But it doesn’t mean that we need to increase the representation 

of people in this legislature. There just isn’t, there’s no 

correlation between those two thoughts. 

 

So at that point, I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think others of 

my colleagues are looking forward to commenting on this Bill 

again. And I think I will leave those comments for now. I don’t 

have anything further I wish to say at this time, so I’ll pass it on 

to my colleagues. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 

afternoon at 4:20 to join in on the discussion on Bill No. 36, An 

Act to amend The Constituency Boundaries Act, 1993. 

 

The piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, as some of the speakers 

who have had the chance to speak today have spoken, is not an 

especially long piece of legislation. The actual Bill itself is just 

one or two pages, so it’s not that long when you look at the 

amendment that is being proposed here by the Sask Party 

government. And in fact the explanatory notes are not all that 

long either, just two pages of explanatory notes. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, despite the short length of the proposed 

legislation, the amendment, and despite the brief explanatory 

notes that accompany the piece of legislation, this piece of 

legislation that’s been proposed by members opposite is a very 

significant piece of legislation. And it’s a piece that has a 

number of problems with it, as I see it, based on what members 

opposite are proposing, what they want to accomplish, or what 

they think they might want to accomplish. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

think there’s a difference between what they actually want to 

accomplish in their heart of hearts, in their plans, and what their 

public statements have been about this piece of legislation and 

how there may be a bit of a disconnect between those views. 

 

And I have to say the member from Nutana, who just spoke, I 

think very well explained and stated the contradiction in how 

the public words that we hear coming from members opposite 

about this piece of legislation may not exactly be what their true 

motives are with the piece of legislation — why they’re 

bringing it forward, when they are, how they are, and what they 

are saying about it in the public domain. 

 

Looking at Bill No. 36, Mr. Speaker, the piece of legislation 

here isn’t too long as I said. The short title is that the Act may 

be cited as The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011, 

and then it says: 

 

The Constituency Boundaries Act, 1993 is amended in the 

manner set forth in this Act. 

 

Clause 2(k) is amended by adding “that is 18 years of 

age or older” after “total population of Saskatchewan”. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Subsection 3(2) is amended by adding “total” before 

“population”. 

 

Clause 12(2)(b) is amended by striking out “56” and 

substituting “59”. 

 

Subsection 13(2) is repealed and the following 

substituted: 



954 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2012 

“(2) The constituency population quotient is to be 

calculated in accordance with the following formula: 

 

CPQ = TP - NP 

              59 

 

where: 

 

CPQ is the constituency population quotient; 

TP is the total population; and 

NP is the northern population”. 

 

So I read that, Mr. Speaker, to give an indication to people at 

home or people who are looking at this at a later date through 

Hansard that — despite the short text, Mr. Speaker — the 

results of this piece of legislation are certainly greater than what 

may appear by the few characters that are put down on this 

page in front of me representing Bill No. 36, An Act to amend 

The Constituency Boundaries Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the member before me addressed, there’s two 

main components to this piece of legislation that’s being 

proposed by members opposite. The one component, Mr. 

Speaker, has to do with what consideration is taken for the 

population when determining what should be the appropriate 

size of a constituency when doing that calculation. To date, Mr. 

Speaker, the practice as of late over the last number of terms 

has been that the total population is taken into consideration. So 

this includes people under 18 years of age. 

 

What members opposite here are proposing to do is to exclude, 

to leave out, to not count all of those individuals who are under 

18 years of age. And the member from Nutana in her remarks 

spoke about the effect that that can have on young people in our 

province with respect to how they view our political process 

and with respect to how it can encourage or discourage them to 

get involved politically — whatever party it may be, Mr. 

Speaker — and take on an active role in their province. 

 

And that’s really the goal of what we want for the youth of our 

province. We want to have a youth population that is engaged, 

that is fully informed and active in civic matters, receive a 

good, sound foundation of information and education through 

our educational system with respect to civics and with respect 

to one’s role in a democracy and some of the rights and 

responsibilities associated with that. That’s what we want, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what we want for the future of this province as 

we think about how we want people engaged and how we want 

people participating in the electoral process. 

 

What we don’t want, Mr. Speaker, is to give signals and to put 

up barriers that would suggest to young people that they don’t 

count. And I know, I know, Mr. Speaker, that’s what we all say 

when we talk in the Assembly. But it’s important to look at 

actions. And in looking at the actions here from members 

opposite with respect to changes in how boundary populations 

or constituency populations are calculated, members opposite 

want to leave out young people. 

 

The best example I think, Mr. Speaker, as to why this is a . . . or 

a sound example as to why this is a poor approach, and it 

happens so often in the Assembly at the beginning of every day 

here in the House after there’s the procession of the Speaker 

and the Clerks and the Sergeant-at-Arms and after the opening 

prayer is said, Mr. Speaker, which is a reminder of why we’re 

here and a reminder of the history and the responsibility and 

how we fit into the broader story of the province and, I guess, 

history as well. The first thing that we do after that prayer is 

introduction of guests, as Mr. Speaker will know very well. 

And this is a time when members on either side of the House 

have a chance to give a special hello, to give a special 

recognition to individuals who have come to the legislature. 

 

And the reasons that people come to the legislature can be 

varied. Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, it’s someone who’s had a 

personal connection with the MLA, they’ve been . . . Maybe 

they are a constituent and they simply have an interest in 

politics, so they want to come the Assembly and see what’s 

going on. Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, it’s a group or a delegation 

related to the events of the day, whether that be the topics in 

question period or whether that be some sort of ministerial 

statement or some sort of announcement that the government 

members are making. Those are some of the reasons that people 

choose to come to the Legislative Assembly. And they can sit 

in the Speaker’s gallery, or they can speak in the east or the 

west gallery. 

 

The idea, though, is that this is a House, this is an Assembly 

that is open to the public, that is welcoming of the public. And, 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps some of the brightest days, when it comes 

to introductions, are when we as MLAs come to the Assembly 

and we see that bright pink paper on our desk. And when that 

bright pink paper is on the desk that means, Mr. Speaker, there 

is a delegation of a school group. 

 

And I know some of us have more school groups come than 

others just based on one’s proximity to the legislature and how 

easy it is for the school group to make it to Regina. Sometimes, 

Mr. Speaker, groups also have financial barriers in coming to 

Regina, so I know I’ve spoken with many teachers who want to 

bring their young people, their students to the legislature but 

simply can’t come up with the resources to charter the bus and 

bring them to Regina. Some schools have been able to fundraise 

or have an expectation that families pay. And in certain 

instances, Mr. Speaker, school boards have also contributed. I 

know at one occasion when I invited a school group for budget 

day, the division or the principal somehow they scraped 

together some money and made it possible for a school group to 

come. And I hope it was a highlight for them. 

 

[16:30] 

 

But it’s so important, Mr. Speaker, when we have those days 

that we have that, not a pink slip but that pink notice on our 

desk, telling us that students are here in the Assembly. It’s a 

highlight because if, when you’re out on the street . . . And this 

happens when you meet people later on in life, when they’re 

adults. And they’re here in the Assembly for whatever reason 

— maybe it’s a reception from a CBO [community-based 

organization] or an interest group of some sort here in the 

legislature or it’s some individuals who have come to the 

legislature for whatever reason — often I always like to ask and 

say, when was the last time you were here in the legislature? 

And without fail, the majority of the time people say well it’s 

been many decades since I’ve been in the legislature, but I 

remember coming here in grade 4 or 5 or 6 or 7, and I 



April 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 955 

remember seeing the legislature, and I remember the heckling 

and the theatrics that occurred in the Chamber. 

 

And these are the things that stick out in people’s minds 

because this is, Mr. Speaker, a very impressive place. And it’s 

not impressive simply because the building is a beautiful one; 

not impressive simply because we have this beautiful red carpet 

in the Chamber, at least for awhile; not impressive, Mr. 

Speaker, because of the marble; not impressive because of the 

statues, though I hear a new one is coming to the Assembly; not 

impressive, Mr. Speaker, because of any of the art that is placed 

in the galleries. It’s impressive, Mr. Speaker, because here in 

the Chamber is where democracy takes place. Here in the 

Chamber is where elected representatives, through a free and a 

fair and an honest electoral process, are selected by local 

constituencies, come to this Assembly. And yes, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s not a perfect system. Government is not perfect. Opposition 

is not perfect. It is, in many ways, a flawed system, Mr. 

Speaker, but it is a great system, and there are many advantages 

to it. 

 

So when young people come to the Assembly, what we say to 

young people, we say this is your Assembly. This is where we 

want you to become engaged. This is where we want you to 

understand that, if you have a concern, that if you have an issue 

that matters, you can contact your local representative. Look 

down from the gallery; you can see one of the 58 members — 

57 plus the Speaker, Mr. Speaker — that are here, that are able 

to take your concerns from your constituency and bring them 

forward for consideration at the provincial level and advocate 

for the province in a federal context. 

 

So we say that, Mr. Speaker, we place such a strong, such a 

strong emphasis on the value and the importance of young 

people coming to the Assembly, because we understand what it 

means for the future of our province to have young people 

engaged in the political process, aware of what’s going on in 

the political process. And, Mr. Speaker, of course, of course not 

every young person in the province is going to get the political 

bug, get the political bug and become an active participant in a 

local constituency association whatever side of the House it 

may be on. But, Mr. Speaker, what we want to instill in the 

young people that come to this Assembly is an appreciation for 

this place, an appreciation for our democratic system and, Mr. 

Speaker, an appreciation for the value, the importance of 

voting. 

 

So often during elections, Mr. Speaker, we’ve all been to those 

doorsteps where people answer the door and they maybe don’t 

always say the kindest things. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not only 

directed at one party. That can be directed to politicians in 

general because, Mr. Speaker, there can be a feeling that 

politics doesn’t matter and that the political process doesn’t 

care about them. And so I think by taking this step here, where 

we start excluding those under 18-year-olds from the 

calculation with respect to sizes of constituencies, I think that is 

sending the wrong signal. I think it’s sending a signal, Mr. 

Speaker, that is not in any way consistent with the flowery 

speeches that we make here in the Assembly, the flowery, 

glowing statements we make here in the Assembly during 

introductions of guests, when it comes to welcoming youth, 

welcoming school groups here to the Assembly. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I would ask members opposite, those that 

care about the school groups that come, I would ask members 

opposite, those that see the value of treating young people with 

respect and see the value of including them in the process, to 

maybe talk to some of the front bench members, Mr. Speaker, 

opposite who are really pushing for his piece of legislation. 

 

Another reason, Mr. Speaker, why I think it’s an error to 

exclude those that are under 18 has to do with the work that we 

as MLAs do. And again, whether we sit on the opposition side 

or the government House, we’re all here to do the best for our 

constituents and to help them with concerns. And, Mr. Speaker, 

those concerns are very often not restricted to those that are 18 

and above. Very often the concerns have to do with those that 

are 18 and under — minors, Mr. Speaker — those that, even 

though they can’t vote, they still matter so much to the political 

process, and they are so greatly influenced and feel the effects 

of what we say and do in this Assembly when it comes to the 

decisions that are made. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we don’t have an age question when we 

answer the phones in our offices or when we deal with emails 

or when we welcome someone into the office. We don’t ID 

them as if it were a pub or a bar, Mr. Speaker, and say, oh well, 

actually you’re 16, or say to the grandmother, well actually this 

concern here has to do with your grandchild who’s a minor, so 

if you don’t mind, could you just wait till your grandchild turns 

18 and then come back to me? And I’d be happy to help you 

out in however many years that would be. None of us say that, 

Mr. Speaker, because we know that would be wrong. We know 

that would not be helpful, and we know that would not be a 

respectful way of treating those that are not 18 in the province. 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I would ask members opposite to provide 

that same consideration to young people when we look at the 

constituency boundaries. I think it is only appropriate, and it’s 

the right thing to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so the one component of this piece of legislation 

deals with the 18-years-of-age aspect, members opposite 

suggesting that those who are not 18 should not be factored into 

the calculation with respect to constituency populations and 

boundaries. I think that’s not the right approach, and I have 

appreciated the chance to make a few remarks about 18. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, there’s another component to this 

legislation that I want to address. I don’t think the 

18-year-of-age requirement is appropriate, and, Mr. Speaker, I 

don’t think the aspect of adding more MLAs to the Assembly is 

appropriate in any way. And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because, 

well, I say it because I actually think most members on the 

opposite side of the House actually believe it. And I think they 

actually believe that it’s not appropriate to add three members 

to the Assembly. Yes, Mr. Speaker, there are the vocal people 

who will talk the points and say why we need to add three more 

MLAs. But I actually think perhaps the silent majority over 

there, Mr. Speaker, I think the silent majority, especially some 

of those members on the backbench, they know in their heart of 

hearts that adding three more politicians to the province is not 

what Saskatchewan people want. They know that is not the 

wise approach. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, colleagues who have spoken before me have 

commented about constituency sizes for population, how 



956 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2012 

Saskatchewan compares to other provinces, whether it be 

Ontario, BC, Alberta. Mr. Speaker, we know that those sizes 

are already not comparable. We know that in Saskatchewan, 

here we are representing less people than in other places. 

 

So the argument to add three more MLAs or three more 

politicians to the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, members opposite 

know that this is an idea that is not supported by the broader 

public. And, Mr. Speaker, they did not mention this in their 

campaign that occurred in November. They did not mention 

this, Mr. Speaker, in their Throne Speech. They clearly wanted 

to try to slip this one in and hope that no one was paying 

attention and that the piece of legislation would go forward 

without a hitch. 

 

The catch is, Mr. Speaker, is the contradiction that we’ve come 

across now in that last couple weeks with the delivery of the 

budget, where we see so many examples where members 

opposite are asking Saskatchewan people, whether it be seniors 

or young people or students, to pay more, to give more money, 

to have higher fees, high increases in tuition, whatever the case 

may be, increases in drug expenses. And the government is 

saying that the government’s rationale for that decision is that, 

well, we don’t have the resources to support those programs or 

those decisions as we thought we once did, and therefore we’re 

making Saskatchewan people pay more. So that’s the talk, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s occurring out of one side of the mouth. 

 

Then at the exact same time, we have members opposite that 

are more than happy to put forward this piece of legislation, 

Bill No. 36, that calls for the spending of millions more on 

supporting more politicians in the province. And it’s a 

contradiction, Mr. Speaker, that simply does not sit well with so 

many Saskatchewan people. 

 

I can think, Mr. Speaker, of the seniors in the province. And 

last week in question period on a number of occasions we 

talked about how seniors are being asked to pay more. For 

example, for prescription drugs they’re being asked to pay 

more. And for many seniors — those on fixed incomes, those 

that are on multiple prescriptions and those that are on a couple 

— for many this could be a substantial and a significant 

increase for monthly expenses on what is already very tight, 

especially when you take into consideration increases that have 

occurred with housing, with groceries, with gas. 

 

I’m shocked, Mr. Speaker, every time I go to the grocery store. 

The prices are higher, and the quantities in the bags or the 

boxes are smaller. So we know that people are feeling pressures 

on a number of fronts. 

 

Today in question period, Mr. Speaker, today in question period 

. . . Well, I’ll back up one second. On seniors, there’s 

prescription drugs. There’s also ambulance fee increases where 

members, senior members in the province are being asked to 

pay more, and those in long-term care facilities, for hygienic 

supplies, Mr. Speaker, are being asked to pay more for hygienic 

supplies. 

 

And then at the same time, while the government is saying we 

need you seniors to start paying if you’re in a long-term care 

facility; we want you to start paying more for hygienic supplies 

— and members at home can guess what some of those 

hygienic supplies would be in a long-term care facility, Mr. 

Speaker — at the same time they say, we don’t have the money. 

We don’t have the money, Mr. Speaker, to support those 

programs, but we’ve got millions more for more politicians in 

the province. That is a contradiction. I think that those are two 

positions that do not jibe, two positions that are not appropriate, 

two positions that are not appropriate. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, we talked about the issue of HIV in the 

province. And we know, Mr. Speaker, we have the worst 

epidemic in the country. We know that one-quarter of all 

HIV-related deaths in the country happen here in 

Saskatchewan, and we know, Mr. Speaker, we don’t make up 

one-quarter of the population. So we know we are experiencing 

the real, raw, and hard reality of HIV here in Saskatchewan and 

its related symptoms and in many sad situations, death. We 

know this is real. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, that members opposite have committed 

on an annual basis $2.5 million to address the issue. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, on the one hand, members opposite are saying we 

have $2.5 million for this issue on an annual basis. That’s all 

we can afford. I assume that’s what members’ position would 

be, or else it would be higher. But then they say, we have more 

money for politicians here in the province. We’re happy, Mr. 

Speaker, to spend more on politicians and at the same time 

leave that funding for HIV here in the province at 2.5 million 

on an annual basis. 

 

To me, Mr. Speaker, that’s a contradiction that’s not 

appropriate. We all, Mr. Speaker, have local issues that matter 

to us. We all have local concerns, and it’s something that we all 

try to promote as local representatives. If it’s government 

backbenchers, people, when it’s time for a government, for a 

budget speech or a Throne Speech, people highlight local 

priorities and concerns. And we do that in the opposition 

sometimes a bit more frequently because many of us are on our 

feet a bit more often. 

 

And one concern, Mr. Speaker, that really matters to my 

constituents is a new school for Hampton Village — new 

schools for Hampton Village, a public and a Catholic. Mr. 

Speaker, I know that my constituents would much rather have 

the money that the government wants to spend on more 

politicians, the millions that it wants to spend on more 

politicians, they would prefer that that money be directed into 

education capital projects. And, Mr. Speaker, last night in 

Education estimates we talked about the needs in the province, 

and I know there are needs throughout the province, but I know 

my constituents who live in Hampton Village and Dundonald 

would rather have money going towards education as opposed 

to more money for politicians, especially when one takes into 

consideration the fact that the numbers that we represent here in 

Saskatchewan are less than other places in the country. 

 

[16:45] 

 

The one other issue, Mr. Speaker — this will be one of the last 

points that I make — it has to do with the film tax credit. We, 

Mr. Speaker, saw a government in recent days that was happy 

to kill an industry, do their part in killing an industry here in the 

province by the elimination of the film tax credit. Despite 

government members’ happiness, eagerness, and willingness to 



April 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 957 

appear on Corner Gas episodes with cameo appearances, 

despite their eagerness to do that, Mr. Speaker, they are not 

prepared to provide the film tax credit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan, I think a good, large 

percentage of the people in Saskatchewan understand that the 

film industry is important and understand that Saskatchewan’s 

role in the broader context of film production here in the 

country, understands that the film program that had been in 

place was an important one and a very good one because, Mr. 

Speaker, it makes cultural sense — we’ve talked about the 

arguments behind that — and it makes economic sense. We 

know about the spinoffs for small businesses. We know about 

the young people that are pursuing their training here in the 

province that want to build a life. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this issue is actually, the film tax credit, I 

think, Mr. Speaker, is very similar to this issue of adding three 

more MLAs because I actually think if we had a secret poll of 

members here in the Assembly, of the 57 members on the floor 

of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I actually think there are many 

members on the opposite side who actually think that the 

decision that members opposite made about eliminating the 

film tax credit was a wrong one. I actually think there’s a good 

number of members, mostly on the backbench, maybe even as 

you get closer towards the front, I think there are members of 

that Sask Party caucus, Mr. Speaker, that did not and do not 

agree with the decision that the caucus, that the cabinet, that the 

Premier made with respect to eliminating the film tax credit. 

 

The problem is, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s many of those same 

members that didn’t support the decision around the film tax 

credit, I think it’s many of those same members that see the 

folly with adding more politicians in the province while at the 

same time pleading poverty for so many programs. Whether it 

is for seniors, whether it is for HIV programs, whether it is for 

initiatives in the North, whether it’s initiatives around 

education, there are, Mr. Speaker, I think members on the 

opposite side who understand that adding more politicians is 

not the wise, not the proper decision. 

 

I think members opposite on the other side understand that, but 

the problem is, Mr. Speaker, those members need to be vocal. 

Those members need to be have a strong voice in their caucus. 

They need to be willing to speak to the inner circle who’s 

pushing the decision around the film tax credit, who’s pushing 

the issue around three more politicians, Mr. Speaker. They need 

to speak up. They need to insist on being heard. Because we 

come to this Assembly, we come to this Assembly and we are 

expected to operate according to our convictions. And I know 

members opposite, Mr. Speaker, I know many of them are 

convicted that adding more politicians to the Assembly is not 

about the reasons that members opposite have stated with 

respect to representation. It’s about something else. And other 

members on this side of the House have talked about what some 

of those other motivations may in fact be. 

 

Those individuals, I encourage them, Mr. Speaker. At your 

caucus meeting tomorrow, have the courage to speak your 

mind. At your caucus meeting tomorrow, speak truth to the 

inner circle. Speak to those that are pushing this issue and say, 

adding more politicians is not what Saskatchewan people want. 

Those individuals can say, I know what Saskatchewan people 

want because, yes, I was out door knocking too and I heard 

from many people in my constituency, and they weren’t calling 

for three more politicians; they were calling for priorities X, Y, 

and Z. There are members opposite who understand this, and 

they need to speak that truth to the inner circle that’s pushing 

this decision to add three more MLAs and exclude those that 

are under 18 from the calculations. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To join in the 

debate on Bill. 36, An Act to amend The Constituency 

Boundaries Act, 1993. 

 

My colleagues before me have expressed concern. And I think 

the concern they’re expressing, I think, is from community 

members. We’re hearing from seniors; I guess the media. We’re 

hearing a lot of discussion about more politicians and people 

are asking, in a time when a province says, yes, there’s growth 

but then also the province says, we want to have balance. And 

if they want to use that word “balance” and balance the books 

and however they want to spin it to the public, that’s the way 

the government’s going to spin it. 

 

But actually there’s so much concern right now with cuts. And 

I’ll be honest with you. If you look at the cuts that departments, 

whether it’s the public service sector, whether it’s the fishing 

industry, the freight subsidy being totally cut from the 

commercial fishermen in our province, seeing closure of some 

of the offices for conservation in Pelican, in Cumberland 

House, and the list goes on. And I think my colleagues have 

expressed it very well. They’ve talked about the concerns, 

whether it’s the cost of prescription drug for our seniors, 

families, the cost of ambulance care — all these costs are going 

up and people are asking, why can we cut? And why can the 

government come up with a plan that affects, I guess, that 

affects their life, their budgets? How come we can have more 

politicians? And why is it acceptable not to consult the public? 

 

And the government says it wants to make sure, you know, it 

talked to the community members. Well there’s a lot of 

community members out there who are not feeling like they had 

any input, say. They’re asking for that. And I think it’s made 

very clear that when they were out campaigning, they didn’t 

say, you know, what do you guys think about . . . We sure want 

your support, and if I get your support and we form government 

again for another four years, we’re going to get three more 

politicians. I don’t think they would have heard that response, 

and I don’t think they would have met a positive response from 

voters out there. 

 

People ask their government, and they trust their government. 

They want their government to do right by programs, by 

allowing our Saskatchewan people that are proud of our 

province, to allow them to make sure they have a voice. And 

they get a voice by electing MLAs, whether they’re with the 

government or opposition. The opposition has a role to play, 

and we’ve very clearly expressed concern about Bill 36. We 

haven’t expressed only our views on this, but the views of 

many people in the province are concerned. 

 

Why is it we can have a priority — and the Sask Party 



958 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2012 

government has a priority — of more politicians versus some of 

the other, I guess, priorities of Saskatchewan residents? Who 

have they consulted? Who have they talked with? It’s very clear 

by . . . You look at the media. You look at the letters we’re 

receiving. You’re looking at the conversation in the grocery 

stores. We mustn’t be the only nine MLAs, over here on the 

official opposition, that are hearing this. They must be hearing 

this back home — have to be — from some of the seniors 

concerned about the cost, the cost of living. 

 

You see all the different areas that are being . . . whether it’s a 

tax by this government, very clearly, the concerns. And it isn’t 

us trying to go out there and fearmonger and play around. It’s a 

process, and they’re making sure there’s schools that they want 

to keep open. They want to make sure there’s conservation 

officers and the offices that serve the people in these 

communities to make sure they’re there. The right choices, it’s 

picking and choosing in a budget. A government’s elected, and 

the people give them trust. And the people say, yes, we elected 

you to treat us fairly, to take care of the monies in the bank, to 

take care of all residents in the province. That is you’re handed, 

and people do that and I mean this, that they sincerely think the 

government will take care of their best interests. And when you 

see what this government has gone on to do and legislation that 

they want to push, is it truly consulting with the community 

members out there? I don’t think so. Very clearly we’re getting 

that message and they must be getting that message as well. 

 

So we see the frustration from some people who are feeling the 

cuts. Some people will be losing their jobs. And if you’re 

somebody who’s not going to be having an opportunity at an 

income and you see the government talking about more 

politicians . . . And I think some of my colleagues have made it 

very clear. You look at the numbers in other provinces versus 

the numbers in Saskatchewan, and the numbers are very low in 

Saskatchewan versus our population to MLAs. And I guess at 

the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear people want 

input. They want input, they want services, they want programs. 

They want to make sure that, I guess, they’re getting their views 

heard, their concerns dealt with by their politicians. Whether 

it’s the official opposition or the government MLAs, people 

feel they have a right and they put a trust in all of us that we 

will do the right things. 

 

This legislation should be part thrown in the garbage. If you 

want to go back and truly ask the people, you have an 

opportunity. It’s not late. It’s not too late to say, whoa, you 

know maybe we’ve made a mistake. Maybe there’s a chance to 

fix something. Maybe we should consult more with the 

Saskatchewan people before we go ahead. With the cuts that 

have been introduced in the budget maybe, you know, it’s time 

to rethink this. And there’s nothing wrong with going back and 

reviewing something. 

 

And I look at the different cuts, whether it’s forest fire 

management, whether it’s about three-point-some million that 

was cut. There’s always different cuts. Why is it? And people 

are very frustrated. And I think some of them are concerned. 

Why is a government have a priority of more politicians and 

less services when they say, well we’re booming, the booming 

economy advantage? Some of the people that are being affected 

by more politicians and the cost to it are saying, how is that an 

advantage in my household? How is that an advantage to me? 

How is that? Am I going to get served better? Are you saying 

the MLAs haven’t been serving the constituents? I think all 

MLAs try to do a good job. I wish there was more NDP MLAs, 

more New Democrats. That would be the great thing. 

 

Unfortunately the people have spoke. We trust that. But they 

also said they’re going to watch and they will hold all of us to 

account, what we did, whether we are backbenchers in the 

government that raise the concerns for the people back home. 

That’s all they want. And they’re going to say that whether it’s 

the opposition that raises the concerns. I want to make it very 

clear from our side, we are raising concerns. We have tried to 

express the views of the people that are approaching us, 

whether it’s letters, whether it’s individual members, whether 

it’s groups, the young people saying, this legislation is too 

much. It’s very short and sweet, but it has a lot of damage that 

it can do. And people are very concerned, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So at this time, getting to the time, and I know we have more 

work to do, and I know more people want to get in on the 

debate, I’m prepared, Mr. Speaker, to adjourn debate at this 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Opposition Whip has moved 

adjournment of Bill No. 36, The Constituency Boundaries 

Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the work of committees this evening, I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned till 1:30 

p.m. tomorrow afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:58.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 927 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 927 

  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 927 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 927 

  Doherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 927 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 928 

  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 928 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 928 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 928 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 928 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 929 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Breakfast for Learning Volunteer Award Recipients 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 929 

 Junior Achievement Business Hall of Fame Awards 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................... 929 

 Caring for Our Watersheds 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 929 

 Company Consolidates Operations in Saskatoon 

  Eagles ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 930 

 Judge of the Provincial Court Appointment 

  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 930 

 Wascana Centre Celebrates 50th Birthday 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................... 930 

 Bank Donation to School of Business 

  Tochor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 931 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Combatting HIV 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 931 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 931 

 Federal Crime Legislation 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 932 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 933 

 Support for Culture and Heritage 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 934 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 934 

 Plans for Forestry Operations 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 935 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 935 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Funding for Student Housing Project at the University of Regina 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 936 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 936 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 Withdrawal of Comment 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 936 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 36 — The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 937 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 943 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 948 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 953 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 957 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


