




















































Hansard: March 19, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 17B  MONDAY, MARCH 19, 2012, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 627 

 March 19, 2012 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, the House shall 

resume. Orders of the day. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 26 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 26 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As always, it’s my 

pleasure to wade into the debate and discussion around the Bills 

that come before this legislature. And I’m happy to speak to 

Bill No. 26, An Act to repeal miscellaneous obsolete Statutes or, 

as it may be cited, the short form, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

Repeal Act. 

 

So what does Bill No. 26 do, Mr. Speaker? Well in short 

actually, it does what it says it’s going to do. It repeals five 

statutes that the government has said are obsolete. The five 

statutes are as follows. There’s The Collective Bargaining 

Agreement Expiry Date Exception Act, The Communications 

Network Corporation Act, The On-farm Quality Assurance 

Programs Act, The Soil Drifting Control Act, and The Special 

Payment (Dependent Spouses) Act. So this Bill No. 26 will be 

repealing all five of these statutes. 

 

I want to note that in the minister’s remarks, I wanted to 

mention what he said on second reading here. So he said again, 

the purpose of the Bill is to repeal five statutes that are no 

longer necessary to retain on the books as these laws are 

obsolete or spent. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we would disagree on this side of the House 

that one particular statute should be repealed. And we believe 

that this came out of the privatization of SCN [Saskatchewan 

Communications Network] two years ago, actually, almost two 

years ago to date, Mr. Speaker, when the government 

announced on budget day — despite the fact it was a time of 

prosperity and things going pretty well — that they were going 

to have to reduce spending and had to . . . They had decided to 

take SCN, the Saskatchewan Communications Network, which 

was about 20 years old at the time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SCN, the Saskatchewan Communications Network, was 

Saskatchewan’s television station, for all intents and purposes. 

It was the opportunity, the place where Saskatchewan 

filmmakers had the opportunity to share Saskatchewan stories 

with people here in Saskatchewan, but a much larger audience. 

There were many things that started out on SCN that ended up 

actually winning awards, Mr. Speaker. 

So there were many, many problems with the privatization. 

Actually the initial news, released right after budget, Mr. 

Speaker, the government had said they weren’t going to sell 

SCN. What they said, they were going to fade it to black. It was 

just going to drift off into the night, Mr. Speaker. But I think 

very quickly, between the public, the viewing public who really 

enjoyed SCN, and the film and television industry, there were 

many, many people who realized and said to the government, 

well do you have any idea what you are doing, what fading to 

black will do to the film and television industry that had already 

been beleaguered by the 2008 economic collapse? 

 

So I don’t think initially that the government knew the value of 

SCN to the film and television industry. There basically here in 

Saskatchewan were three pillars of this industry. There was 

SCN, the Saskatchewan Communications Network, which was 

. . . With a very small investment, it would buy local content or 

trigger licences that brought in much money, Mr. Speaker, from 

out of province. The film and television industry . . . So SCN 

was a big part of that. 

 

The second piece, Mr. Speaker, was and still continues to be the 

sound stage. But the sound stage has sat empty for the last 

couple of years, Mr. Speaker. It has had very few shoots 

actually in the sound stage. And the government initially, after 

they had decided they were going fade SCN to black, and then 

they changed their tune and said, oh well we’re looking for a 

buyer, the government then said, oh we’re going to develop a 

film series incentive to try to attract, attract the film industry 

here. So that incentive involved making it affordable for one 

particular company, actually, at the time, to come in and shoot a 

pilot at the sound stage. But, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t capitalize 

on that series incentive, which was a low-cost item, to continue 

to boost the film and television industry. So they’ve let the 

sound stage remain virtually empty, Mr. Speaker. A 

state-of-the-art facility that the people in Saskatchewan here 

own has basically sat empty. 

 

So I do have some concerns actually, going forward, Mr. 

Speaker, with the plans that this government has for that sound 

stage. So I would just like to put that on the record here. 

 

The third pillar of the film and television industry, Mr. Speaker, 

is the tax credit which, when it was first introduced, it was 

groundbreaking. We really were at the head of the pack when 

the government introduced the tax credit. 

 

So those three things together, SCN which triggered other 

broadcast licences, and which is what you need to do in the film 

industry — you get a little piece of financing here, and then you 

get more financing here. It’s an interesting industry, how they 

put together the financing for a production, Mr. Speaker. So 

SCN was key in that. 

 

The sound stage is another very key part of the film industry 

here, the film and television industry. And they’ve let that 

languish and haven’t used it to its fullest potential. 

 

And then the tax credit. The film and television industry, Mr. 

Speaker, has been asking for several years for the government 

to look at ways to restate the tax credit, not necessarily paying 

more money out, but ways of marketing it in a little different 



628 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

way. Many other jurisdictions, including Manitoba two years 

ago actually, when they saw that the film industry was 

incredibly beneficial to their economy, but also had been taken 

a bit of a hit with the financial crisis in 2008, Manitoba decided 

that they were going to do something with their tax credit. 

 

So Saskatchewan under this government went from being 

front-runners in the film and television industry here in Canada, 

with production values alone for several years at well over $60 

million. That’s just production values, Mr. Speaker, and those 

are mostly out-of-province dollars. It’s new money coming into 

the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we saw a film industry, film and television industry that was 

doing incredibly well drop to $11 million production. And I’m 

sorry I don’t have the number at my fingertip for the latest 

number, but last year $11 million. So it saw a drop from more 

than $60 million in production values to $11 million two years 

ago and hasn’t seen much improvement since, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So not only did the film and television industry bring in money 

from elsewhere but all the spinoff benefits that come in with TV 

or film production shooting here. You’ve got catering. You’ve 

got hotels. You’ve got wardrobe. You’ve got all kinds of 

professions or professionals who supported the film and 

television industry through their own businesses, and there was 

much economic spinoff there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this government single-handedly has killed, very near killed 

the film and television industry. There are a few players who 

remain, but I personally know people who have had to leave the 

province, who called this place home. They came back, Mr. 

Speaker. This government talks about attracting creative and 

skilled employees back to Saskatchewan, and that’s exactly 

what had happened with the film and television industry. At one 

point we had three what they call A-crews or crews that could 

staff any production and do an amazing job. They were the top 

of the class. And what I’m told now, Mr. Speaker, is it’s hard to 

put together even one A-crew, Mr. Speaker. People came here 

or returned here or trained here and have now had to leave to 

make a living in their chosen profession, Mr. Speaker. So that 

speaks completely counter to this government’s narrative about 

making sure that we’re attracting and retaining the best and the 

brightest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We had an industry here that we could be incredibly proud of. 

There’s many, many people in Saskatchewan who, and many 

wonderful industries, but there is something pretty unique about 

the film and television industry. And we all love to know that 

our province was making a mark, whether it was winning an 

award or whether it was knowing that Corner Gas was being 

seen in many, many, many countries around the world, the 

opportunity to tell our Saskatchewan story so people have the 

chance to learn a little bit about us. 

 

So this government, as I said, has single-handedly, 

single-handedly trashed the film and television industry. And as 

I said, there are still some, very few people who are here who 

are still able to make a living, Mr. Speaker. And I think that that 

is an absolute shame. 

 

When it came to, once the government realized that fading SCN 

to black on April 30th, 2010, was a very bad idea, that not only 

would the space on the dial be lost but much more would be lost 

than that, they decided that they were going to try a buyer, Mr. 

Speaker. So they did in fact find a buyer, Bluepoint, which 

bought SCN, Mr. Speaker, for $350,000. And we would call 

that a fire sale price. I know I’ve heard members on the 

opposite side say that wasn’t a fire sale price. I’ve heard them 

heckle that across the Chamber, Mr. Speaker. But if you looked 

at the previous annual report from, I believe 2008-2009, SCN’s 

assets were valued close to $4 million, Mr. Speaker, not 

$350,000. So if anyone is going to say that $350,000 is not a 

fire sale price, I think perhaps they should look up the definition 

in a dictionary, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think the other big thing that many people are missing with the 

loss of SCN is the opportunity to tell Saskatchewan stories. And 

Bluepoint right now is in the process of selling SCN to Rogers, 

to Citytv, at which I know that there’s many people at SCN who 

are glad that they will be able to keep their jobs, Mr. Speaker, 

but the whole concept of local content, local content and telling 

of Saskatchewan stories, is completely lost, Mr. Speaker. So 

yes, we’re glad people still have the opportunity, trained skilled 

people at SCN have the opportunity to keep their jobs, but 

there’s some big concern with the fact that the Saskatchewan 

story is going to be completely obliterated from this television 

network, Mr. Speaker — I think another thing to note about the 

last two years and the Saskatchewan Communications Network. 

 

So shortly after the government decided to fade SCN to black, 

and then they realized they couldn’t do that or shouldn’t do that, 

then they decided to sell SCN. They convened a film and 

television task force, which — you know what? — I often get 

up in this Chamber and I am not very pleased with the 

government’s ability to consult, but that was one. You talk to 

anybody who was part of that process. This film industry, film 

and television industry task force was excellent. They had big 

producers, small producers, all kinds of people who sat around 

that table. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker? They were told to come up 

with no-cost and low-cost incentives or ways to support the 

industry in light of pulling this one key pillar out of the film and 

television industry out. So they were told to come up with these 

low-cost and no-cost items. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? 

They did. 

 

The film industry, film and television task force reported in 

October of 2010. And has this government implemented a 

single one of those recommendations? Not one. I’ve heard the 

Tourism minister, actually last year after his budget speech, say 

that, oh yes they have, but SMPIA, the Saskatchewan Motion 

Picture Industry Association, would have begged to differ, Mr. 

Speaker. Not one single one of these recommendations from the 

film industry, the film and television industry task force, was 

reported. So apparently that was . . . Or was implemented. So 

apparently — not one, not one of these, Mr. Speaker — so 

apparently this was a whole big smokescreen, this task force, to 

try to calm everybody down in the film and television industry. 

 

And you know what? They had to be hopeful. They were 

incredibly . . . It was devastating, actually. Getting rid of SCN 

was absolutely devastating to the film and television industry 

here in Saskatchewan. But the participants on that task force, as 

much as they were wary, the only thing that they had was a 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 629 

little bit of hope. They had to pin some hope in this process. 

You talk to anybody who was involved in that task force, Mr. 

Speaker. They did pin their hope on this task force. 

 

And what has their government done, Mr. Speaker? What has 

this government done to taxpaying individuals — creative, 

highly trained young people and more mature folks? What have 

they done to this industry? They have killed, for all intents and 

purposes, the vibrant film and television industry. And again I 

want to emphasize that there are still a few people who are able 

to hold their own, but this . . . By and large they have done a 

huge disservice to the people in this industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it will be interesting to see in this budget if there is anything 

for the film and television industry. I know that every budget, in 

the short time that I have been in this legislature . . . I guess I 

can’t say that any more. It’s two and a half years, but it’s gone 

pretty darn fast, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[19:15] 

 

An Hon. Member: — When you’re having fun. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — As the member from Rosemont says, time 

goes fast when you’re having fun, Mr. Speaker, which is true, 

but I’ve not seen . . . 

 

Every time I’ve sat down with folks in the film and television 

industry, again, they are hopeful, and they walk lightly. They 

tread lightly because they don’t want . . . They know where the 

industry was — more than $60 million in production values. 

Again I want to state that this was just production values. This 

was not all the wonderful spinoff that comes from a film or 

television series shooting here, Mr. Speaker. This was just 

production value and mostly out-of-province dollars as well, 

new money to our province of Saskatchewan of which we 

should have been very, very proud, should have been doing 

things like other jurisdictions, like Manitoba, to continue to 

incent people to work in the film and television industry. 

 

So I know that the film industry is ever hopeful and waits. I’m 

sure they’re waiting and wondering what’s going to be in this 

budget, but I think that there’s already been a tremendous 

amount done by this government to a vibrant and exciting 

industry of which we all should have been very proud and 

should have been working to support, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So for the fact of the matter, the government never should have 

privatized SCN. The budget savings, I believe it was a $5 

million annual budget savings, Mr. Speaker — $5 million on 60 

million, 60 million. I think I hear people on the opposite side 

saying that’s a lot of money. Well you know what’s a lot of 

money, Mr. Speaker? More than $60 million in production 

value, new money here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Or you 

know what? I’m going to hold my tongue, Mr. Speaker. 

Anyway, Mr. Speaker, it will be interesting to see in the coming 

days what happens with SCN. I think the one big thing that 

people in rural Saskatchewan are going to seriously miss, their 

local content, and it’s a shame that the government chose to go 

this route. 

 

And you know, the interesting thing — which maybe there’s 

members on the opposite side, especially some of the newer 

members on the opposite side of the House, don’t realize — but 

SCN actually was a Conservative creation. This wasn’t created 

under the NDP [New Democratic Party] government, Mr. 

Speaker. It was a Progressive Conservative or the Sask Party’s 

cousin, created SCN. So this wasn’t some crazy lefty idea. This 

came out of Conservative values, and this was . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . I can see that my last remark, Mr. Speaker, got 

some good laughs here tonight. But I can hear, I can hear some 

of the heckles that would come across the floor, what they 

would be suggesting that SCN was. But I’m sure there are 

members that don’t realize that SCN was in fact a Conservative 

creation here in Saskatchewan. And I’d say that was probably 

one of the better ones. I won’t say the only one, but it probably 

is one of the better things that came out of that Conservative 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with respect to Bill No. 26, and the statute no. 3 in 

particular, The Communications Network Corporation Act, the 

repealing, we think this is a sad day. It was a sad day two years 

ago on budget day for the people of Saskatchewan who enjoyed 

Saskatchewan, the opportunity to hear Saskatchewan stories, 

and for filmmakers to tell our stories all around the world, Mr. 

Speaker. This is a sad day for . . . That 2010 budget day was a 

sad day for all kinds of folks. But it’s just a sad reminder of 

how this government, Mr. Speaker, has put ideology, in this 

case, in front of common sense.  

 

So with that, I know that I will have colleagues who will also 

wade into the debate on Bill No. 26, An Act to repeal 

miscellaneous obsolete Statutes. So with that I would like to 

move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 26, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 

2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 9 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hutchinson that Bill No. 9 — The 

Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

enter debate here this evening as it relates to Bill No. 9, The 

Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

The changes put forward in this Act all centre around the 

Community Initiatives Fund, or CIF, and that’s where the bulk of 

my comments will be focused on here today. Currently the way it 

is structured, a portion of Casino Regina and Moose Jaw casino’s 

dollars are placed into the hands of the CIF, the Community 

Initiatives Fund, for which they’re then disbursed realistically 

across the province, Mr. Speaker. And that’s certainly the intent 

of those dollars, to enrich and enable communities to be as 

strong as they can be. 

 



630 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

And many of the projects that we’re looking at that are funded 

are incredibly special and unique projects that really add to 

communities in rural and urban Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

and they’re important programs. And I know if we’re looking 

specifically at certain aspects of this Bill we would look that 

some of these . . . just making sure that some of the changes put 

forward aren’t going to compromise what good work this fund 

has provided in the past and what it can fulfil into the future, 

whether that’s enabling and supporting sports or recreation or 

cultural enrichment or arts and the host of projects that have 

been supported. 

 

When we look at the changes that are put forward, most of them 

relate specifically to the Community Initiatives Fund, and when 

I focus on the different areas, I’ll just highlight maybe for 

people to understand what sort of grants are offered. First 

there’s areas of human development, which are certainly 

important to Saskatchewan people and develop out, I guess, our 

most important resource in this province, and that being 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

The second area would be youth leadership and Aboriginal 

inclusion, and these would include as well the urban Aboriginal 

community grant programs that certainly have provided some 

meaningful resources for special programs that have certainly 

made a difference in the lives of many in this province. 

 

Another area that these support are that of physical activity and 

health and wellness. This is an important area and an area in 

many ways that we don’t support enough as a province. And 

certainly we incur the costs of not doing so by way of our health 

of the general population and then the social costs of 

responding to those health concerns. But this kind of project 

here, number three, as it relates to physical activity, would 

include Saskatchewan In Motion and all sorts of activities that 

are supported again all across Saskatchewan. 

 

A fourth area would be problem gambling and mitigation 

payment programs, which certainly is an important aspect. 

Certainly we look that for some, I guess, gambling is a 

recreational activity. For others it’s an addiction and something 

that causes great harm within many families’ lives here in 

Saskatchewan, causing great harm and pressures and challenges 

for far too many children and far too many families. And it’s an 

important area of support. 

 

And then number five is the community vitality program, and 

that would include small capital projects and milestone 

community celebrations which are really important as well in 

telling our proud history as a province, our cultural heritage and 

sharing that pride with respective communities and certainly 

with respective jurisdictions and the world at large. 

 

In many ways this last piece connects to what the previous 

member was speaking of when she was speaking about 

concerns around loss of SCN when SCN was cut and our lack 

of ability to tell that Saskatchewan story, that unique and rich 

history that’s so special, and to share that with the world. But 

certainly these dollars in this program are enabling some of that 

to be done at a very small level within communities, and those 

are important, important celebrations. They bring together 

communities. 

 

I know lots of times if you’ll go to centennial celebrations of a 

respective town or community, it brings together so many who 

built that community. And often I think it’s fair to say that we 

forget how the institutions that we’re proud of formed and how 

business and associations and activities, how they came 

together. And that’s what’s sometimes so special about those 

milestone-type events is that they bring together individuals 

who either played a role in the formation of communities or 

families played a role. And I know that’s a special piece as well 

because it’s always unique when you’re at these events to see 

sometimes great-nieces or great-nephews or grandchildren of 

community leaders that played instrumental roles in putting 

together structures that influenced where we are today or where 

our respective community is today and the great pride in often 

young people learning what that contribution of their family 

was. It’s special to see, and I think it’s an important, important 

for us to understand or respect where we’ve come from. 

 

When we look at other aspects of this Bill, we see some 

changes as it relates to governance. And the fund itself is 

managed by what’s supposed to be an arm’s-length, 

independent government-appointed board whose members have 

extensive experience in the community. And there’s some 

changes within these provisions on this front in terms of 

appointments have been changed, structures and changes 

around quorum, structures and changes around remuneration for 

committee members. And that’s all aspects for which we’ll be 

analyzing as we move forward to make sure that this puts that 

committee and those members in the best position that they can 

be to serve Saskatchewan people with the role and function that 

they’ve been provided by way of sitting on that board and 

managing that fund. 

 

It also provides, by way of some changes in governance, some 

authority for that arm’s-length board to hire and manage some 

resources, and certainly that makes sense. And when we look at 

this whole piece, what we do need to make sure is that the 

governance changes that have been brought forward are in the 

best interests of the intended objectives of what the Community 

Initiatives Fund was all about, the CIF, and what the purpose of 

that fund was set out to provide, making sure that this is in fact 

not only consistent with those objectives but reinforcing and 

supportive and enabling of the good work that that fund has 

provided to the people of this province. 

 

I’d certainly like to thank those members that have served that 

fund on the board as part of that governance structure and 

certainly any staff and resources as well. I’d like to offer a 

thank you for the work they provide to Saskatchewan people in 

making these decisions to allocate in a fair and independent 

fashion the resources that they do across our province for all the 

kinds of great projects that I’ve highlighted here tonight, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There’s also some changes, if I’m looking through here, to 

liability. And there’s some change, I believe, to provide some 

protection to the board itself or to those that are part of the 

governance structure and also to workers or employees by way 

of some changes to liability protection. 

 

And I see, if I’m just looking at some of the other changes that 

the minister has put forward here, there’s some changes that 

were put forward as it relates to ministerial responsibility. And I 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 631 

guess we might have some questions on this front about how 

this changes the minister’s relationship with the fund, if that 

relationship is in fact the appropriate structure by way of this 

legislation, whether there is direct control, and whether or not 

that’s what was intended when what’s supposed to be an 

independent, arm’s-length board for the greater good of 

providing important resources to community initiatives across 

Saskatchewan, whether or not that’s going to in any way be 

compromised by changes to this Act. 

 

We also recognize that there’s been suggestions that there’s 

been changes to modernization in the wording and that the 

minister suggested that this allows the fund itself to fulfill its 

mandate and for communities to receive the tangible and 

important benefits that they deserve. We want to make sure that 

that’s the case. Certainly we’ll be analyzing this Bill on this 

front and doing so in consultation with stakeholders across 

Saskatchewan, individuals that have experienced interfacing 

with the fund and with individuals of areas of expertise as it 

relates to both the Gaming Corporation but also the CIF. 

 

[19:30] 

 

So in short, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more questions as it 

relates to this Bill. We really need to understand what both the 

intended consequences are because I think there’s some 

questions yet on that front, and often in the case with this 

government, more importantly what some of the unintended 

consequences may be as it relates to this piece of legislation and 

making sure we have that thorough discussion with 

communities across Saskatchewan, with stakeholders who are 

impacted, to make sure that this in fact, this Bill, this legislation 

is in their best interests and that it allows them to fulfill the 

mandate of what’s an important piece of, or an important 

function to the province supporting so many of the various 

programs. 

 

And again I guess I go back and I highlight some of the work 

that this fund has provided in Saskatchewan and some of the 

enrichments it’s provided in communities. It’s very much the 

types of initiatives that we should be providing and resourcing 

broader support from government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When I look at some of the grants that go out as it relates 

human development, this is a key area for this province and 

really an area that we simply aren’t doing enough on, Mr. 

Speaker, to get as rich of an outcome as we should be from 

Saskatchewan people and providing the resources needed and 

the training that’s needed to optimize outcomes in the lives of 

individual people but also as it relates to the economic and 

social well-being of this province. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, certainly as it relates to these 

different fronts, these are the kind of items that connect. And it 

doesn’t, they don’t exist on islands or in silos. And we need to 

do a much better job as government and not rely just on sort of 

the goodwill offered through the Communities Initiatives Fund 

to do the kind of work that we know is in the best interest of our 

communities and of our future economy and of our economy 

today and certainly in the lives of individual people in this 

province. 

 

I know the member from Cumberland who’s here tonight 

knows the kinds of circumstances that we can be improving 

both within his constituency and within his communities but 

also across this province. And this really, this human resource 

and human potential that just simply hasn’t been supported to 

be as strong as it can be, to contribute as much as it can be, and 

to have as fulfilled of lives as so many could have. And we 

can’t just, as I say, rely on the goodwill of good initiatives like 

the Community Initiatives Fund to do that work. It takes strong 

planning from government, central government, to be laying out 

plans in direct consultation with those who understand. People 

like the member from Cumberland and direct stakeholders on 

the ground and communities across Saskatchewan to be laying 

out the resources needed, the kind of programming that’s 

needed, that’s going to make a difference in the lives of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And I know when we look at these sorts of examples we often 

talk about sort of the improvements that we can make in the 

lives of an individual child: a more fulfilled life, a more 

sustainable life or a sustainable life, a life that’s immersed in 

the economy of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now these are all admirable goals, but they also have a greater 

good back to society as a whole, strengthens our social 

well-being as a province. And if we can make significant gains 

on these fronts we can certainly as well reduce some of the 

social costs that we incur because of, in many cases, many of 

the failures on this front. We can do a much better job of 

enabling and supporting individuals and young people. We can 

reduce down the road significant costs and cost savings as it 

relates to our health system and our justice system and our 

social services costs. 

 

So not only are we making meaningful improvements in the 

lives of young people who will grow and mature and lead 

fulfilled lives with strong families, but we also strengthen our 

economy as a whole and of course bring a greater social 

well-being to the province as a whole. 

 

When I look at one of the second pieces here that this supports 

is youth leadership and Aboriginal inclusion, including the 

grant programs here in Regina and in Saskatoon and all across 

Saskatchewan. Again these are good programs and good 

projects, and I fully support the work of the CIF on this front. 

But again it shouldn’t be sort of an ad hoc, one-off basis that 

we’re supporting the kinds of meaningful projects that we know 

make such a difference in the lives of people in our 

communities and in our urban communities and in our rural 

communities. But in the case of the urban Aboriginal dollars 

working with, in many circumstances, quite a vulnerable 

population and it’s simply correct to say that we’re failing to 

make the strategic important investments that we should be to 

be bringing about better outcomes for so many in this province, 

and certainly better outcomes that we would then realize as a 

province as well. 

 

The casinos as a whole have played an important role as it 

relates to economic development in Saskatchewan and skill 

training and training and job training for all Saskatchewan 

people. They’ve also played that role for First Nations and 

Métis people in this province. What we need to be doing is 

looking at how these casinos, studying their model a little bit 

and understanding that model and applying it other industries. 



632 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

Applying that model that’s found some success and duplicating 

and replicating and utilizing that for the broader good of 

Saskatchewan people across other industries as well, Mr. 

Speaker. But we also need to be looking at how we are we 

doing within the casinos themselves on this front as it relates to 

skills, training, and development. And are we hitting the marks 

that we’re desiring to? Are we meeting our objectives and how 

do we know that? How are we measuring that? Can we make 

improvements on this front? So there is many aspects on that 

front as well that we should also always be considering. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at this point in time I know it’s important for 

us to engage with Saskatchewan people as it relates to this piece 

of legislation. And we’ll continue to do that and we’ll bring 

forward the questions that we are receiving to the committee 

structure moving forward. We’ll bring them to the floor of this 

Assembly. We’ll work co-operatively to seek solutions that are 

in the best interests of Saskatchewan people. We hope to have a 

willing partner in government to go forward with that process in 

a constructive fashion that serves Saskatchewan people in the 

way that it should. 

 

And what you can count on, Mr. Speaker, is that as we go about 

that consultation, we’ll be engaging those that are impacted, 

those that are affected, and those that have had knowledge of 

how this structure works, to make sure that we understand in a 

whole and full sense what the intended consequences of this 

legislation are and what the unintended consequences may be, 

making sure then that we have the chance to refine and make 

improvements and do so in a co-operative fashion. 

 

But certainly as it relates to the CIF and those that have served 

the board and those that have worked to provide the resources 

back to Saskatchewan people, I simply want to say thank you. 

It’s meaningful work. It’s the kind of work that makes a 

difference in the lives of so many of our constituents — 

whether it’s through school projects or community projects all 

across this province, whether it is a celebration of centennial 

anniversaries of respective towns in this province, whether it’s 

been support for some of the sports teams in First Nations 

communities, whether it’s been support for the arts in urban 

centres across this province — the contributions have been 

significant. 

 

And all I would say, Mr. Speaker, is that we should go back and 

look at the kinds of initiatives that this is supporting. Skills 

training and development, supporting the development of 

human capital, enrichment of Aboriginal people across 

Saskatchewan, support for communities, bringing about 

healthier living and addressing physical fitness across 

Saskatchewan — these are all pieces that should be addressed, 

not just through the good charity of the CIF. They’re aspects 

that should be central to a plan of government. 

 

And unfortunately on this front, far too often, these are the 

kinds of aspects that make a meaningful difference, we know, 

in the lives of Saskatchewan people, in the communities here in 

Saskatchewan. But they seem to be overlooked far too often, 

Mr. Speaker. We’d urge not only for the good work of the CIF 

to continue to support these sorts of initiatives, but for a 

government to put forward a real plan that brings forward the 

real kind of change and progress that Saskatchewan people 

deserve. 

But at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, it’s been my pleasure to 

weigh in on debate here this evening. And I will move 

adjournment of Bill No. 9, The Saskatchewan Gaming 

Corporation Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 9, The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 

2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 11 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 11 — The Court 

Officials Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 sur les fonctionnaires de 

justice be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At this time, to get 

in to make a few comments on this Bill, I would like to join 

with my colleagues that have made some comments on that. 

And I know there’s a lot of straightforward answers that people 

will want to discuss and ask. And at this point in time I know 

there’s more questions that want to be asked in committee. And 

at this time I’m prepared to move this Bill, Bill No. 11, The 

Court Officials Act, 2011 to committee at this time, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General that Bill No. 

11, The Court Officials Act, 2011 be now read a second time. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be referred? I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 11, The Court 

Officials Act, 2011 be referred to the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 12 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 12 — The Court 

Officials Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 633 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again to join in on 

the debate on Bill No. 12, The Court Officials Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2011, just to give a few comments about it. 

And I again want to make it very clear, my colleagues have had 

a chance to raise some concerns in areas to make sure that we’re 

going in the right direction. And of course we’ve moved the 

first one. This one is just some name changes that have to fill in, 

and there’s a requirement to do that. So at this time we’re 

prepared, and I am prepared, to move this one to committee. So 

I do that now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General that Bill 

No. 12, The Court Officials Consequential Amendments Act, 

2011 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be referred? I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 12, The Court 

Officials Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 be referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 16 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert that Bill No. 16 — The 

Correctional Services Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to weigh in on debate and discussion this evening as it 

relates to Bill No. 16, The Correctional Services Act, 2011. 

 

This Bill, certainly it’s important for us too. It’s a 

comprehensive Bill. It’s a significant one of work, a significant 

amount of changes, and it’s difficult to gloss over that here 

tonight in any sort of substantive way, but we will touch on 

some of the points. 

 

What’s important for Saskatchewan people to know is that, as 

we move forward, consultation with stakeholders as it relates to 

this Bill is going to be most important. And like so many other 

Bills, we need to make sure that this Bill in fact is in the best 

interests of Saskatchewan people. So on that front we need to 

make sure we understand the intended consequences of 

government. Certainly there has been some statements from 

government as it relates to the changes put forward, a lot of 

which are from an administrative perspective, from a procedural 

perspective, from a perspective in some ways of structure. But 

we need to make sure that we fully understand and comprehend 

the changes that have been put forward. 

 

[19:45] 

 

More importantly, we need to make sure that these are in the 

best interests of those that are impacted by this Bill — those 

that work to provide public safety across Saskatchewan and that 

are responding in a front-line sort of way to the pressures of 

community safety, working in our institutions providing safety 

— and making sure that we’re dealing with the broad groups of 

stakeholders who are impacted by changes of the nature to the 

correctional Act. So that’s going to be important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know this Bill, if I understand correctly, is in response to a 

review that began a few years back. And this review, I believe, 

stemmed from a time where there was, I believe it was a jail 

break at that point in time, maybe in about 2008, 2009. I 

remember that the member from P.A. [Prince Albert] Carlton 

was the minister at the time, and in fact there was a fair amount 

of confusion from that minister and from this government 

whether or not there was any pressures in the correctional 

facilities as it relates to gang activity. I know, Mr. Speaker, that 

the minister’s suggestion at that point in time was that there was 

no challenges of gang activity in Saskatchewan’s correctional 

facility. That was the member from P.A. Carlton, then minister 

of Corrections and Public Safety, Mr. Speaker. Of course, 

nothing could be further from the truth, Mr. Speaker. And I say 

that in a disappointing fashion. But certainly there are immense 

pressures, immense challenges, and harsh realities that exist in 

communities across Saskatchewan and certainly within our 

correctional facilities as it relates to gang involvement, gang 

activity. 

 

Now I do know after that mishap where the minister, I believe, 

came out afterwards and corrected his statement, that in fact 

there were pressures in the facilities because of gang activity. 

After he had consulted his officials and sought some, maybe 

had received some advice, I do know at that point in time it led 

to the review of the correctional system, and I believe this is a 

consequence of that. And if I recall correctly, the report was 

The Road Ahead: Towards a Safer Correctional System. 

 

And I believe the goals itself to make improvements in the 

correctional system are important goals, admirable goals, and 

ones that in general that we would provide support to. However 

we need to make sure we understand all the changes that are 

being brought forward by this government at this point in time. 

And in fact we need to make sure that the changes that are 

being brought forward are in fact responsive and reflective of 

both that report but also the reality and pressures within 

Saskatchewan communities and some of the realities we face as 

it relates to our correctional facilities, but also crime and justice. 

So we will be reviewing those recommendations. We’ll be 

making sure that these are consistent on that front. And we’ll be 

making sure that, if so, that they’re in the best interests of the 

system as a whole but, more importantly, Saskatchewan people. 

 

I recognize that there’s changes to providing about a 

professional code of conduct for corrections staff. Certainly that 

would seem to be something that seems important and 

something that we would support, something that could then be 

enshrined. What we’ll be looking forward to is the process of 

seeing that process or that code develop, making sure that it’s as 



634 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

strong as it can be, that it can be as effective as it can be in 

serving Saskatchewan people and reflective of the realities that 

those workers are facing. And that’s what a lot of this comes 

down to is public safety, the safety of communities, the safety 

of people, and then the safety and support and structures as it 

relates to workers, and government’s response to that safety or 

to the concerns that exist. 

 

I know one thing that does concern Saskatchewan people as it 

relates to public safety, and we’re looking at some refinement, 

some of a modest nature, some with a bit more meat on them 

here, is that in fact, at a time where we’re supposed to be 

prospering as a province, we actually have a government that’s, 

by all signals, going to be cutting support for policing across 

Saskatchewan and putting on, I guess, onto the pocketbooks of 

Saskatchewan people the cost of providing the kind of public 

safety that Saskatchewan people deserve. 

 

And I know this is something that Saskatchewan people 

certainly have concern with, Mr. Speaker, when we look at a 

time many of our communities are growing in a significant 

fashion. We have lots of activity and certainly we have 

community safety pressures. And it’s certainly not the time to 

be pulling policing support from our communities as this 

government is signalling. We’ll see on budget day, which is just 

a couple of days away. But right now the Premier has indicated 

that he’s going to be asking Saskatchewan people to ante up, 

and if they want the level of policing in their communities that 

they’ve been used to, that they should pay more by way of their 

property taxes. 

 

We think there’s different routes to this, Mr. Speaker, and we 

know community safety and policing itself is something that’s 

important to Saskatchewan families and communities — rural, 

urban, right across Saskatchewan. 

 

Just looking through some of the other aspects of the 

legislation, I know that when we’re looking at some of the 

changes to the Bill, what we need to understand as well is that, 

put it in this broader context of a fairly strained correctional 

system as it relates to facilities as it is, in fact we have 

overcrowding in many of those scenarios and in fact needs as it 

relates to physical infrastructure. And this is coming at the same 

time as we’ve seen this government support in a full way the 

new crime Bill that’s coming federally, but fails to have any 

understanding of what the budgetary costs are for Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

What we know is that, as a result of this Bill, there will be more 

people incarcerated, more people locked up in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. But what we don’t know is the cost of this or the 

benefit or whether this is the best model to choose. And we find 

it incredibly disappointing that this government seems to accept 

any level of federal cost off-loading on to the books of 

Saskatchewan people and on to the provincial books and at the 

same time as we know that we’ve got pressures within some of 

our ministries, specifically in this case Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing. 

 

So we found it disappointing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to date, that 

this government can’t define, can’t articulate, can’t explain the 

cost of the crime Bill, of the expansion of the correctional 

facilities. And so when we see what might be modest 

refinements come forward by way of legislation here today, we 

I guess call on the government to understand the whole picture. 

And certainly that concept of failure to cost and understand the 

implications of changes to a crime Bill are consistent with many 

budgetary failures of this government. And it’s no wonder, Mr. 

Speaker, that the expenses in Saskatchewan continue to grow 

but that there’s many questions that emerge about value for 

dollar and what exactly it is Saskatchewan people are paying 

for. 

 

And if we look at this as just another example of federal 

off-loading on to the books of Saskatchewan people, what we 

see is that Saskatchewan people are picking up the tab in a 

significant way, whether it’s in Health, whether it’s in Social 

Services, whether it’s in Corrections, Mr. Speaker, for 

off-loading of the federal government. 

 

And I think one example that connects to this so significantly is 

the off-loading which we . . . of expenditure on the social side 

by way of the consequences of underfunding First Nations 

education in Saskatchewan. Because we know the federal 

government has shirked its responsibility for many years on this 

front and that has failed to deliver a fair and equitable funding 

to First Nations education in Saskatchewan. And we know that 

the consequences are immense. And the consequences are in 

fact felt in the very ministry for which this Bill is making 

changes in, that being corrections and justice and policing. 

 

What we know, Mr. Speaker, is that in failing to stand up for 

Saskatchewan people and in continuing to simply accept 

underfunding of First Nations education, we know that the costs 

will mount as it relates to expenditures in this province, the 

expenditures that Saskatchewan people are going to have 

off-loaded on to them. Those costs are real. They’re significant, 

and they are in ministry after ministry. But significantly they’re 

in Corrections, significantly they’re in Justice, significantly 

they’re in Health, and significantly they’re in Social Services. 

And these are direct costs of the underfunding of First Nations 

education by the federal government. 

 

So with action on that front and with that off-loading of 

responsibility or shirking of responsibility, Saskatchewan 

people are picking up a tab for very expensive programs and 

services. Moreover, Mr. Speaker, we could be making leaps and 

bounds of progress as it relates to economic and social gains if 

we would put forward a strategy to close the First Nations 

outcome gap in education. And certainly a large part of that is 

connected directly back to the unfair, inequitable funding that 

First Nations education receives, Mr. Speaker. So that should be 

a significant focus and priority of government. It seems to be 

something that’s of fleeting interest to this government, but the 

costs are real. The costs of inaction, the costs of inequity, the 

costs of an unfair funding of education are real in the lives of 

children across Saskatchewan born into an education system 

that’s underfunded and disabled from providing the kinds of 

outcomes that we should be providing to young people here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Further than that, it’s limiting what we can do and what we can 

be as a province economically and socially. And this is where 

we would be urging significant improvements that would 

certainly impact our Corrections ministry here in Saskatchewan 

as well. So open up all sorts of economic gains, in fact 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 635 

articulated by economist Eric Howe, an $80 billion economic 

gain if we could focus our efforts to close that Aboriginal 

education gap. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s fair to say this is a comprehensive Bill 

that’s been put forward. There is significant changes that have 

been brought forward and there’s going to be an awful lot of 

consultation as we move forward to make sure that this in fact 

serves Saskatchewan people in the way that it should be. But on 

all those other priorities that should be front and centre of 

government, we’re going to continue to be urging of 

government to take the meaningful steps that it should and to 

make a priority closing the unacceptable underfunding of 

Aboriginal education and to be frank, the unacceptable 

consequences that it has on the individual lives of children in 

Saskatchewan, that next generation, the generation previous, 

and making sure that we can fulfill the kinds of outcomes that 

we should in the lives of that next generation. 

 

Not just that, Mr. Speaker. In doing so we can bring about 

significant economic opportunity. Unlocking economic activity 

and growth to the tune of $80 billion in this province is no small 

feat; more than the total sum of all potash sold in the history of 

this province, Mr. Speaker. So this is about significant 

economic development. It’s about improving the lives of young 

people and it’s about making significant social improvements, 

not to mention a direct reduction in what we’re spending in 

Justice and in Health and in Social Services by making those 

sorts of changes. 

 

So we see quite a few changes that have been introduced by the 

minister opposite when he put forward this Bill: new provisions 

to create the ability for an inmate to appeal a disciplinary 

decision in the loss of remission to an appeal adjudicator. We 

see the code of conduct. We see changes as it relates to the 

Provincial Ombudsman or the connect to the Ombudsman and 

the Human Rights Commission and Privacy Commissioner. We 

see administrative changes. We see changes as it relates to 

procedure. 

 

And certainly as I read through, there’s certainly aspects and 

goals for which we support within this Bill, but we need to 

make sure that this Bill is in fact reflective of the report that was 

commissioned and making sure that this is in the best interests 

of Saskatchewan people, that this is the most efficient and 

effective way of going at, addressing the challenges that exist. 

So that’ll be the work that is before us as an opposition. Those 

discussions, that consultation, those committee meetings, those 

questions to the minister, that will all be occurring as we move 

forward but at this point in time I’d simply like to thank all the 

individuals who work so hard across Saskatchewan to provide 

public safety and provide the work in our corrections facilities, 

and that do all the work that they do to provide safety within 

this province. 

 

At this point in time Mr. Speaker, I’d move adjournment of Bill 

No. 16, The Correctional Services Act, 2011. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 16, The Correctional Services Amendment Act, 2011. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[20:00] 

 

Bill No. 17 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 17 — The Child 

Care Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

here tonight to enter the discussion on Bill No. 17, An Act to 

amend The Child Care Act, 2011. What this Bill proposes to do, 

Mr. Speaker, is twofold actually. One of the things is to remove 

the reference to the family services board. As the minister 

pointed out in her remarks, family services board was meant to 

review decisions respecting child care licensing, but this board 

had never been created and there are other mechanisms for 

reviewing some of these decisions. The other part of this, Mr. 

Speaker, is allowing retroactive payments, whether it’s on 

subsidies or grants, to be made to the next, to the fiscal year. 

What happens right now, says the minister here, “By amending 

section 27 of The Child Care Act a minister’s order or an order 

of council will no longer be necessary.” So it’s not that 

retroactive payments didn’t happen, but they needed an order in 

council. And now this piece of legislation will take care of that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I have to say, last fall when Bill No. 17 was introduced, as 

someone who’s particularly interested in child care as a parent 

of young children, who knows many, many young people or 

many, many parents who also have young children, who are 

right in the thick of trying to figure out how you balance work 

and school and being a good parent as well, Mr. Speaker, child 

care is quite near and dear to my heart. I think my, obviously, 

my main responsibility here is representing the folks of 

Saskatoon Riversdale, but I think my perspective as a parent of 

a young child and particularly a mother becomes very relevant 

here in this debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I was quite keen when I heard that Bill 17 was coming forward, 

The Child Care Amendment Act, and I was eager to hear what 

was going to be in this Bill. I was ever hopeful that it would be 

something, something more substantial. I know that I’ve stood 

in this Assembly before and said the one thing that we think 

here is missing is an overall long-term vision and plan for 

supporting families, Mr. Speaker, with a plan to implement that 

vision. So I was ever hopeful that that would be present in this 

Bill, but that is not the case. 

 

Today actually, as a matter of fact, we happened to have in your 

gallery, we had about 14 directors of child care centres here 

who brought some of their concerns to the legislature. These are 

people who have been on the front lines of child care for many 

years. There was one woman here who’s worked in the field for 

23 years, I believe. So they know what child care looks like on 

the front lines. 

 

And one of their big concerns is, it’s great to create spaces, Mr. 

Speaker, but if you don’t have the staff to support those spaces, 



636 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

there’s absolutely no point. Instead what you get is harried staff 

who doesn’t have, who just can’t do the work, Mr. Speaker. It 

becomes more and more difficult. And I know this is the one 

thing, when I’ve mentioned the need for a plan here, I’ve heard 

the minister or ministers get up and talk about the need or talk 

about spaces, but a child care plan is not just about spaces. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan we have some huge issues around child 

care. One of them is the subsidy piece, Mr. Speaker, which is 

right now offered through Social Services. So actually I’d like 

to identify that as the first problem. When I asked questions 

about child care today, Mr. Speaker, we have two ministers who 

get up to respond — the Minister of Education and the Minister 

of Social Services — because the Minister of Education’s 

responsible for child care while the Minister of Social Services 

is responsible for the subsidy portion. So I would point out that 

perhaps that’s one of the first things that needs to change. 

Perhaps this should all be consolidated under one ministry. I 

might suggest perhaps a ministry for families, and that could 

support a broad range of areas underneath that, Mr. Speaker. 

But I would offer that that might be one of the problems here — 

not having a plan. 

 

Around the subsidies, I’d like to talk a little bit about the 

subsidies. So right now a family with an income of $1,640, 

which is not much more over minimum wage, someone 

working full-time and making not much more over minimum 

wage, $1,640, you start to lose, with one child you start to lose 

your subsidy once you reach that rate. That’s not a whole lot of 

money, Mr. Speaker, to not be able to be eligible for a full child 

care subsidy. And when we’ve had increasing costs over recent 

years here in Saskatchewan — we’ve had rents go up; we’ve 

had housing costs go up; we’ve had food and utilities go up — 

not changing that in many, many, many, many years is 

problematic, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know that one of the other problems, and I know this did 

change I believe in 2006, something called the exit threshold. 

So you can make a little bit more money and still be eligible for 

subsidies. And I do have some written questions in, I believe, 

on this particular topic, but so you might make $50,000 and still 

be eligible for a very small subsidy. But I’m curious to know 

exactly what that subsidy looks like. But we have a whole host 

of problems with the subsidy piece. 

 

And one of them we talked about earlier today, Mr. Speaker, 

was the bureaucracy involved with it. So you have child care 

directors who, every month for every family, fill out an 

attendance sheet with all the hours that little Johnny or Mary 

were in the facility. They handwrite all these. This is not an 

online process. It’s a form that they fill out for every single 

family, and then they submit this form to the ministry. And the 

subsidy department then goes through these and enters them or 

does whatever they do with them. So we’ve got child care 

directors who are spending a whole bunch of time filling out 

paperwork. We’ve got people in the ministry filling out and 

attending to paperwork. 

 

And then we’ve got families who have to scrape together or 

gather together all their forms every month when it comes to 

their earnings. So you’ve got all this paper shuffling in essence 

that happens, which may just result in a minimal subsidy or the 

loss of a subsidy when you make $1,640, Mr. Speaker. I think 

that that’s problematic. And I’d wonder how much money 

we’re spending on the paper shuffling part of it when we should 

in fact be investing this money directly into children. 

 

And we need to recognize that child care is not . . . Child care 

serves many purposes here in Saskatchewan and elsewhere. 

First of all, it supports families. It supports parents to be able to 

be engaged either in education so they can become engaged in 

the workforce or it supports people who are in the workforce. It 

supports and provides opportunities for children. And it also is 

an economic development, economic development tour . . . I’m 

having trouble speaking here tonight. It is an economic 

development tool, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what that means is how can employers find, how can it 

make . . . We hear the government talk about needing to find 

more skilled workers here. Well we have skilled workers here. 

We have to make sure we provide the supports for them so they 

can be part of the workforce. And for anyone who has children, 

we all know that if you have had to venture out or if you do 

venture out into paid work, if you don’t have child care that you 

can count on and feel good about, you are probably the worst 

possible employee you could be. If you are at work and you 

have insecure child care where you’re not quite sure what 

exactly is going on or if your son or daughter is getting the 

same care or similar care that you would be providing, then 

how do you be the best possible employee? 

 

And that’s what we want people to do. We want people to be 

the best possible employees so they can contribute to our 

economy. But we want people to be the best possible parents 

too because, when we have children, Mr. Speaker, we want to 

do right by our kids and make sure that they have every chance 

to grow up to be fine, contributing citizens. And we need to 

invest in our young people to make sure this happens. 

 

I know from my own experience actually, from talking to some 

people I know who are right in the thick of child care issues. I 

belong to a Yahoo moms’ group. So an online group, a 

parenting group. There’s probably 100-plus women; it’s not a 

very big group. But I can tell you at least once a month, Mr. 

Speaker, there is a frantic post to that Yahoo group calling on 

all the moms in the group to try to help find a child care space 

because somehow child care has fallen through. I’ve seen . . . 

I’ve heard women on that group actually working on Ph.D.s, 

Mr. Speaker, who’ve had to withdraw from their education 

program because their child care, they couldn’t find child care 

that worked with their education and worked for them. 

 

So the experts, to me, Mr. Speaker, are the people who are in 

the field providing the services and the people who need the 

services. They’re the best people to tell us what we should be 

doing as a government and the kind of supports they need to be 

the best possible employees, student, and students and parents. 

And I think that there’s much benefit to be had to be reaching 

out and talking to some of these folks to see what they think a 

made-in-Saskatchewan child care strategy should look like. 

 

Ultimately I think again this investment in our young people, 

our very youngest people and our employees, would reap much 

good, Mr. Speaker. I think that we are missing a lost 

opportunity by not putting together a long-term child care plan. 

That vision, developing a vision based on Saskatchewan values 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 637 

— what child care providers and what parents and what child 

care educators are telling us — developing that vision and then 

putting down those markers saying, well we’re going to get here 

by this time, and here by this time. And so people can measure 

and say, you know what? You are meeting your goals. 

 

But this issue just around spaces, Mr. Speaker, and I know any 

time that there’s ever any criticism around child care, I hear the 

ministers get up and say, well we’re creating more spaces. Well 

unfortunately by the end of this government’s mandate they’ve 

committed to 2,000 new spaces over the next four years, which 

really is a commitment to keep us near bottom of the pack, Mr. 

Speaker. So 13,000 spaces in Saskatchewan relative to a 

province like Manitoba with the same population which has 

close to 30,000 spaces. 

 

Spaces are not . . . It’s not just about spaces, Mr. Speaker. A 

child care plan is not just about creating spaces. I’ve heard 

people say that there’s . . . Sometimes child care directors and 

people working on the front lines in child care centres and child 

care homes say one of the issues: so you create spaces; you 

don’t have the staff to fill them because child care workers 

actually, on average, make about what someone working at 

Wal-Mart makes, Mr. Speaker, with no education and no 

student debts and without the heart-wrenching difficulties that 

can sometimes happen in a child care facility. So the people 

we’re asking to be responsible for our children are being paid 

poorly, I would say. We are paying the people that we trust to 

care for our children; we are not valuing them. I would argue 

that actually we don’t do a very good job here in Saskatchewan 

in valuing care work. 

 

And I think whether it’s looking at different ways to value 

parental leaves, Quebec has done an amazing job. Aside from 

their child care, the one thing Quebec has done, they have opted 

out of the employment insurance program in about 2006. And 

they offer their own maternity, paternity, and parental program 

which is better than the national program. 

 

So again valuing care is about making sure we’re valuing 

parents who provide care, but it’s also about making sure we’re 

valuing the care that child care workers are providing. And I 

think we do a very, very poor job in the job . . . We do a very 

poor job in valuing those who do care work here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d like to point to a couple other provinces who have done a 

very, very good job. Prince Edward Island, a province much 

smaller than us actually, has decided that they need to do better 

when it comes to child care. Prince Edward Island actually has 

gone from near the bottom of the class as well, just like 

Saskatchewan, to close to the top. You’ve got Quebec, 

Manitoba, and then Prince Edward Island. How did Prince 

Edward Island get there? There was a political will to do things 

differently and to make sure the supports for families were in 

place so their citizens could be employed or be educated and 

feel good about the care that their children were receiving. 

 

[20:15] 

 

So if Prince Edward Island can do it, we most certainly should 

be able to do it here in Saskatchewan. We have record revenues. 

Actually if you look at over the last, including this upcoming 

budget, probably about $50 billion, $50 billion in revenue here 

in this province. So please don’t tell me that there aren’t the 

resources there to be able to invest in our youngest citizens and 

ensuring that they are well cared for and that families have what 

they need to be the best possible parents to raise the best 

possible kids. So $50 billion is a lot of money, Mr. Speaker, and 

I believe that the resources are there if the political will was 

there. If Prince Edward Island can do it, we certainly can as 

well. 

 

Again I think I want to highlight one of the big things that the 

child care directors who were here today were talking about, 

and it’s about recruitment and retention of staff. So you’ve got 

child care workers . . . First of all, we’ve got a bit of a 

mishmash across the system. You can make anywhere from $10 

to $20 an hour if you work in the child care system. And there’s 

no standardization of wages, and wages are abysmal, Mr. 

Speaker, but I’ve already talked about that a little bit. 

 

So there’s no standardization of wages. There’s no 

standardization of what child care rates are paid, and there’s 

some difficulty . . . Child cares are run by parent boards. So you 

might in one child care facility have a top-notch professional 

board with people who have much experience sitting on boards 

and administrating. And then in the next child care facility, they 

might not have the resources or the ability to manage a board 

quite as well. So we have a total mishmash across the board 

when it comes to child care. So I think this government needs to 

see this as a huge opportunity. This is a great way of saying to 

Saskatchewan citizens, we value the contributions you make, 

and we want to put in place the supports so you can achieve 

what you need to achieve. 

 

I was chatting with someone a few days ago actually. The 

francophone child care in Saskatoon, Felix le Chat, right now 

has a waiting list of about 150 spaces. There are 150 people on 

the waiting list. One of those families, Mr. Speaker, are people 

who are new, new to Saskatoon. These are people who are new 

to Canada. They came to Saskatoon. They are professionals, 

francophone — French speakers. They’ve come to Saskatoon. 

They had wonderful job opportunities, and they were led to 

believe that there would be supports for them when they got 

here. 

 

So these two professionals have a young family, and they’ve 

got here, and they realized that there’s a 150-child waiting list 

for the child care that they need to get into. Their kids speak no 

English right now. And it’s not that their children aren’t going 

to learn how to speak English, but coming to a new country 

where a new language is spoken, they really want to be in this 

francophone child care. It would be the most comfortable and 

best place to help them integrate into the Saskatoon and 

Saskatchewan economy. So that’s just one story, Mr. Speaker 

— 150 spaces at Felix le Chat in Saskatoon. 

 

There are these cases all across the board. But again I want to 

emphasize, and I know the women, the child care directors here 

today, say this is not just about spaces. This is about the ability 

of child care centres to recruit and retain qualified staff, and 

retaining involves being able to pay them well. There are very 

few people who enter the child care field who actually stay. 

What ends up happening is when you’re making about $20,000 

a year and you’re trying to support your own family, you realize 

that that’s not sustainable, Mr. Speaker, so you leave the field. 



638 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

You may have gathered student loans while you were getting 

your education. 

 

I think another thing to point out is there is very little difference 

between someone who does the first three months of training or 

the first year of training or the second year of training. There is 

very little incentive for employees to go on to do the second 

level of training, aside from of course that personal motivation 

which I believe child care workers have, but there is very little 

financial incentive to do that second piece of training, Mr. 

Speaker, which is I think a total shame. 

 

So again with Bill No. 17, I was optimistic in the fall when this 

Bill came forward that this was the time that the government 

was going to tell us something big and bold about child care. 

They were going to fix the subsidy system. They were going to 

address wages and training, but sadly, Mr. Speaker, that did not 

happen. Instead we get the removal of the Family Services 

Board from the Act, and we get retroactive payments, which is 

great, but that was already happening through orders in council. 

 

So I personally am very disappointed with this Bill and think it 

could do so much more. And I think it’s up to government to do 

so much more, especially when we have the resources here and 

we have the economy that we do have. It’s important to make 

sure that people have the supports to be the best possible 

employees or students and the best possible parents. Nobody 

wants to abdicate their role of being a parent when they’re at 

work. But you want to make sure you have the supports in place 

so your mind can be focused and so you can do the work that 

you need to do and then you can come home and be the parent 

you can be, and you weren’t stressed out all day thinking that 

your child wasn’t safe or secure or happy and loved in the care 

that they were receiving. 

 

So again I’m disappointed with Bill No. 17. It could have been 

so much more. And I know the people here today would like to 

see, would love to see, would implore the government to 

seriously look at overhauling the whole child care system. Let’s 

take a look at the subsidy system. Is it working? No. What it is, 

it’s a whole bunch of paper shuffling for parents, for child care 

directors, and for ministry staff. So overhauling and reviewing, 

reviewing and overhauling that subsidy system, making sure 

we’re paying staff well so they can do their job well and will 

stick around in the field. 

 

Child care workers do this work because they love to do it, but 

that shouldn’t mean that they shouldn’t be paid well to do the 

work of caring. So with that again, I just want to say I’m 

disappointed about Bill No. 17. And I look forward perhaps in 

two days from now, the budget, the government will come 

forward with a really great child care proposal. I hope so, but 

I’m not holding my breath. But we’ll continue to talk about this 

in the legislature and elsewhere, Mr. Speaker. And with that, I 

would like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 17, The Child Care Amendment Act, 2011. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

Bill No. 18 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 18 — The Degree 

Authorization Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to enter into the debate on Bill No. 18, An Act respecting 

the Authority to Provide Degree Programs and to Grant 

Post-secondary Degrees and making consequential 

amendments to other Acts. That’s quite a handful, the title there. 

It’s an important piece of legislation that we have a good debate 

about this because as I read through it and I read some of the 

documents that we’ve got and some of the feedback that we’ve 

been able to do, I’m not sure what the purpose or the need is. I 

understand what the outcome will be, but is this a solution in 

search of a problem? 

 

I think that when the minister got up and he gave actually it was 

one of the longer ministerial speeches to enter the second 

debate, I think that . . . second reading. I find it very interesting 

as I read through it, and it was quite long — it was, like I say, a 

two-parter; it was before and after supper — and it was . . . I’m 

not sure whether that helped the understanding it further. But 

essentially what he’s saying when he got up and spoke was, and 

I’ll quote, “This legislation holds three key tenets. One, it is 

meant to bolster accessibility for students in our province.” It 

goes on to talk, “. . . population and economy continue to grow, 

so too do the needs of the province to meet an increasingly 

vibrant labour market . . .” 

 

So he’s talking about the needs of the province. He flipped to 

that from what the students had as needs for accessibility. I 

want to talk a little bit later about what accessibility could and 

should really mean for students. But he’s really then, I think he 

sort of flipped to what the economy needs or what employers 

are looking for, and that’s not quite the same thing. That’s not 

quite the same thing. He also slid in the fact that — and I don’t 

know whether this was the minister freelancing because I know 

he tends to want to go in this direction — but he says essentially 

the Act is meant to help ensure we are addressing a public 

policy void that this government has inherited that other 

Canadian jurisdictions have worked to address over the course 

of the last several years. 

 

So there lies in I think what people are generalizing as, here is a 

solution in search of a problem. He’s got a policy void. 

Nobody’s been talking about this policy void, but somehow it’s 

come up and he’s going to solve it, no matter whether we like it 

or not. And he’s got an answer, but we don’t know what the 

problem is. But he says it’s about accessibility, so we’ll talk 

about that. 

 

Then he says, then he goes on to say the second key tenet . . . 

Because he’s got three. The first was the accessibility. Second, 

it ensures a robust quality assurance process. And he talks about 

how other groups are doing this kind of thing, but again that 

doesn’t talk about a need. It sort of talks about a characteristic 

of the solution, the solution you’re going to have, these other 

institutions being able to give degrees. And you have quality 

assurance, so that’s good to know. But we haven’t yet decided 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 639 

whether we’re going to do that or not, but I guess if we’re going 

to do it, then that’s good to have. But I’m not sure that’s a 

reason. That doesn’t sort of fall into, this is why we need it. We 

need it because we’re going to have a quality assurance 

program? Well it’s good to know, but I’m not sure that that’s a 

pressing need, doesn’t fill the pressing need category. 

 

And then third, it talks about that the legislation protects the 

long-standing reputations of the University of Regina and the 

University of Saskatchewan. It talks about how we’re going to 

make sure that that happens, protecting the word university, 

protecting the word varsity. It’s going to talk about how we are 

going to ensure that these degree-granting institutions are 

legitimately Saskatchewan, based in Saskatchewan. Even if it’s 

only a post office, as least we know it’s here. 

 

And that’s all fair and well, but the question is again, why are 

we doing, what is the need? And when you kind of leave the 

need out, then you get into an issue of you have a real problem 

with unintentional consequences because you’re really trying to 

do too much. 

 

I’ll talk a minute about issues around accessibility and why 

students . . . And it’s always good and it’s always worthwhile to 

be talking about how we can help students get their best 

possible education here in Saskatchewan. That’s a very laudable 

goal, very laudable goal, but we haven’t heard the need. We 

haven’t heard students — and the minister has not demonstrated 

at all that he’s been pressured because of access — students are 

feeling there’s just not enough degree-granting institutions in 

this province. 

 

Again it sort of fits into that three-more-politician rule of thumb 

these guys on the other side have — that they’ve got a solution, 

but nobody asked for that solution. They are looking for a 

problem to fit their answer. They want three more politicians; 

now they want degree-granting institutions. So I don’t know. 

They are getting things kind of upside down here. Three more 

politicians, more degree-granting institutions. 

 

Today we heard, for example, about the child care issue. The 

child care issue. What really people, when they go to school and 

they get their . . . And I don’t even know if it makes a 

difference to them whether it’s a degree or a certificate. All they 

want to know is, when they do their work that they get paid 

well enough that they can pay their rent or pay their mortgage 

and have enough money to make ends meet. That’s what we’re 

hearing people talk about. And I think people are talking about 

that and I think if the government really seemed to care about 

these issues, they would be thinking about those kinds of things 

and not going down this road of degree-granting programs. 

 

And maybe it is the thing, but you know when I looked through 

it, and it’s quite a thorough piece of legislation and it is very 

interesting, but I know that they hired this fellow, Alex Usher, a 

consultant. His company is called Higher Education Strategy 

Associates and the government . . . There’s some fanfare now. I 

have to give them a little bit of credit because at least they did 

consult on this as opposed to the three new politicians. No 

consultation on that, but on this they did. 

 

[20:30] 

 

But again the minister’s speech does not line up with this. In 

fact actually when I read through this, there is no talk about 

students wanting more access to degree-granting programs. In 

fact actually, and I guess that some of the students were invited 

to this but really from my read of this, they don’t really talk. 

They’re not quoting students or any kind of, and I hate to call a 

student a consumer, but nothing from the consumer point of 

view here saying, this is what we need. This will keep the 

marketplace of learning vibrant and I can have more choices 

and it’ll match up to the kind of careers I want to have. It really 

doesn’t talk about that. It sort of flips it around, as I said, to 

really being something driven by, in this case, the minister who 

really has a mission to fill his policy void which nobody has 

been talking about. And he hasn’t proved that anybody’s been 

talking to him about it and saying, hey you’ve got a real issue 

there you have to resolve. 

 

No issue. Nobody’s raised it and in fact from what it seems 

from this report by Mr. Usher, that in fact it caused more 

concern because people said, so why are you doing this? Why 

are you doing this? Aren’t the two universities good enough? 

Aren’t they doing enough work? Aren’t they innovative 

enough? Aren’t they meeting the needs? And we do have the 

First Nations University and the Saskatchewan Institute of 

Indian Technology and Gabriel Dumont. Aren’t those working 

well? And of course, SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology]. Aren’t they working well enough? 

What is the real need? There has not been a real case made for 

this. 

 

And you know, I think this is a real problem because you do get 

into situations where, say, you’re creating a situation where 

you’re going to have some unintentional consequences or 

something’s going to happen. And I think that we have to be 

very careful. We have a lot of faith in our two universities and I 

actually happen to have . . . New journalists I see up there. 

Anyways, I happen to be alumni of both universities, so I feel 

really good about the two universities and I think they’re 

wonderful institutions. And they’ve been able to adapt to the 

21st century in an amazing way, in an amazing way. And so 

I’m not actually seeing the real, real need here. 

 

And I think that when we’re having government pressures, and 

we’re going to be seeing a budget in a couple of days where the 

government’s going to be delivering this budget of mixed 

messages about austerity and prosperity, here we have the 

situation where we’re going to be talking to some institutions 

that create these new programs. And I imagine, and usually this 

is the case, a degree program usually costs more than a 

certificate program. So you’re going to have that scenario out 

there. 

 

But I think that it’s going to be one of mixed messages here, 

because then they say, and I just want to talk about this for a 

minute, because they talk about this quality assurance program 

or process and he outlines it quite well in the Act. It’s part IV 

— how it’s going to be worked out, the body, the terms of 

appointment, the quorum, all of this stuff, how you’re going to 

get paid and the fact the ministry will pay for clerical 

assistance; it’s the law. I found that kind of interesting that it’s 

the law that the ministry will pay for clerical help. You would 

think they’d be able to organize that. In fact I would even 

suggest that I would even think that it would be one of those 



640 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

situations where you would want to have an association of 

higher learning and they would, in fact, look after this by fees 

themselves and it would be administered by them at an 

arm’s-length process, much like a professional body is. 

 

You know, I know from my own experience with the STF 

[Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation], they administer their 

quality assurance program themselves. It’s not administered by 

the Ministry of Education. They have a way to make sure it’s 

done well. It’s set up in the STF Act in fact. And so it can be 

done, but in fact it’s the teachers who pay for it. It’s not the 

Ministry of Education that pays for it. And here you have, it 

sounds like the Government of Saskatchewan’s going to be 

paying for all the parts of this, the degree-granting program by 

these other schools. And I don’t have a problem with the other 

schools, but I think it’s part of doing of business that they 

should be paying for their own quality assurance, much like any 

other professional organization. We don’t pay for the quality 

assurance of teachers. We don’t pay for many others. And so 

why are we now paying for the quality assurance of some of 

these other bodies? I don’t know. I think that’s kind of a new 

thing, and I don’t think it’s been really well thought out. 

 

The other part of this though too is I think that — and I really 

did want to speak to this — is the fact that when we talk about 

quality assurance . . . And we’ve not really talked about what 

happens when a student has a complaint. What is their process 

now? And I know that it’s in the university Acts because we 

debated this a couple of years ago when this same minister had 

brought that forward in terms of, in his view, it was updating 

the old appeal processes. At the universities, it was called the 

visitor. And a visitor was someone you could appeal to when a 

student felt that he had been done wrong by the university. 

University of Regina had a visitor. University of Saskatchewan 

had a visitor. And now that’s not the case, and it’s all done 

internally. Fair enough, but I’m not sure that’s been addressed 

in here, and I think that’s a critical part. 

 

So I think that this is . . . There are some questions I have, some 

questions. And it’ll be very interesting that when we eventually 

get to the committee on this. If the minister is willing to give 

some straight answers, we’d be very, very interested here. 

 

I want to just draw your attention, Mr. Speaker, there’s an 

article in Maclean’s magazine. Now it is from April 2nd, 2007 

so it is not quite four years, but it raises some of the issues that I 

think we should think about in terms of this. And it goes, and I 

want to quote this: 

 

When contemplating education options, it’s important to 

understand how your degree will be viewed after 

graduation. Canada has no national accreditation body. 

Each province has its own system for awarding the right to 

grant degrees, as well as separate systems for private 

institutions. This has led to inter-provincial 

inconsistencies, and confusion for students. 

 

And so we know, and the minister has . . . End of quote. And 

we know that when the minister made his remarks, he talked 

about how this falls in line with other provinces, but he 

neglected to say which other provinces and what percentage of 

the Canadian population. It might be the four Atlantic provinces 

which make up, I think, about 3 or 5 per cent of the Canadian 

population. But he’s probably talking about Alberta and BC 

[British Columbia] — I’ll assume that’s what he’s talking about 

— which is much more significant. So they have their systems 

out there, but I know in BC, and this article talks about there 

were only four degree-granting schools in BC in 1989 and now 

it’s 14, and some have been rolled in together to become a 

university. And of course this is the concern that our two 

universities have here, because they have national, in fact they 

have international reputations, and the problem is that if you get 

other universities involved from the province, it might seem 

appropriate when you’re enrolled, but then when you graduate, 

you say, so what do we do with this degree? 

 

And so then what happens is that students who are graduating 

with a degree from some of these other places, these newly 

granted schools that can give out degrees, what’s happening is 

that they’re not being necessarily recognized when they want to 

go into post-graduate work. And this becomes a problem 

because . . . And the schools will say, well we don’t want to 

recognize your program from institute A because we’re not 

sure, even though it says you have a degree, we’re not sure that 

it has the same rigorous approach to academics as, say, the 

University of Regina or First Nations University or University 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And so they’re saying, so based on that, we’re not going to 

admit you to a post-graduate program, whether it be your 

master’s or PGD, a post-graduate degree, or whatever. Now in 

this article, people might say this amounts to academic 

snobbery. And now I know that you have academic snobbery 

and you have academic . . . Oh, what’s the . . . incestuous 

relationships when you go to the same school for your three 

degrees, and that’s a problem too. But what’s he really talking 

about? What they’re talking about in this article is the 

Association of Universities and Colleges of Canada, often 

referred to as AUCC, and this is an advocacy organization that 

represents 91 public and private not-for-profit universities. 

 

And so in many ways this article talks about the fact that 

because there’s no national accreditation body, many registrars 

use the AUCC membership as a de facto accreditation, and I 

believe that’s the situation for the U of R and the U of S, that 

they are members of AUCC. So if there ever was a policy void 

that I think that our minister should be working on, is maybe 

this national accreditation should be the thing that would make 

sense for all our students as they move across the country. I can 

think of my own daughter who ended up going to school here at 

the U of R, went to school in Nelson, BC, went to school . . . 

And then she finally ended up in Halifax. 

 

Students love to travel around the country, and it’s a wonderful 

way of getting your education. But you have to have some 

consistency as you go across the land. If you are just going and 

you’re assuming . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. Yes, I can 

relate to that: who pays? That’s right. And so you want to have 

some consistency. You want to know what you’re getting when 

you do this, and it’s a wonderful opportunity for young people. 

 

So this is something I think that we need to really think about is 

so . . . I really want to acknowledge the good work of AUCC. 

But if they are being used as a de facto accreditation body, 

that’s not necessarily their role either. And I think it’s important 

that we may want to think about encouraging the minister really 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 641 

to take a look at what AUCC does. And I think that in this Bill, 

it really . . . You know, and the minister in his remarks refers to 

having people with expertise in this area, but he doesn’t really, 

he doesn’t really mention AUCC. And I think this is an 

important area that we would be asking questions about. What 

does AUCC feel about this? What can they do to make sure 

there’s quality assurance? And I think this is really incredibly 

important. So I think this is huge. 

 

Now I do want to just let you know of course in our role as, in 

opposition, that it’s our hope and our . . . What we set out to do 

is, when we receive these Bills, of course we send out letters to 

stakeholders and ask them, so what do you think? What do you 

think about this? And we did get some responses, and I just 

want to let you to know that we did get one from Gary 

Tompkins, the Chair of University of Regina Faculty 

Association. He wrote back to our question about the Bill No. 

18, The Degree Authorization Act. And he responded, and it 

was very interesting what he had to say. And I will quote: 

 

I felt that as a public policy exercise, the committee’s 

actions were backward, having identified a solution 

(increase the number of degree granting institutions) [that 

was in brackets] while trying to identify a problem the 

action would fix.  

 

[20:45] 

 

And so here you had a . . . And he goes on to say: 

 

It appeared to me that the expansion of the number of 

institutions with degree granting authority was a “done 

deal” when no specific problem was identified. This 

feeling was strengthened by the circumstances 

surrounding the meeting — we received very short notice, 

there was only one meeting in Saskatoon, and it was 

scheduled during the university examination period.  

 

So this is a real issue. And he goes on to talk about, you know, 

universities are characterized by having two fundamental 

characteristics: academic freedom — how does that play into 

that whole discussion? — and bicameral governance. So that’s 

really, really important. 

 

And so I think there’s some really important . . . You know, and 

I think this is and I have to say while, you know, sometimes we 

think people who work at universities have really complicated 

answers, his answer to the situation around access was really 

straightforward. I believe, and I quote, “I believe the best way 

to improve post-secondary access for students is to adequately 

fund public institutions of higher learning.” And there you go. 

If there’s a problem, then I think we can find it within our 

current public post-secondary system, but it’s all about 

appropriate funding. And I think this is really true.  

 

And so I think that I do have some questions about this Act. 

And I think that while I look through this report by Mr. Usher, I 

have to agree with Mr. Tompkins that it’s a solution in search of 

a problem. And if there really is a problem, of course the 

problem hasn’t been really well documented, then there are 

other ways that we can deal with it. 

 

And I do want to refer to another piece of a . . . another report 

that came out because now maybe the minister’s talking about 

accessibility in a way I’m not catching. But usually accessibility 

for students means either it’s costs, or distance, housing, and 

waiting lists — can they get into the program they’re trying to 

get into in a timely fashion? — all of those things. And all of 

those things can be documented, and there can be a case well 

made. 

 

And I was just asking some of my colleagues before I got up 

and, Mr. Speaker, you’ll remember the debates in 2004 to 2006, 

even earlier, about waiting lists at SIAST. And we really 

haven’t heard that much. Maybe I haven’t . . . Maybe I’ve been, 

you know, I’ve been on other issues, but I haven’t really heard 

that much about the waiting lists. And that’s a very good thing. 

That’s a very good thing. And if that’s the case, then hats off to 

all the people who are making that happen. 

 

And I know for example in my own riding, SIAST has done a 

fantastic job of moving off Idylwyld and going down to Mount 

Royal Collegiate. And the programs they’re teaching out of 

Mount Royal is phenomenal. And so they’re really moving to 

increase access. So that’s what I’m thinking access means. 

Maybe, maybe I missed out on what that definition of that word 

is. But if that’s the case, then we’ll have that discussion in 

committee. But I think that even then, we’re talking about 

degrees. We’re not talking about certificates. We’re not talking 

about journeyman papers or anything like that. We’re talking 

about degrees. 

 

And so I have not heard . . . You know, we’ve had students 

come here. We have our annual delegations where we have 

students in the building, and I know last year in March we had 

students here, social work students talking about the high cost 

of housing. And I think that’s well documented. But not many 

have said, we need more degree-granting institutions or spaces. 

Maybe they’re missing out. Maybe there is a waiting list for 

some of the programs that are, you know, five people, ten 

people, but not enough to create a new need for a degree. 

 

And it would be interesting to know — and this is what I’d like 

to know — is what would those degrees be? And are they ones 

that really are priority interest of the Government of 

Saskatchewan? So what are those degrees that we’re really 

talking? Are they social work degrees? Are they nursing 

degrees? Are they theological degrees? What are they? And 

this, the information we have . . . And of course the work by 

Mr. Usher doesn’t give that, give that information. 

 

And I think that if they’re not of priority interest to the 

economy and the Government of Saskatchewan, then my 

question earlier about who’s paying for all of this, around the 

quality assurance program, why should the Government of 

Saskatchewan be doing that? Because we’ll be hearing in a few 

days more about the lean initiatives of the Government of 

Saskatchewan, where over four years they were cutting the civil 

service by 4 per cent each year for 16 per cent, and then at that 

same time they’re creating another bureaucracy, the quality 

assurance body, to ensure that these degrees that are granted out 

to some schools are valid. 

 

And I don’t . . . And on one hand you can’t argue with that. But 

on the other hand, you go, is it really the business of 

government? Isn’t this a professional issue that if a professional 



642 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

organization of degree-granting institutions should be able to 

monitor themselves? Maybe they can’t. I don’t know. But I 

don’t know why in these times of austerity that we’d be going 

down this road. I have a real problem. Maybe that’s the idea. 

We’re going to get three new politicians; they would be the 

three that would work on this quality assurance program. And 

wherever they . . . Number 59, 60, and 61 get appointed to the 

quality assurance program maybe. I don’t know. You’ve got to 

find something for them to do. 

 

But I wanted to bring up the fact that, I just wanted to say that 

while I’ve been talking a lot about the degree-granting status, 

this report by Mr. Usher, there’s been other reports that have 

been done about accessibility. And I think this one is really, 

really quite well done. It’s by Paul Gingrich, talking about After 

the Freeze: Restoring University Affordability in Saskatchewan, 

and I think this is really, really key. You know, I think that one, 

it talks about tuition, fundraising, how tuition at one point was 

much more affordable in Saskatchewan and today it’s not — 

it’s something that more we could be doing — and how it’s 

increased by 10.6 per cent since 2009. And I think this is 

something that really needs to become an issue, and I think this 

is very important.  

 

You know, but he just says here there’s some really interesting 

stats here. By 2009 the cost of tuition was, compared with 

average income, was 30 per cent greater in Saskatchewan than 

in Manitoba. All right? So there’s some real issues here. Here 

you have university revenues from all sources — tuition and 

fees, research grants, and provincial funding — has greatly 

increased in the past decade while undergraduate student 

enrolment has declined. So I mean that’s an interesting 

statement. Massive revenue growth in the past 5 years have 

benefited university administrations and non-academic 

programs, but student and faculty members have not benefited 

proportionally. 

 

So I think that’s one dimension of access that we should really 

be focusing on. We’re putting more money into the universities, 

but student enrolment is actually, according to this report, has 

declined. So what’s the issue here in terms of access? Are there 

students because it’s more expensive? Then that’s what we 

should be dealing with. That’s what we should be dealing with, 

not the fact that you need to have more degree-granting 

institutions. I don’t think those two link up unless I’m missing a 

connect. And then in this case, the minister, it would have been 

interesting to hear more about what he would have said about 

this. 

 

The other interesting issue is the whole issue around living 

costs. And this is interesting: 

 

Among Canadian provinces, Saskatchewan has the largest 

proportion of students living outside commuting range of 

universities. Distance is a key factor in increasing costs of 

attending university and inhibiting attendance. 

 

45 per cent of University of Regina and 60 per cent of 

University of Saskatchewan students must find rental 

housing during the academic year. 

 

And of course we know how much rents have gone up. “Since 

2006 average rents have increased by 53 per cent in Saskatoon 

. . . and 43 per cent in Regina . . .” He goes on to talk about this. 

So this is huge. 

 

A 2010 estimate of average spending of Canadian students 

for wireless devices was $52 per month; the average for 

telephone, wireless and internet services, and cable TV 

was $93 . . . [And this adds up] to $744 over eight months. 

 

So this is really interesting. And so this is something that again, 

if we’re talking about access, the issue of living costs, and 

particularly in Saskatchewan, and you would think with a 

government who really in many ways takes pride in the fact that 

it has a lot of MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 

who are outside the two major cities of Regina and Saskatoon, 

would have said, hey, if we’re doing this Bill 18, maybe we 

should do more to help our students with the costs of living 

because our kids from rural Saskatchewan or small town 

Saskatchewan or from one of the smaller cities have to come 

into town, into the main cities, and the high cost of living is 

something that needs to be addressed. 

 

And I think, like one of the things, and I will say is that this 

government, in terms of the new housing, student housing at the 

University of Saskatchewan, and it just opened this fall — very 

good, very good. And I think that it addressed the needs of 400 

students. We always have this grand debate whether it is 400 

students it’s helping out. I won’t say 400 units though. We 

always have that debate. But it’s a good thing. It’s a very good 

thing. And in fact actually I think there’s even more coming on 

stream in the near future. So that’s a step in the right direction, a 

very good step. But it’s one that really is a small step when you 

talk about accessibility. And in terms of priorities between Bill 

No. 18 and student housing, I would come down on student 

housing pretty much every time. 

 

And now what it really talks about, and actually this report 

actually does congratulate the government for creating the 400 

spaces at the University of Saskatchewan which is, as I said, a 

very good thing. But we need to see much more in terms of that, 

as we said. And I didn’t realize these stats until tonight, how 

many out-of-town students there are at the U of R and how 

many are out of town at the U of S — huge numbers. And so 

really a housing strategy for students is a significant one. And 

particularly, you know, people coming, students coming from 

out of the city, but also the First Nations and Métis students. 

That’s a huge issue. And foreign students — very, very 

important. 

 

And he also goes on and talks about financial assistance and 

how this is an important issue and something that we need to do 

more about. So again the debt that students have is phenomenal. 

And I’ll just read a little bit of this. The average size of student 

loan for Saskatchewan undergraduates increased from 8,000 in 

2003-04 to 9,800 in 2005-06 and has remained over 9,000 every 

year since. A student who took out the average loan each year 

for a four-year program would graduate with a debt load of 

almost 40,000. Now there’s an issue around accessibility 

because it’s limiting what you need to do after. And if there’s 

some way of reducing that, that would be great. 

 

Now it goes on to say, “One-half of all Saskatchewan . . . 

students graduate with a student debt of $10,000 or more.” The 

percentage of Saskatchewan post-secondary students graduating 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 643 

with more than $20,000 in debt has increased from 27 per cent 

in 2003 to 39 per cent in 2009. So here’s a real issue, a real 

issue students are facing: their financial debt afterward. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, he goes on and he talks about high barriers to 

attendance, and probably this is the key piece in terms of 

access. And number one: 

 

Family income continues to be a key factor in determining 

who attends university in Saskatchewan and across 

Canada. Low-income youth are more likely to encounter 

all the barriers to post-secondary studies, often skipping 

post-secondary education. 

 

[21:00] 

 

So the question goes back to when the minister talks about the 

first tenet of this Bill No. 18 is about access. And here we’d 

have to talk about family income being the case. “From a 2009 

survey of Saskatchewan high-school graduates not attending 

university, 17 per cent of the respondents cited financial and 

affordability issues as the primary reason for their decision not 

to pursue post-secondary education.” They did not mention the 

fact that there wasn’t enough degree-granting institutions in the 

province. “First generation university students — those from 

families where no one has attended university — [can] find 

attending university difficult. They are twice as likely to rely on 

government student loans.” 

 

And I want to go on talking about Aboriginal “. . . individuals 

reporting Aboriginal ancestry have lower attendance rates at 

post-secondary educational institutions than do non-Aboriginal 

students. From a mid-2000s cross-Canada survey, by age 21, 30 

per cent of Aboriginal youth had attended university, as 

compared with 47 per cent of non-Aboriginal youth.” So I think 

that this is really . . . 

 

And then the other one I want to talk about, and one that was 

just highlighted today, the issue around child care. We know 

that more mature students are coming back to school, especially 

women who have children, and are looking for child care. And I 

think this is a critical piece that we should be able to address 

and somehow if we don’t address that issue at that particular 

time in their lives, it could be limiting what those young people 

could be doing in terms of getting education. And again that’s 

an access issue and it’s a very important issue. And I’m just not 

sure in terms of where the minister talks about access being an 

issue, this is important. And in fact this author talks about more 

child care spaces for students with children and this just needs, 

needs to happen. This is important. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I think that we’re clear that we have 

lots of questions about this. We know that this minister can get 

on a bit of a cause when he sees a policy void and he wants to 

fill it no matter what. And so is this one that’s really critical? Is 

it one that’s really important? Is it one that, if we do this now, 

that we’ll solve a lot of problems or will it create more 

problems down the road? I’m not sure. We know that there are 

many questions here. 

 

And I just want to review this, that we have some questions 

about the proposed legislation. And again, you know, talking 

about Mr. Usher, and it was interesting, you know, from Higher 

Education Strategy Associates from Toronto. He did this, and 

the government made the announcement in spring 2011. But 

why a consultant from Toronto? Why wasn’t it a 

made-in-Saskatchewan solution? And again the question. 

 

And I really do think that for us in this province, we are so 

proud of our two universities right now, that they’ve done a 

phenomenal job in educating our students and their challenges. 

And in the words of this government, there is more work to be 

done, but they’re up to it. I have complete confidence in them, 

particularly when it comes to dealing with the true issues of 

access and the true issues of, what are the student barriers here, 

and the true issues of both academic freedom and liberal arts. 

 

We have to maintain that integrity, or else what does this 

society become if you don’t have that kind of education? And 

we’re very proud of that kind of educational tradition in 

Canada, liberal arts education. But at the same time we’re very 

aware that people are looking for meaningful careers. Students 

are looking for meaningful careers, whether it’s in the arts or 

whether it’s in the trades, whether it’s in engineering, whether 

it’s in the professional realm. 

 

Again the question really becomes, is this the pressing need for 

this government at this time? It’s sending mixed messages 

about the necessity of this Bill, the priority of this Bill. And yet 

at the same time students are facing some real challenges, 

whether it’s finding child care, whether it’s finding a good place 

to rent, whether it’s the cost of tuition. And this may be kind of 

in that ivory tower realm of, is this really what people were 

looking for? How many people were looking for this? 

 

It would be very interesting for this government to develop a 

paper in some way around the true dimensions of access, 

because I think the minister is correct in saying that we should 

be dealing with the issue of access. But I think he’s really 

missed the mark in terms of saying we just need more degrees. 

 

I think that it’s like this government here saying — and I think 

people, we all heard this on the doorstep when we were out 

knocking — saying we need better government. And so what is 

the government response? Three more MLAs. That’s how there 

will be better government? I don’t think that’s what they meant. 

I think when they meant better government, they meant better 

services, more responsive leadership, more consultation, but 

they didn’t mean three more MLAs. 

 

And so when students were calling for better access, they 

weren’t calling for more degree-granting places. They were 

looking for affordable tuition, better housing, more child care, 

that kind of thing. And so I think the government’s really 

missed the mark in terms of this piece of legislation. And so it 

will be interesting to hear the minister in committee on this 

because I know when he gets on a policy issue he really likes to 

get into it. So we will be listening to that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, at this point I’d like to move adjournment of 

Bill No. 18. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 18, The Degree Authorization Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 



644 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 20 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hickie that Bill No. 20 — The 

Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2011 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and it’s with great 

anticipation that I’ve been waiting for my chance to speak to 

this Bill, Bill No. 20, An Act to amend The Planning and 

Development Act, 2007. It’s a good Bill, Mr. Speaker. It’s one 

that has made some wide-reaching, far-reaching changes to the 

existing planning and development Act. And I think there’s 

some interesting policy here on the part of the government that 

we’ve taken a look at, and I’m going to provide a few 

comments tonight in relation to those policy changes. 

 

In the minister’s comments when it was introduced on 

December 14th, he indicates that the goal of the Bill is to update 

the municipal planning framework. And certainly municipal 

planning is a keystone of the efficient operation of 

municipalities in the province, both urban and rural, and 

certainly it’s a concern across Canada. And we know that the 

Federation of Canadian Municipalities has done work across the 

country on this type of work. And I’d also have to say that in 

my experience with First Nations and First Nations planning, 

that municipal planning at a First Nations level on Indian 

reserves is also a very active area in the federal sphere and 

certainly one that intersects quite intricately with the provincial 

sphere. So I’ll be making further comments about that as we go 

along here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the minister stated that community planning engages the 

public to build a vision founded on values and assets of a 

community and then articulates the vision in a plan. And I think 

basically that’s the goal of community planning and certainly 

there are a number of professionals and consultants who are 

actively engaged in this type of work. 

 

One of my concerns with community planning is that if 

engagement isn’t meaningful and if the public isn’t fully 

understanding of the process, quite often you end up with a 

consultant who’s been paid a lot of money to prepare a plan, but 

in the long run the community doesn’t accept the plan. It often 

gets put on a shelf. And because if there isn’t meaningful 

engagement on the part of the community, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

it becomes something that just sits on a shelf, like we see with 

royal commissions. And we see that with other organizations 

who do a lot of work on the planning but don’t fully integrate it 

into their own community personality. It’s easy to hire someone 

to do the plan for you, but I think it’s really important for 

community members to feel that they’re part of the plan, and 

then ultimately that there will be adequate funding at the other 

end to implement the plan. Because I can come up with a great 

plan, but if I don’t have the resources needed to implement it 

. . . And I’ve had that experience in many community 

organizations I’ve been involved in. It’s easy to have big talk 

but it’s hard to put it into action. 

 

So I think the goals here are lofty in this particular Bill. There’s 

been extensive stakeholder consultations, according to the 

minister, and there’s been a request for legislative amendments 

to do a number of things, including increasing transparency of 

fees, the way fees are collected. 

 

And I think the big goal of this particular Bill is to provide for 

arrangements between municipalities so it’s not just individual 

municipalities any more. And certainly The Planning and 

Development Act, right from the get-go, was interested in 

cross-municipal relations, so we see planning and development 

commissions around the larger urban areas. There’s certainly a 

large one in Saskatoon and also in Regina. And these 

commissions are charged with the orderly integration between 

the rural area and the urban area. And as you can well imagine, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s not easy. It’s complicated, and the 

goals and visions of both types of municipalities are often hard 

to reconcile. 

 

One of the things the Minister didn’t talk about a whole lot in 

this description of the Bill was the interplay with First Nations 

as neighbours. And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that in my years 

as working for the federal government on the treaty land 

entitlement framework agreement and implementing that, quite 

often we saw issues arising between First Nations and 

neighbouring municipalities. A number of concerns from the 

municipal level on things like tax loss, which was dealt with 

fairly comprehensively in the framework agreement, but still 

concerns from the municipal level about how their land base 

was going to be impacted when lands were removed from their 

tax base and added to First Nation reserves. 

 

So what I saw happening throughout the years that I worked on 

the implementation agreement was that these parties found a 

way, because of the pressing need between them, to come to an 

agreement on their own. And you know, it was orderly, 

neighbourly communications that brought these First Nations 

and municipalities together. Things like garbage and pest 

control and weed control and RM [rural municipality] roads and 

all those things that interplay in a community. And where First 

Nations were moving in to rural municipalities and acquiring 

land pursuant to the agreement, there were a number of very 

well thought-out and negotiated agreements between First 

Nations and rural municipalities to deal with those types of 

issues. So really it’s just neighbours working together. 

 

And in this case, the First Nations are new neighbours because 

they’re moving in to the rural municipality, and they were able 

to come to a reciprocal agreement that suited them. Not always 

perfect, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There was often areas where there 

was concerns and disputes, and in that case, sometimes 

mediators were called in. And in other cases, no agreement was 

reached. But ultimately I think the lesson of treaty land 

entitlement is that when you have neighbours that have mutual 

needs and mutual concerns, that getting together and talking is 

really the simplest solution, and it’s often the only solution. 

 

Legislation like this, The Planning and Development Act, 

attempts to formalize and structuralize those types of 

relationships. It gets complicated when you do that, and it is 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 645 

also sometimes, like I said earlier, imposed in a way that isn’t 

meaningful to the members of the community. So care has to be 

taken when we create these kinds of structures because the 

validity of the agreement . . . it’s kind of like the Russian 

constitution was one of the best human rights pieces of 

constitution in the world, but human rights abuses still occur. 

So it’s I guess it’s as good as the paper that it’s written on 

sometimes, and it’s the will of the people and the will of the 

communities to make it work that drive the success. 

 

Like I said, in the organizations I’m involved in, there’s often a 

lot of people with really big ideas and big visions, and those are 

great because you have to start somewhere. But as we know, the 

devil’s in the detail. And in those kinds of circumstances, if the 

community doesn’t pull together and see the vision and 

incorporate it into their daily, I guess, expression of community, 

then it becomes meaningless, and they do become shelved. 

 

[21:15] 

 

And I’ve seen a number of them shelved in that way in the work 

I’ve done, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because simply, the people that 

are going to make it happen may have gotten swept up in the 

grandiose, big-talk kind of ideas, or they simply weren’t part of 

it all along. Sometimes a very, you know, motivated consultant 

— but one that may not understand the community fully — can 

come up with a glossy, shiny plan, but it doesn’t always work 

on the ground. 

 

The minister indicated in his comments that: 

 

The amendments are designed to provide additional 

flexibility for municipalities to jointly plan and manage 

areas of common interest, improve the mechanics of 

decision making for large district planning commissions, 

[and] provide the minister with the ability to delegate 

approving authority status to a district planning authority 

. . . 

 

So, oh and there’s a few other things he’s indicated: incidental 

housekeeping items, dispute resolution processes for these 

district planning commissions, and municipal flexibility to 

service and cover the cost of development. 

 

In some ways, I suppose this is an attempt to provide for 

consolidation of municipal operations in a meaningful way. 

Certainly we know, as particularly rural municipalities are 

suffering depopulation, that it’s becoming more difficult for 

them to manage as an entity in themselves. And it makes a lot 

more sense for them to create partnerships with other 

municipalities. 

 

Again, I’m not sure where First Nations fit into this picture 

because it wasn’t really addressed, although he does make a 

reference to an organization called WaterWolf which apparently 

has 35 municipalities and one First Nation. That’s not 

something I’m familiar with, Mr. Speaker, and will want to look 

into that more to understand how that model is being reflected 

in this Bill. 

 

So there’s ways under . . . This Bill has attempted to provide 

some flexibilities around where there are local plans or 

community plans, official community plans in place and where 

there aren’t. Or you may have a situation where one 

municipality has an official community plan, the other one 

doesn’t, and yet they want to do some district planning. So the 

Bill sets out a number of ways to do that. 

 

Another interesting aspect of the Bill is that it provides for these 

district planning authorities to be granted approving authority 

status. So this DPA, or the district planning authority, is a 

corporate body and they are able to make planning . . . they’re 

authorized to make a planning district on official community 

plans’ zoning bylaws. So it’s giving some pretty great powers to 

these district planning authorities, much as the current Act does 

for planning and development commissions. So I think that’s 

part of the intention that the minister is looking at. 

 

It also, as another part of the Act, the amendment Act, Bill No. 

20, is to provide municipalities with varieties of tools to recover 

the costs of managing and servicing new development. This is a 

sort of a different section of the Act, and it will allow 

amendments to ensure that the fees are rational and transparent 

and that changes to the levies and service agreements will give 

them flexibility to enter into agreement on lands outside their 

jurisdiction if they’re directly servicing a subdivision or 

developments. 

 

So it just gives them more tools and flexibility. And you know, 

as you can imagine, rural municipal lines and urban-rural 

municipal splits are drawn already and development occurs 

around them. So it’s important for the municipalities to have the 

ability to deal with the realities of expansion and subdivisions 

even when the lines of the municipal areas are established. I 

know some situations, again with First Nations, where town 

boundaries have impacted economic development plans of First 

Nations through their treaty land entitlement acquisition. And 

through negotiations with the urban municipality, they were 

able to rearrange the town boundary to suit the needs of all the 

parties. 

 

So there’s ways to do this. As I said, it doesn’t require a law for 

people to get together and make a plan. Certainly that’s been 

the way people operate all along. Whenever there’s a 

community, there’s plans that are being made. But this does 

provide some formalities that will provide structure for 

municipalities. So if we want to take a look at the Bill itself, it’s 

a fairly lengthy Bill, and there’s a lot of changes to it. 

 

I guess the first and most important change is the definitions 

again. We always seem to start at the definitions. So the first 

definition change that we’re looking at is the definition of 

district plan and district planning authority. So this is a new 

definition. And district plan is basically the plan for a planning 

district that’s adopted pursuant to section 102. So this is 

something I will be addressing in a minute, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And then the next change would be the definition of 

district planning authority, which were not previously defined. 

So the goal of these changes, according to the notes, is to 

improve clarity. And I think that’s been achieved. 

 

Next change is clause 12(a), and it’s allowing the district 

planning authority to be the approving authority. I spoke to that 

earlier, and in this case, the approving authority is a council or a 

district planning authority that has been declared pursuant to 

13(1). And 13(1) itself has been repealed and the changes in the 



646 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

repealed section expand the provisions to allow for district 

planning authorities to be the approving authorities providing, 

of course, that they meet the requirements. 

 

So 13(3) has been changed as well to require that the new 

approving authorities have to adopt an official community plan 

or district plan and employ or retain a professional community 

planner. I’ve met a few community planners in my work, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and these people are very valuable to assisting 

communities with a positive, go-forward plan for community 

development. So although I can imagine it’s a burden for some 

smaller municipalities to have to employ or retain a planner, in 

order to have a plan, you have to have a planner. It just makes 

sense. Otherwise the fears and I think the reality is that it will 

end up on a shelf somewhere. So the notes explain that having 

the plan and the expertise, those two go together, and it 

provides capacity necessary to manage the land use and the 

development as approving authority. 

 

So that’s the first few changes. The next ones we looked at is 

section 15, and 15(1) and (2) have been changed to clarify that 

district planning authorities may delegate power and duties to a 

development officer. So that’s just a delegation clause 

providing for some flexibility in the planning authority. 

 

The next change is section 17 which was repealed and replaced, 

and this is the fees provision. So what it reads now is that fees 

for subdivisions can vary based on several considerations, and 

this makes it consistent with the ones we will find in section 51. 

So basically the approving authority can prescribe a schedule of 

fees for processing subdivision applications and applications to 

reissue a certificate of approval. There is a maximum cap on the 

fees. They cannot exceed the cost to the approving authority of 

processing the application. So you can’t charge 50 bucks if it’s 

only going cost 20 bucks to process the applications. Fees have 

to be fair and reasonable, which is all good. 

 

Section 23, there is a very basic amendment to it that I don’t 

need to comment on. 

 

And, of course, 24(1)(a) is amended simply by adding district 

plans. So it’s making sure that all of the terminology is correct 

now that we’re talking about district plans in addition to official 

community plans. 

 

One of the major new changes is a new section called 30.1(1). 

And what this clause does is provides the minister the ability to 

require a district planning authority or a DPA or the 

municipalities affiliated in it, to prepare or amend a plan. So it’s 

consistent with provisions under 30 which allows an individual 

municipality to prepare an official community plan. This just 

extends it further to the district planning authority or the 

municipalities therein. So the goal of the section is to achieve 

consistency with the provincial land use policy or statement of 

provincial interest. And the minister can direct that they prepare 

their plan or that they prepare an amendment to the plan. 

There’s various other subclauses in this new section that deals 

with the minister’s requirement for the plan. 

 

It just reminds me of some of the other work I’ve done with 

planning and development commissions. And this was 

something that was interesting that came out of the Great Sand 

Hills, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when a few years ago there was an 

area that was set aside as protected right within the heart of the 

Great Sand Hills. And that’s an important, ecologically 

sensitive area in the province. But in addition to the areas that 

were set aside and restricted from development, there was 

buffer zones around that area that were brought into The 

Planning and Development Act of the day. And what that did is 

gave local municipalities the ability to create environmental 

plans and differing degrees of environmental protection. 

 

So one of the areas I did some work in, which was subsequently 

added to a First Nation reserve, was in that area. And there, I 

actually counted the number of people that worked on that file 

to get that land added to the reserve. It was Crown land. And it 

was over 200 government officials that were involved in one 

addition to First Nation reserve. So it was fairly complex. 

 

But in that case, the rural municipality that was responsible for 

the . . . They had passed a protection plan, environmental 

protection plan under The Planning and Development Act and 

worked very closely with both the federal government and the 

First Nation to ensure consistency when the lands were added to 

reserve. That was of great concern to the people in the area 

because the fragility of the surface was of concern. And so 

things like ice roads had to be built in the winter in order to 

make sure that there weren’t big ruts created in the grass, 

because there’s so much sand there that the grass wouldn’t hold 

unless there was proper protection when the trucks came in. 

 

So I think that’s a good example of all levels of government 

working together. There was the rural municipality, the Crown 

on surface and subsurface, there was the federal government 

with agencies both in Ottawa and Calgary in the oil and gas 

development side, and also the First Nation themselves. I think 

it was a way that, a good example of how these types of 

community efforts, where there’s different interests and 

sometimes competing interests but interwoven, and neighbours 

talking to each other, and it did come to fruition and was a 

success as far as I know. 

 

So back to the Bill itself. The next changes that we see, a new 

section that’s of interest is the contents of the plan, and that’s 

section 32.1 which talks about intermunicipal development 

agreements. And in this clause we get into the meat of what 

these district planning authorities are able to do. It’s a new 

concept as far as I understand, and it’s one that I think serves 

the needs of municipalities that need to do this kind of sharing, 

both where you have the urban-rural interconnect or intersect or 

conflict, or in areas where various rural municipalities are 

needing to consolidate some of their services — that they’re 

just too small, they don’t have a large enough tax base any more 

to be able to manage on their own, and there’s consolidation 

that’s needed. So it’s a form of consolidation, and the contents 

of the plan have to have the following. 

 

So they have to have several statements of policy. The first 

statement of policy is “sustainable current and future land use 

and development in the municipality.” Further, they have to 

have a statement of policy with respect to current and future 

economic development, the general provision of public works, 

the management of lands that are subject to natural hazards, 

including flooding, slumping and slope instability. Here’s the 

one I was referring to earlier that’s rephrased here for these 

district plans — “the management of environmentally sensitive 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 647 

lands.” 

 

Also they have to deal with source water protection, and we 

know that water is something of great concern, given the 

weather that we’re having today. I saw a jogger in a T-shirt and 

short pants today, and the No. 1 Highway is closed out by 

Maple Creek. So you just don’t know what the weather’s going 

to bring. And water protection is something that I think is of 

grave concern to all municipalities given the vagaries in climate 

that we’re seeing these days. It’s flooding, drought. You know, 

the ranges of weather and implications for water is immense. 

 

Also we were talking earlier today about using water for 

production in the solution mines, the solution potash mines and 

those kinds of things, like Buffalo Pound Lake is being 

impacted, Katepwa Lake. So when these communities get 

together and start developing these plans, they’re going to need 

to also sit down with the province and make sure there’s enough 

water for all of the plans. 

 

[21:30] 

 

And then finally, one of the things that has to be in there in the 

community plan, the official community plan, is the means of 

implementing. And I think that’s probably the hardest one, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because often, like I said earlier, it looks good 

on paper, but implementing is quite frequently where things 

break down. 

 

So there’s a number of also optional things that could be 

included in an official community plan, and this is the previous 

section as it existed, and now we’re talking about the 

intermunicipal development agreement. So that was section 

32(1). We’re now adding 32.1(1). So I’m going to move into 

that now. 

 

So this is where two or more municipalities can, by bylaw, enter 

into an intermunicipal development agreement. And this case, 

in the new section, the two municipalities can provide for joint 

land use planning and development matters, mechanisms for 

resolving disputes, and specific services, infrastructure or 

facilities that are covered by the agreement. 

 

So you can imagine any number of things where two 

municipalities may want to get together and have joint services 

or infrastructure. It may be community . . . I would think in 

most cases, I’m thinking landfills would be a perfect 

opportunity for municipalities to get together and discuss 

efficiencies by integrating their services. 

 

It also deals with the proportion of funds that each municipality 

is required to contribute. So of course the funding is the 

important part there. And then processes and procedures for 

amending and terminating agreements. The second part of the 

subsection talks about, if this intermunicipal development 

agreement contains provisions that limit or control the 

development of land then the individual municipality councils 

have to amend their own official community plans and zoning 

bylaws to reflect those provisions. Makes sense. I mean, if you 

have an OCP, an official community plan that’s going to be in 

conflict with the district plan, then those have to be amended to 

be consistent. 

 

And then finally, the last part of the new intermunicipal 

development agreements clause indicates that after 30 days after 

it’s entered into, they have to file a copy of it with the minister. 

So the minister’s kept up to date on the development of the new 

intermunicipal development agreements. So that’s section 

32.1(1). 

 

Then we’re moving into the fee section. In section 51 there’s 

some basic changes here that clarify that the cost of regulating a 

development can be included within the established fees. It’s 

intended that these be true costs and the true costs are to 

provide for planning, approval, services, enforcement, and they 

should be recoverable as well. 

 

There’s an addition to the section 51(2). It allows the 

municipality . . . So 51(2) is repealed, and the new one says that 

the municipality can recover — where are we here? — the real 

costs of managing development processes in 51(1) rather than 

the lowest cost. So there’s a classification that can be set out in 

the bylaw and that schedule of fees then, with the bylaw, shall 

set out the rationale for the fees as well. So they have to justify 

the fees that they’re planning. 

 

The next change is to section 73(1)(a), and this is just a little 

cosmetic, actually, change where they’re adding “colour and 

texture and type of material” after “architectural detail.” So it’s 

added some detail to that subclause. 

 

Then we’re into section 97. It’s repealed and it’s kind of 

rejigged, so there’s new numbering there. But what this clause 

does is ensure the affiliated municipalities address dispute 

resolution mechanisms in the planning district agreement. And 

again, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think we could say enough about the 

importance of appropriate dispute resolution clauses because, as 

I mentioned earlier, the devil’s in the details. So these types of 

dispute resolution clauses are important, and we don’t want to 

end up in court on these types of disputes. So it’s important that 

the commission itself has the ability to do that. 

 

Section 97(1), although it hasn’t changed a whole lot, it does 

provide for what needs to be in the agreements. And there’s a 

number of points there that are addressed. And it’s a fairly 

lengthy clause. I won’t go into all the detail on that one. But the 

new 92(2)(b) gives a process to amend a district plan where the 

impact of the amendment is limited to land in only one 

municipality. 

 

The next changed clause is clause no. 99. Again there’s just a 

very simple correction there to the renumbering in the clause. 

The next change is a change to clause 100(b). And what this 

does is just recognize that the affiliated municipality may have 

a district plan as well as an OCP. So it provides for both levels 

of planning. The next change that we have is in section 101 and 

again it’s just a removal of redundancy, or the changes remove 

the redundancy that was built into the clause. 

 

Then we’re looking at the next change is to section 102, again 

an extensive clause that has been repealed and replaced. And 

what it does is it adds district plans as a distinct statutory 

document, so they have to be mentioned separately throughout 

the Act. The new provisions provide for a district plan to 

function as a broad regional policy document. So that’s the 

extent of the changes to 102. 



648 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

Section 103, again there’s cosmetic changes. And section 105, 

we have a change in terminology again from OCP to district 

plan, so it’s cleaning up some of the language there. And then 

section 105(2) has been changed. Oh, that was the one I just 

mentioned. I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, or Deputy Speaker. 

 

Section 106 is now repealed as well, and that is the termination 

of affiliation of municipality. And 106.1(1) is a clause that’s 

quite interesting, and it’s the dispute resolution clause. So this 

addition gives flexibility in the approach to dispute resolution. 

This draws in the Saskatchewan Municipal Board. So what 

happens here now is the Saskatchewan Municipal Board can be 

referred to if there is a dispute. And they have complete control 

over the resolution of the dispute, and they can direct the parties 

to follow any method that the Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

considers appropriate. So I think the parties need to be serious if 

they’re going to the Municipal Board because at that point then 

the Municipal Board is directing it and is in charge of the type 

of dispute resolution that can be chosen. 

 

It’s also binding on the parties, so it’s a serious clause. They 

have to be sure that they’re needing that level of assistance in 

resolving the dispute. And I think certainly the ideal is when 

people can resolve disputes amongst themselves rather than 

needing to resort to a third party resolution. But it’s there for 

when it’s needed, and I think that sometimes encourages people 

to find a resolution rather than going to the third step because it 

often heightens the dispute and raises the profile of it. So in the 

end run, it may be the only solution, and if it’s necessary, it’s 

there. So that’s a good thing. 

 

Next section that’s been amended is section 107 of The 

Planning and Development Act. And basically here it just gives 

the minister discretion to approve or refer a request to dissolve a 

planning district to a dispute process under 106. So I guess if 

things are really going not too well, there’s a way to dissolve 

the agreement as well. 

 

Section 108 has had some small amendments to it, several just 

clause renumberings and things like that. So there’s not much to 

comment on in that point. And then section 109, just a few 

small changes to section 109 as well, just adding “district plans” 

after “official community plans.” 

 

Section 122(1) just gave me a little pause to think about it, and 

it ties in railways because what they’re doing is adding a new 

clause after clause (h) in subsection 122(1). And what it talks 

about here, if I can look at the clause itself, it says, section 121 

doesn’t apply to . . . So there’s a whole list of things it doesn’t 

apply to. And we’re looking at the addition of a subdivision 

approval exemption to the extension of an existing rail line 

that’s being developed in the general interest of Canada, such as 

federal railway development. I just found this somewhat ironic, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I think the trend in Saskatchewan 

for sure is quite the opposite. We don’t see a lot of federal 

railway development here these days, and indeed we’re seeing 

less and less railway development and the shutting down of a 

lot of shortlines, you know. 

 

And the whole viability of shortlines is, I think, being called 

into question by some of the people who are concerned about 

the dismantling of the single desk for the Canadian Wheat 

Board because I think changes in grain transportation, even 

since the abolishment of the Crow rate, have negatively 

impacted the bottom line for farmers here in Saskatchewan and 

certainly the viability of shortlines. So when we hear about 

shortlines being shut down and more consolidation in the main 

railways of Canada, it’s interesting to see a clause in The 

Planning and Development Act that worries about extensions of 

railways and building of railways. So I’m not sure why that’s 

there and why it’s needed at this point in time. Maybe I’m not 

reading the clause entirely correctly, but I just found that quite 

interesting to show up in something like this. 

 

So onward we go. The next clause that’s been amended is 

128(1)(b), again just adding “district plan” before “official 

community plan.” And section 168 has also seen a minor 

amendment. Section 169, again a number of minor 

amendments. This does talk though, section 169 does refer to 

the fees and the types of levies that can be applied. So there’s a 

clarification and removal of redundant wording in that 

particular subsection that make it easier to read. 

 

The next one that’s being amended is section 172, and in 

particular there’s a few changes in 172(2) and an additional 

clause added to 172(3) after clause (e). So we now have (f) 

which talks about land available pursuant to section 172.1 that 

they may require for the location of a public work or public 

utility or expansion of those works. 

 

So then another new clause that we see in this Bill is section 

172.1(1). And it’s added to provide legislated structure and 

authority for municipal utility parcels to be negotiated as part of 

the servicing agreement. So in this case, there will be municipal 

works that are being surveyed and how those parcels are going 

to be dealt with. So there’s a whole host of . . . I think there’s 

eight or nine changes here or additions to that subsection to deal 

with municipal utility parcels. 

 

We have changes to 173(d) as well. And then 176 is repealed, 

and there’s a new section there. This one’s interesting. There’s 

appeals on the development levy or servicing agreement. So it’s 

how appeals will be conducted in the event that there’s a 

dispute regarding development levy. Again it can end up with 

the Saskatchewan Municipal Board in subsection (3), and 

there’s other procedural directions here for the municipality 

when there is a dispute as to the levy for the development. And 

again any decision of the board or the development appeals 

board is going to be binding. Or sorry, it may be appealed to the 

Municipal Board. So there’s a whole process set up there for the 

appeals when the levies are disputed by individuals. 

 

Section 189(1), Mr. Deputy Speaker, is public lands dedicated 

by the minister. And the changes here extend the power to 

dedicate Crown land managed by any ministry as 

environmental or municipal reserve. So of course, the 

dedication would occur in consultation with the minister 

responsible for the land, but it will give flexibility to dedicate 

environmentally sensitive, hazardous, or flood-prone lands 

managed by the ministries — Environment or Agriculture or 

any other agency of government — prior to its being transferred 

to the municipalities. So this is again flood-prone land, 

environmentally sensitive land — these are all issues of concern 

to municipalities, both urban and rural. And certainly having the 

support of the ministries — Environment, Agriculture — when 

those lands are designated that way assists municipalities in 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 649 

managing those types of areas. 

 

[21:45] 

 

Section 201 has a very minor amendment to it. And then we’re 

looking at section 207, notice of proposed bylaw. And what this 

. . . The changes to this existing clause just provide a written 

description of the location effective . . . It requires that the 

bylaws give a written description of the location of affected 

properties and a map or electronically published map 

delineating the location of the affected properties. So this is just 

to make sure the public has necessary information so that they 

can comment on the proposed amendments. 

 

There’s some changes to subsection 215(1), and this is about 

the makeup of the boards and to make sure that councillors or 

employees in the municipality do not sit on the development 

appeals boards because then they would be hearing appeals of 

their own decisions. So that appears to be a fairly reasonable 

proposal. 

 

There’s just one other further change, and it’s a transitional 

change on 248.1 that recognizes the change in terminology 

from a district OCP to district plans. And again that’s just 

keeping everything in line so that we have these district 

planning areas. 

 

So as the minister indicated in his comments on December 14th, 

there is a number of housekeeping issues that the consultation 

identified since the original planning and development Act was 

issued. So they’re attempting to address those. 

 

And I think the minister indicated that not all the requests of the 

people that were consulted were included in the provisions here. 

In particular the cities and SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association] and SARM [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities] wanted an expansion of 

the lists of fees and levies to include fire suppression 

infrastructure and facilities. The minister gave reasons for not 

doing that although he has indicated it would be in future 

discussions. It’s of concern when fire suppression infrastructure 

and facilities haven’t been included in these types of provisions 

because those often cost a lot of money. 

 

So we’ll see what happens in the budget. Maybe there is going 

to be provision for those kinds of things for . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Maybe there won’t though, I guess. That’s 

right. My colleague indicated that there might not be funding 

for those kinds of things because we have to cover three new 

politicians. So that’s a few million dollars there that we’re not 

able to turn over to the planning people in The Planning and 

Development Act agencies. Decisions have to be made. I guess 

we’re living in austere times, or at least we think we might be 

depending on what area or who you’re listening to on what day, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. But it’s interesting when we hear talks of 

those extra costs being thrown at it all the time. 

 

At any rate, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s enough of me going on 

about these proposed amendments. I’m pleased at this point in 

time, I think, to pass on the torch to my colleagues, so I would 

move to adjourn the debate on Bill No. 20, The Planning and 

Development Amendment Act. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 20, The Planning and 

Development Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 23 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 23 — The 

Occupational Health and Safety Amendment Act, 2011 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Bill that I’ve 

certainly been waiting for, and I’m sure it’s been faced with 

certain anticipation in the House. I see some slow, thoughtful 

nodding from Douglas Park back there, Coronation Park. 

They’re very excited about this speech as well and well they 

should be, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I don’t know if they’re going to 

move in any sort of detrimental way on occupational health and 

safety grounds as I conclude these remarks, but, you know, it’s 

early in the intervention, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But we’ll see 

what we can get done.  

 

In all seriousness, I am quite happy to rise and participate in the 

debate on Bill No. 23, An Act to amend The Occupational 

Health and Safety Act, 1993 because this is of course pretty 

serious business, all kidding aside, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Certainly Saskatchewan has a history of occupational health 

and safety legislation, I believe one of the first occupational 

health and safety Acts in Canadian jurisdictions. 

 

And one of the sort of pioneers of occupational health and 

safety legislation in the province is a fellow by the name of Bob 

Sass. And for those that have been following the news of late, 

Mr. Sass has come forward with another individual calling for 

an asbestos registry for public buildings in the province, and 

certainly it’s one more act in a life that has been devoted to the 

safety of workers. And certainly that we have occupational 

health and safety legislation in the province period, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, has a lot to do with the thoughtful work of someone 

like Bob Sass. 

 

Occupational health and safety has a fairly well-defined regime 

of review and renewal. Periodically you have fairly extensive 

consultations that take place with both employers and 

employees throughout the province, which is as it should be, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. And in some regards, if the kind of 

across-the-table work that is done in the case of occupational 

health and safety legislation review, I think we’d be . . . If you 

could extend that kind of co-operation across the workplace 

generally, I think the province would be well served. 

 

But certainly the current iteration of legislation comes from a 

call for comment that went forth last spring fairly close to this 

time of year by the current government, and the committee of 

review, I think, also had their opportunity to weigh in. And 



650 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

anyway the two sides . . . It’s not completely reflected in this 

work, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but obviously there was kind of 

ongoing consultations very much inform what we see here. 

 

So the consultation piece that went out across the province to 

stakeholders in April of 2011 said: 

 

Dear Stakeholder:  

 

To improve the standard of occupational health and safety 

(OHS) in Saskatchewan workplaces in support of our 

government’s goal to eliminate all work-related injuries 

and illnesses, I am pleased to advise you of the launch of 

the following consultations. 

 

Consultations on the proposed amendments to the OHS safety 

Act, OHS Act, 1993; questions around the adequacy of 

penalties for the OHS infractions; sufficiency of the current 

levels of penalties; whether or not alternate penalty types would 

be beneficial; and “whether the revenue collected from these 

penalties should be partially re-directed towards furthering 

public education and prevention efforts.” 

 

And I guess that set the table for a fairly extensive bit of 

consultation that went on and let alone what had taken place 

previously with the Occupational Health and Safety Council in 

2006. I guess one of the things that is pointed out in the 

minister’s second reading remarks of December 14th wherein 

he stated that the aim is being for the legislation to improve 

workplace health and safety in the province by supporting the 

government’s goal of eliminating all work-related injuries and 

illnesses. Again that’s an important goal and certainly is one 

that we support in the opposition. 

 

And I guess we do well to remember that this is about 

workplace safety, and just reading the paper today, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, seeing the way that this can . . . The most tragic 

consequence of a lack of workplace safety of course, the way 

that can translate is sometimes in death on the job. And it 

should never be the case that . . . It’s a sad, sad circumstance to 

have people that go out the door in the morning, head off to 

work, and then never come home. 

 

And certainly that was the case at the Agrium potash mine at 

Vanscoy. And there’s currently a court proceeding engaged on a 

situation that had taken place there not too long ago where there 

were some things that should’ve been, steps that should have 

been taken to secure the safety of the employees in that mine 

that were not, and for which an employee paid with his life — a 

gentleman in his 50s. And if you think about the trauma and the 

shock for that family, Mr. Speaker, that in and of itself should 

be a cause for action, let alone the way that these kind of losses 

translate into loss of productivity and loss of value, but the first 

and foremost value of course being human life and health. And 

if we can do a better job in the workplace for workers, it makes 

so much sense from a number of perspectives. 

 

The minister in his second reading speech cited the efforts 

around focused education campaigns as well as stepped-up 

enforcement measures. He cited a 500 per cent plus increase in 

the number of OH & S [occupational health and safety] 

prosecutions between 2007-08 and 2010-11. 

 

Again, one of the sort of qualitative pieces on that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker — and I’ll get into that a little bit later on in my 

remarks — is again it’s good to have law on the book or laws 

on the books. It’s good to have penalties on the books, and it’s 

good to have stepped-up prosecutorial efforts. But again if these 

things are out of whack, if you’re not according the kind of 

severity to different of these incidences under the legislation, 

then of course you can make an argument that, well we’ve 

increased our prosecutions. But if those prosecutions result in 

something less than adequate punishments for infractions under 

this regime, then obviously that paints an inaccurate picture, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And again in a province where, again as is admitted by the 

minister in the second reading speech, wherein Saskatchewan 

still has the second highest workplace injury rate in the country 

and wherein each year about 40,000 injury claims are made to 

the Workers’ Compensation Board, the minister goes on to state 

that that’s unacceptable, and we in the opposition benches 

certainly agree, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

We welcome efforts such as Mission: Zero, launched on behalf 

of the Workers’ Compensation Board in conjunction with the 

Department of Labour. But the fact remains that, again, being 

second in terms of workplace injury rates in the country is 

definitely not a distinction that we would like to have as a 

province. But again most importantly at the base of that, Mr. 

Speaker, is the fact of the injuries that have been sustained and 

the loss of life that has been sustained, and the tragic way that it 

plays out in the individual families involved, the communities 

involved, but also how that plays out in an economic sense in 

terms of lost productivity and the way that that impacts an 

economy. 

 

[22:00] 

 

One thing that we are heartened to see in the minister’s remarks 

is the citing of an increased number of inspections, and again, 

you know, the fact that the general sort of arrow is pointed in 

the right direction in terms of reduction in the time loss 

workplace injury rate. But again, the fact remains that we’re 

second worst in the country, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the fact 

that there’s a lot of work to be done. 

 

One of the things that is further cited by the minister — again to 

quantify some of the economic costs involved in the situation as 

it stands in Saskatchewan — the fact that over 500,000 days of 

productive work being lost each year in Saskatchewan, and the 

fact that annual claim costs exceed $200 million. And again, 

that’s just with those two indicators alone, Mr. Speaker, let 

alone what that means for the loss of productivity overall in the 

economy. 

 

So the legislation is something that we’re interested in, and we 

know as well that we’re not alone in that interest, Mr. Speaker. I 

did have this conversation with yourself, Mr. Speaker. It’s not 

something that just the official opposition is interested in. It’s 

not just something that the members opposite, the Minister of 

Labour is interested in. It’s something that the Provincial 

Auditor has been interested in. And in the 2011 report, volume 

2, Labour Relations and Workplace Safety came in for a fairly 

interesting overview and study in chapter 18 of that volume 2. 

 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 651 

And I guess off the top, the way that the ministry relates to the 

legislation in terms of processes that did not comply with the 

OHS Act 1993, and again citing the fact that Saskatchewan has 

the second highest rate of workplace related injuries — that it is 

decreasing but again still second highest in Canada — is not 

where we want to be or should be. And I guess the way that 

methodology and process on the part of the department impacts 

their ability to drive change in the department and the call from 

the Provincial Auditor for a more complete analysis of 

noncompliance and its causes, and it’s the fact that the 

Provincial Auditor is also calling for a more consistent use of 

ministry policies and better follow-up of noncompliant 

workplaces. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the debate we’re in right now 

on Bill No. 23, again it’s well and good to have legislation on 

the books, but if the enforcement regime is not equal to the task 

at hand, then you can have all the fine legislation in the world 

that you want but it won’t matter a whit. 

 

Similarly if the punishments aren’t adequately . . . If they aren’t 

appropriate to the infractions at hand, that as well makes it 

difficult to get an accurate picture of what is happening and 

whether or not . . . You know, it brings to mind the old line 

about statistics from Mark Twain and again if, statistically 

speaking, you can make something look good that is on the 

ground, something less than good. So again if this is painting an 

accurate picture, that is borne out. 

 

But that’s why we take a great interest in the work of the 

Provincial Auditor and the kind of work that was done in 

chapter 18 of the 2011 report, volume 2. I guess one of the 

interesting things from page 363 of that report, Mr. Speaker, in 

conjunction with some things around the recommendation that 

the Ministry of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety sign a 

shared service agreement with the Ministry of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration, again trying to keep 

the form up to the changes that have been made or the related 

fact of recommending that the Ministry of Labour Relations and 

Workplace Safety establish an agreement with the Public 

Service Commission for providing payroll services that clearly 

assigns responsibilities for key payroll activities, again, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s not anything more than just trying to keep the form 

of the authority chain in line with changes that have been made 

to the department. 

 

Where we take a particular interest is with regards to 

implementation of past recommendations that is needed — 

again this is starting on page 363 — and the outstanding 

recommendations that apply to the new ministry. 

 

In page 364 of that report and on through, the first 

recommendation concerning the HR [human resources] plan 

that is needed for the Department of Labour Relations is 

partially implemented. The number of other things in terms of 

controls and processes, again, partially implemented. And I 

guess the one that we’re most interested in are the processes for 

addressing workplace non-compliance. And again, this audit is 

concerned with how the ministry enforced the Act and 

regulations, and so I think this is worth quoting into the record, 

Mr. Speaker, from page 365 of Chapter 18 of the 2011 report 

volume 2: 

 

It is difficult to overstate the importance of healthy and 

safe workplaces. There are over 370,000 people employed 

in Saskatchewan workplaces and this number is rising as 

the economy expands. In addition, at over 40,000 

workplaces in the agriculture sector, workers are often 

self-employed or working on a farm. 

 

In 2010, 38 Saskatchewan workers died due to working 

conditions on the job. 

 

To say that again, Mr. Speaker: 

 

In 2010, 38 Saskatchewan workers died due to working 

conditions on the job. In 2010, 8.7% of Saskatchewan 

workers were injured at work and 3.12% of workers had 

more serious injuries resulting in time away from work 

(time-loss injuries). 

 

So again, nearly one in 10 affected in some way through either 

time loss injuries or injured on the job, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Saskatchewan continues to have the second highest workplace 

injury rate in Canada, after Manitoba, and its injury rate 

remains well above the Canadian national average. At the same 

time, rates for time loss injuries are decreasing in 

Saskatchewan, and again the ministry telling the auditor that a 

decline in industries is consistent with strategies it introduced in 

2003. And again it’s . . . To point out, to underline that, Mr. 

Speaker, if I can parenthetically, in 2003, and again targeted 

measures have been ongoing since then. 

 

Moving through the chapter, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting 

looking at the way it’s broken down between industries as to the 

highest number of injuries. So from page 366 of the report, 

industries in Saskatchewan with the highest number of injuries 

included: health authorities, hospitals, care homes, where 5,034 

incidents were reported; construction, 3,928 injuries reported; 

grocery, department store, hardware, 1,617 injuries reported; 

commercial, industrial production, 1,552 injuries reported; 

municipalities, 1,399 reported; and transportation, courier, 

commercial bus, 1,385. And again it’s important to know where 

the injuries are happening and where the sort of anomalies are 

or where the calls for . . . is particularly urgent for accelerated 

enforcement and activity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I guess I’d also like to quote the breakdown as provided of 

industries in Saskatchewan with the highest rate of time-loss 

injuries includes: light agricultural operations, which is 2.8 

times the average provincial rate; dairy products, soft drinks, 

2.7 per cent times the provincial rate; iron and steel fabrication, 

2.3 times; mills, semi-medium manufacturing, 2.2 times; 

transportation, courier and commercial bus at 2 times; health 

authorities, hospitals, care homes, 1.9 per cent times; residential 

construction, 1.8 times; and municipalities, 1.6 times. And 

again, when you’ve got a better sense of where the problems 

are, you can more closely target your efforts, Mr. Speaker, and 

that’s important. 

 

So the auditor’s discussing that information with an eye to 

providing a more precise, a more detailed analysis of where 

injuries are happening and what is provided for opportunities 

for action. So under the enforcement of the Act and regulations, 

the auditor on page 367 of the chapter states: 



652 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

Saskatchewan’s occupational health and safety legislation 

sets minimum requirements to limit health and safety 

hazards found in workplaces. The Act outlines the rights 

and duties of employers and employees, sets out penalties 

for offences, and mandates processes that must be used 

(such as the use of workplace occupational health 

committees). The related regulations focus on specific 

types of risks and related requirements. For example, the 

regulations set out requirements for scaffolds, compressed 

gases, felling trees, abrasive blasting, using explosives, 

precautions when using certain chemicals, and noise 

control. The Act and regulations define the duties of both 

employers and employees to keep the workplace safe and 

healthy. 

 

Again it cites the fact that the ministry becomes aware of 

workplace health and safety issues through inspections and 

complaints, that the ministry as of the time of the writing of this 

chapter employs 55 occupational health officers including 12 

officers specializing in particular health conditions such as . . . 

[inaudible] . . . Jeez Louise, Mr. Speaker. I’m having trouble 

with this one. Ergonomists, we’ll call it that. Hygienists, 

toxicologists, and radiation specialists, as well as seven mines 

inspectors — and again each of these deployed within a 

particular area of expertise. 

 

And again the auditor goes on to state that the ministry focuses 

on workplaces in which an employer hires workers, reflecting 

the Act’s focus on employers’ responsibilities. Again in that 

there’s a different approach, one based primarily on education 

for family-run or self-employed businesses such as family 

farms. 

 

[22:15] 

 

So in one of the really interesting exhibits in the report, Mr. 

Speaker, set out on page 368, it provides some detail on the 

different sort of trends in inspection, contravention, and 

stop-work orders. So in 2011 or 2010, 2011, there were 4,851 

workplace inspections conducted. Contraventions that were 

issued including cessation of work, notices, and compliance 

assurances, there were 6,592. Of those ordered or issued, Mr. 

Speaker, stop-work orders, there were 463; files sent to Justice 

for review, 81; prosecutions initiated for non-compliance, 

number of defendants where charges were laid, 74; and 

convictions, 52. 

 

And again there shows over time the basic sort of trend line 

around the conduct of workplace inspections shows that number 

increasing fairly steadily from ’06-07 at 3,621 to ’07-08, 3,658; 

’08-09 at 3,851; a significant jump in ’09-10 to 4,785, and then 

a bit of a levelling off at 2010-11 at 4,851. So again providing 

sort of a context or a shading or a . . . I guess we’ll stick with 

context for the current enforcement regime. 

 

So when the auditor looked at these facts and figures and 

looked at the current process around assurance engagement 

within the enforcement of the Act, they concluded — and again 

this is on page 369 of the report — that from April 1st, 2010 to 

August 31st, 2011, the Ministry of Labour Relations and 

Workplace Safety had effective processes to address workplace 

non-compliance with The Occupational Health and Safety Act 

and related regulations except for the following: “the ministry 

requires a documented, comprehensive risk-based approach to 

address workplace non-compliance.” 

 

Moving further on in the page, Mr. Speaker, page 370, “the 

Ministry should undertake more complete analysis of 

non-compliance and its causes” and “the ministry should 

require more consistent use of Ministry policies and better 

follow up of non-compliant workplaces.” 

 

Again, I’m not here to sound churlish about this, Mr. Speaker, 

but certainly the auditor provides this information to improve 

the work that we do around public policy. And I fail to see how 

that is adequately . . . Those things that are called for by the 

auditor, I’m not entirely clear how they’re brought forward in 

the legislation, or the connection between the auditor’s 

recommendations and how that has informed Bill No. 23 as it 

has come forward and how that is . . . you know, what measures 

are intended to again live up to the recommendations of the 

auditor, who is recommending how to improve the legislation 

for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And to go back on that, Mr. Speaker, again calling for a 

documented, comprehensive risk-based approach to address 

workplace non-compliance, to undertake more complete 

analysis of non-compliance and its causes, and requiring a more 

consistent use of Ministry policies and better follow up of 

non-compliant workplaces. 

 

It would have been good to see a discussion of that in the 

minister’s speech, which of course introduces the legislation to 

the public and to this Chamber. And again, we’d like to see how 

those sound recommendations of the auditor are borne out in 

the legislation before the Assembly. 

 

So again the auditor expands significantly on the key findings 

and recommendations. So again on the need for a structured 

response to workplace non-compliance, quote — this is from 

page 370 of the report — quote from the auditor: 

 

We expected the Ministry to establish a documented, 

comprehensive risk-based approach for addressing 

workplace non-compliance. Such an approach would assist 

the Ministry to consistently: 

[a] assess risk of harm (likelihood and impact of 

injuries) 

[b] set priorities to address non-compliance 

[c] communicate priorities 

 

Carrying on to quote from the report: 

 

We found the Ministry set and communicated priorities 

but needed to assess risks using a more comprehensive, 

systematic approach. 
 

Carrying on from the report, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The Ministry’s processes for setting priorities included 

work with other organizations at the provincial level and 

some internal planning processes. The ministry 

participated in a formal partnership with WCB called 

WorkSafe Saskatchewan. This partnership used a 

risk-based formula to identify workplaces where the most 

injuries and deaths occurred and created lists for the “top” 

50 and 400 employers — that is, those with the worst 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 653 

records. The Ministry set some priorities using these lists. 

For example, it asked its officers to inspect “top 50” 

workplaces in their geographic areas. In our sample . . . 

[they] found about 9% of the Ministry’s inspections were 

at identified “top 50” workplaces during April 2010 to 

August 2011. 

 

The auditor carries on to discuss that: 

 

The Ministry’s planning documents (strategic plans and 

annual work plans) communicated priorities for safety and 

for healthy work conditions. The safety priorities included 

protection against collapsing trenches, preventing falls, 

and requiring knowledgeable supervision on the work-site. 

The healthy work condition priorities included 

ergonomics, exposure to asbestos, lasers, and industrial 

contaminants. 

 

The ministry conducted meetings to communicate these 

priorities and work plans, and by weekly staff meetings. The 

ministry documented a few increasing risks in its annual work 

plans but did not document the rationale for most of its 

priorities or for how to assess risk. So not a bad job done on the 

one hand, Mr. Speaker, but certainly more work to be done on 

the other. 

 

A further recommendation from page 371 wherein the auditor 

recommends that the Ministry of Labour Relations and 

Workplace Safety document and use a comprehensive 

risk-based approach to address workplace non-compliance with 

the OHS Act 1993 and related regulations. Again flushing that 

out more precisely, wherein by the analysis of the auditor, the 

ministry had processes to communicate workplace 

non-compliance promptly. The ministry’s policy and 

procedures manual instructed officers to issue reports as soon as 

possible and no later than two weeks after the inspection. The 

ministry delivered most notices of contravention promptly and 

within policy guidelines, 92 per cent within the sample 

conducted by the auditor. The remaining 8 per cent were not 

timely, including 4 per cent of notices where workers were not 

protected against falls and the officer did not issue an 

immediate stop-work order as ministry policies required. 

 

The files, again according to the work of the auditor, did not 

contain explanations about why officers did not issue stop work 

orders. Protection against falls was a ministry priority. But 

again, the auditor’s calling for better documentation of why 

different things were done, and again, the more knowledge that 

you’ve got, Mr. Speaker, goes to better deployment of resources 

and better deployment of enforcement efforts. Again, I think 

fair points to make. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, moving towards conclusion of the kind 

of consideration I wanted to make sure was on the record in 

terms of the work of the auditor, there are other 

recommendations that we could go into at this time. But I think 

the last thing I would say on this score, Mr. Speaker, of the 

seven total recommendations that are provided by the auditor, 

there’s, I think, some good work there in terms of 

recommendations that would better calibrate, better focus the 

efforts of the OHS branch and work that . . . recommendations 

that again, I think, if we’d seen a better sort of connection made 

by the minister in terms of how these recommendations from 

the auditor, which are fairly well considered and I think make 

good sense, how they would be reflected in the actual Act itself. 

But I guess we’ll have to wait the conduct of hearings with the 

. . . as this legislation moves to committee and perhaps under 

the consideration of the actual auditor’s report itself — again, 

2011 volume 2, chapter 18. 

 

Some of the interesting critiques that we’ve seen of this 

legislation from other parties — particularly those again in one 

of the most injury-laden sectors out there covered by the OHS 

Act ’93 — one of the interesting things, concerns brought 

forward by SEIU-West [Service Employees International 

Union], again where they’ve got concerns around what was 

brought forward under preliminary matters, part I in section 

2(1)(d), definition of project owner, formerly referred to as the 

contractor, wherein SEIU-West agrees that the contractors who 

hire employers to complete a job and therefore are not directing 

the activities of the project or the workers should also be held 

accountable under the OHS Act. However simply changing the 

name from contractor to project owner does not accomplish 

this. In fact what needs to occur is the current definition of 

contractor needs to be expanded. That would seem to be a fairly 

common sense recommendation on the part of SEIU-West, and 

again it’s something that we look forward to a more fulsome 

discussion of with the minister. 

 

Section 2(1)(u), definition of owner. You know, why is this 

change being brought forward, and what are the possible 

unintended consequences? Changes to section 2(1)(ff), 

definition of worker, wherein the OHS Act should protect all 

workers. But there’s an outstanding query regarding the 

suggested change from SEIU-West, where they ask that the 

rationale suggesting the Lieutenant Governor in Council by 

regulation may prescribe a person or category of persons as 

workers within the meaning of the Act, yet the example 

provided, such as a volunteer firefighter, is not in keeping with 

the definition unless they are paid. So again, the need for 

greater clarification between those two categories, Mr. Speaker. 

And could that not possibly be achieved through the addition of 

a paragraph under section 44 of the Act? Again fairly 

well-considered suggestions coming forward. 

 

Section 30(1), the renaming of notice of contravention as a 

compliance order. You know, what are the implications of this 

change? The notice of contravention should not be interpreted 

as a compliance order when indeed it is an offence of the Act 

and/or the regulations. It must remain legally defined as a 

violation for which a penalty and/or remedy shall ensue and 

may entail prosecution. As such, the suggested change would 

inevitably weaken enforcement and protection for workers. It is 

important to identify breach of legislation as that is the intent of 

the notices of contravention as laid out in the existing section 

30(1). Again, we’d like to get a better response to that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I’m not sure if I heard the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena calling attention to the clock, but perhaps 

I’ll do that myself and look for it. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of adjournment, 

this House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.]



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 26 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 627 

 Bill No. 9 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 

  Wotherspoon ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 629 

 Bill No. 11 — The Court Officials Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 sur les fonctionnaires de justice 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 632 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ...................................................................................................................................................... 632 

 Bill No. 12 — The Court Officials Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 

  Vermette .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 633 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ...................................................................................................................................................... 633 

 Bill No. 16 — The Correctional Services Act, 2011 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 633 

 Bill No. 17 — The Child Care Amendment Act, 2011 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 635 

 Bill No. 18 — The Degree Authorization Act 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 638 

 Bill No. 20 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2011 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 644 

 Bill No. 23 — The Occupational Health and Safety Amendment Act, 2011 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 649 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 




