




















































Hansard: October 29, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 3B  MONDAY, OCTOBER 29, 2012, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1629 

 October 29, 2012 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 7 p.m., debate will resume. I 

recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Cox, seconded by Mr. 

Docherty, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Nilson.] 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s my pleasure to enter into the debate on the Throne Speech 

on behalf of the people of Regina Dewdney. There’s a few 

thank yous I’d like to do just before I get into the substantive 

part of my comments, Mr. Speaker. Us in the back benches 

don’t get a chance to speak often. 

 

And I’d like to of course thank my family. My wife, Tami, 

she’s stood by me through a lot of ups and downs and through a 

steep learning curve here as a new MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly]. And we’re certainly getting used to it. 

And obviously the people of Regina Dewdney for putting their 

trust in me and to represent them here in this beautiful building. 

And again, as I mentioned, this past year has been a real good 

learning experience for myself, and I’m working hard to try and 

continue to earn that trust. 

 

A new CA [constituency assistant] in our office, Mr. Speaker, 

and Brittany came to work with us this summer. She’s done a 

great job on behalf of the people in our constituency. And I’m 

very thankful to be named Government Deputy Whip. Now I 

understand — I’m learning this role as well — I know there is 

quorum you have to worry about, and that’s 14 people have to 

be in the House, I’m told. Some in the building were concerned 

that I did get this role. I might not be the best qualified; in the 

past, I’ve had a tough time counting up to 13. So we’ll see how 

it goes. 

 

Just briefly, Mr. Speaker, what’s happening in Regina 

Dewdney. Of course the Victoria East corridor, there’s lots of 

businesses — they’re thriving businesses. You can tell by the 

traffic on that street and No. 1 Highway. There’s lots of traffic 

there. There is businesses coming up all the time. It surprises 

me every time you drive through there. Lots of shopping, lots of 

restaurants, new restaurants. 

 

You notice, when you walk around and you go door to door, 

there’s a lot of people that put a lot of money into their houses 

there. They’re doing a lot of home renovations. They’re doing 

infills in some of the older areas, and I think that speaks to the 

economy we have in Saskatchewan. People are confident. They 

want to put money right here in Regina and Saskatchewan. That 

certainly does help our economy. 

We have a new care home going in on Heseltine crescent there. 

There’s a high school in my constituency I’d like to talk a little 

bit about. The high school is called Cochrane High School. It’s 

actually transitioned now though, Mr. Speaker, to Campus 

Regina Public. And what’s happening there, previously 

Cochrane had been a school for kids that socially and 

academically were struggling a little bit, so they were sent to 

that school. It’s transitioning now to a skills and trades centre, 

and it’s a pretty exciting pilot program they got there. This year 

is the first year. The grade 9s aren’t there anymore. The year 

after that, grade 10s won’t go there, regular grade 10s, and so 

on. 

 

What they’re transitioning to, Mr. Speaker, is they’re going to 

have, in the afternoons to start, kids go to their regular school in 

the mornings; in the afternoons they go to this new campus and 

they learn trades basically. They learn aesthetics. They learn 

plumbing. They learn computers. They learn how to make apps. 

And they’re partnering with businesses in the community. 

Welding shops want to help out and SaskTel is bringing people 

in, expertise to help with some of the classes, Mr. Speaker. So 

those are certainly innovative approaches that they’re taking at 

Cochrane. The kids, it gives them a chance to get apprentice 

hours while they go to high school in the mornings, like I 

mentioned before, and in the afternoons they get to go over to 

the new campus. And it gives a chance for kids to get hooked 

into the trades. 

 

Of course, as we know, in Saskatchewan there is a dearth of 

plumbers, electricians, carpenters, etc., and we could use 

certainly more of those. Let’s get them early; let’s hook them 

into that. There’s a health sciences part as well. So it gives a 

chance for kids, when they’re 17 or 18 years old, to see if they 

in fact do like that, if they do want to become a nurse, they 

want to become a doctor, they want to become a carpenter, etc. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s a real good innovative program. 

The school board’s put some significant dollars behind it, and 

we think that’s an interesting program. And we’ll certainly be 

watching that closely to see how it goes. 

 

But I think that points to what growth is able to afford, Mr. 

Speaker. This government’s put 125 million into capital 

projects just in Regina alone since 2007. That’s a significant 

amount of money — 6.5 increase in operations just this past 

year, Mr. Speaker. So that’s what growth does, okay? It makes 

it certainly very much easier to pay for these upgrades at 

Cochrane and to have students achieve more success. 

 

Now I’d like to talk certainly a little bit more about what 

growth can afford and what it means for us in our great 

province, Mr. Speaker. And of course I’m an educator, so I 

thought I’d look at that specific part. My colleagues have done 

a great job in talking about different parts of the economy and 

what this growth plan aims to achieve. 

 

One of the things, Mr. Speaker, in here is the Saskatchewan 

advantage scholarship. And that helps all high school kids in 

Saskatchewan. They get $2,000 to attend a university — U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan], U of R [University of Regina], 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology] — any post-secondary institution. And this past 



1630 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2012 

year 4,000 kids received that. That’s a significant investment in 

our kids and in our future. And we think that’s a good thing. It 

piggybacks on the graduate retention program, and that’s been 

part of our government’s . . . what we’ve done . . . sorry, 

$20,000. If you want to stay here in Saskatchewan after you’ve 

gotten your post-secondary degree, contribute to our economy, 

you’ll earn back $20,000 in taxes. 

 

And something else that’s very important for affordability for 

families and kids going to post-secondary education, Mr. 

Speaker, is the savings grant. It tops up the RESP [registered 

education savings plan] program by the feds by $250 every year 

per kid. And I know in my family I want to start early because I 

know those expenses can add up later on. And with my kids at 

the ages they are, if we start now, and I’m sure we plan to, $250 

doesn’t sound like a whole lot when you compare the whole 

cost of a post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker. But if we just 

start this year, $7,500 will come to my family, and that’s 

before, hopefully, any gains that will be when it’s invested. So 

that’s a significant amount and certainly it will help families out 

there here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The provincial assessment that’s being brought in, Mr. Speaker, 

you know, I think that’s a good program. It assesses where we 

are, where we need to improve, where we are doing well and 

we might not have to spend as many resources or time on, Mr. 

Speaker. I think each school board used to do this, and there 

was great examples out there and they had their own thing. And 

that worked fine for them, but I think they wanted some 

direction from the ministry so there was sort of standards 

throughout the province. And so this is a good program. 

 

And we’ve set a very aggressive goal, I think, Mr. Speaker, of 

having the highest graduation rates in the country by 2020. 

Now that’s certainly a tall order, and we’re not afraid of going 

after those targets, Mr. Speaker. And we know when a 

community or a province, when we have more people graduate, 

that means better incomes, healthier people. Maybe, you know, 

generally a better life on the whole. I think when you have 

people that are able to graduate, more and more people, that 

leads to a better economy. Getting post-secondary education 

certainly helps with that as well. 

 

And these are aggressive targets, and I’m proud of this 

government. We haven’t shied away from aggressive targets in 

the past, and in this document there are significant targets that 

we plan to meet. And when I think about some of the other ones 

we’ve done, Mr. Speaker, I think about nurses. We wanted to 

have 800 nurses, and we’ve surpassed that, Mr. Speaker. 

Surgical wait times, that was seen three or four years ago as a 

very aggressive target, when we had the lowest number of 

surgery, the highest waiting lists in the country, Mr. Speaker. 

And so that’s a good thing and we’re wanting to strive for those 

targets. And that’s something; I’m really impressed by this 

government. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, they never 

did this. They didn’t do that. And it was very telling, I think it 

was one of their ministers that famously said, that famously 

said they’re not even going to bother with goals, and I believe 

in this case it was nurse recruitment or it might have been 

doctor recruitment as well, something in the health care field. 

We won’t even meet that target. We’re not even going to try, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now if I was on a team and I had a coach that came into the 

locker room and said, you know, guys, it’s going to be real 

tough to win this game. I don’t know if we’re going to try too 

hard, might be too tough. You know, that would be a pretty bad 

attitude, I would think. And you know, I give that member 

credit for stating that, for admitting that they really had no plan. 

They had no, no goals. They had no goals set and, you know, I 

think that’s very telling as to the results they had while in 

government. 

 

And you know, I know, Mr. Speaker, we’ve done, we’ve done 

fairly expansive consultations on this, as a lot of my colleagues 

have mentioned. We had MLAs going throughout the 

community in Regina here. I know we did door knocking and 

we met with stakeholders and met with a lot of . . . And that 

happened all across the province. And so this is, this isn’t from 

. . . You know, this is definitely bottom-up, Mr. Speaker. So I 

caution the NDP [New Democratic Party] when they want to 

criticize. And sure, that’s what they do. They’re the opposition. 

They’re there to criticize. But this is truly, I think, for the most 

part, a sort of a grassroots approach — what the people of 

Saskatchewan want to see from their province in the next 

several years. So I think that’s good. 

 

You know, I can see why . . . You know what, Mr. Speaker? I 

definitely want to have several of my colleagues have a chance 

to speak tonight, Mr. Speaker. I think I’ll conclude my remarks 

there. Certainly there’s a lot of meat in this document and a lot 

to look forward to for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, and certainly look forward to the growth that 

will happen in this province. And I’m very happy to be part of 

this government on behalf of the people of Regina Dewdney. 

And on behalf of my constituents, I certainly am going to 

support this Throne Speech when the vote comes later this 

week. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

to stand in my place today to speak, to address a reply to the 

Speech from the Throne. I just want to thank a few people. You 

know, I was elected in 1999, and my children were fairly young 

back in those days, and so I thank my wife for looking after the 

children while I was away. And so it’s been quite an 

experience, being in politics, and certainly it’s been very 

rewarding. And again I just want to thank my wife and family. 

My children now are young adults, and my son is working for a 

construction company in Saskatoon. My youngest daughter is 

going back to university in Saskatoon as well and my eldest 

daughter is working in Regina and lives with me here. So it’s 

nice to see that they have found jobs and making their careers 

and their life in Saskatchewan. 

 

Obviously I’d like to thank the constituents who re-elected me 

again in the past election. I have a new constituency assistant. 

I’d like to thank Janet who’s been with me for about 10 months, 

who’s doing a great job. And also I’d like to thank my staff in 

my office, Megan and Selena and Theo. 

 

Our Throne Speech is all about growth and the plans for 



October 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1631 

growth. And you know, I don’t have to necessarily look at the 

whole province, I just look at Biggar constituency to see the 

type of growth that’s taken place in my constituency and in and 

around my hometown of Biggar. 

 

There’s manufacturing companies have expanded and started 

up in the town of Biggar and in Landis and many other 

communities in and around the constituency. They’re hiring 

skilled labour — there’s really a shortage of skilled labour — 

looking for welders and those types of people with those types 

of skills. And we have a high influx of immigrants into the 

constituency, in particular Biggar and Landis, where many 

people from the Philippines have come to work in those 

manufacturing firms. And their spouses are working in 

restaurants and also in various other businesses, grocery stores, 

and in and around the communities, Mr. Speaker. Obviously the 

businesses that are expanding have, you know, really improved 

the business climate in Biggar and the Biggar constituency. Our 

whole plan for growth obviously is about growth, and that’s 

going to continue under the leadership of our government and 

our Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was very honoured when the Premier asked me 

to serve as Minister of Rural and Remote Health earlier this 

year. And I’d like to speak a bit about my role as Minister of 

Rural and Remote Health and the items in the Throne Speech 

that address some of the challenges we have in health care, 

especially in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

I’ve lived in rural Saskatchewan all my life. I know the unique 

issues that patients in rural areas face when it comes to 

receiving timely access to health care, Mr. Speaker. I spent the 

entire summer, about four months, touring around the province. 

I visited 40 communities in rural and northern Saskatchewan, 

met with dozens of doctors in rural Saskatchewan to hear 

first-hand some of their challenges. I also met with other staff, 

registered nurses, nurse practitioners, lab and X-ray techs, 

mental health and addiction workers. I saw some exciting 

innovations that are taking place in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

[19:15] 

 

I visited the primary health care clinic in Meadow Lake, saw 

them using a team-based approach to provide medical care. I 

was in La Ronge to see how Northlands College has launched 

the first remote technology robot to be used for nursing 

education in Canada. I was able to work with the robot, and it 

was very innovative and unique type of technology that is being 

used. I also toured the new hospital in Humboldt, and got to see 

progress that’s being made on the hospital in Shellbrook as 

well. 

 

Everywhere I went, Mr. Speaker, I met health care providers 

who showed great dedication in providing quality care to 

patients. Everywhere I went I saw community leaders and local 

fundraising committees who are proactive and taking the 

leadership to find solutions to their own unique health care 

challenges. 

 

I would like to just take a minute to thank everyone at the 

Ministry of Health and from across the health regions who 

helped to organize and facilitate the tour. Forty tour stops was a 

big undertaking, and a lot of people contributed to making our 

visits a success. I would also like to thank everyone who 

attended the meetings, and the health care staff, the physicians, 

and especially community leaders and fundraising groups. We 

had some great discussions and I’m so glad that I got to hear 

some — first-hand — some of the unique challenges 

communities in rural and remote parts of the province are 

facing. Our government is also committed to working with 

those communities and our health regions to address those 

challenges. And the Speech from the Throne highlighted some 

of the things that this government is doing to alleviate some of 

those challenges. 

 

As an example, some of the . . . one very innovative work that 

is being done is the collaborative emergency centres. And we 

know that rural physicians can get burned out. When they have 

to be on call around the clock, it makes it very rough to recruit 

and retain physicians in smaller centres. And this is why we’re 

looking at Nova Scotia’s collaborative emergency centres as a 

way to alleviate some of the challenges of providing 24-7 

emergency services in rural and remote communities. These 

collaborative emergency centres are open 24 hours a day, seven 

days a week, and are staffed by a primary health care team 

during the day, and a team that includes a nurse and a 

paramedic with physician oversight by telephone or Telehealth 

during the night. 

 

I had the opportunity to visit two collaborative emergency sites 

in Nova Scotia. I would like just to thank the Minister of 

Health, David Wilson, from Nova Scotia, and the health care 

workers and their administrators for their hospitality, their 

generosity, and their eagerness to share their experiences with 

this program. 

 

Just last month we had the honour of hosting some of the health 

officials from Nova Scotia who came to a knowledge exchange 

day here in Regina. We had over 200 people from the health 

region, from RMs and towns, from professional associations 

and unions all attended to learn about the potential CECs 

[collaborative emergency centres] have with Saskatchewan, and 

we hope to see an innovation site earlier in the year, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Many of the other innovative things that we’re looking at is 

forming a new locum pool, building on the locum pool that is 

. . . that the Saskatchewan Medical Association is working, 

having a rural locum pool, and also continuing the great work 

that’s being done that was set up under the former minister of 

Health, and one of the very innovative programs is the 

Saskatchewan international physician practice assessment or 

SIPPA. The SIPPA program is a made-in-Saskatchewan 

solution to assess foreign-trained doctors, especially family 

physicians, which is exactly what we need more of in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Previously Saskatchewan only accepted foreign-trained doctors 

from six countries and now we’re recruiting doctors from all 

around the world. Last year when SIPPA was launched, 37 

foreign-trained family doctors have successfully completed the 

assessment, and over 90 per cent of those physicians practise in 

rural or remote communities. In the coming year, the Ministry 

of Health and Saskdocs will be working closely with the 

College of Physicians and Surgeons to get a full complement of 

30 doctors in each of the three annual intakes. Mr. Speaker, 



1632 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2012 

that’s going to be very good news for rural Saskatchewan and 

Saskatchewan as a whole to have that many number of new 

doctors be coming into Saskatchewan, and most of them will be 

working in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I had the honour of being at the inaugural 

flight of STARS, which is the shock trauma air rescue service 

that has been running in Regina for some time. I went to the 

inaugural flight in Saskatoon, and it’s a very innovative form of 

providing emergency service to Saskatchewan residents, almost 

exclusively in rural areas. And so this is another thing that we 

do through our health care, through the province with our 

corporate sponsors and fundraisers to help with emergency here 

in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, the 2012 Speech from the Throne 

highlights our government’s plan for growth: why we seek 

growth, how we sustain growth, and how we will meet the 

challenges of growth. The Throne Speech sets both targets and 

outlines some of the tools that are needed to reach these targets. 

I’m very proud to support the Speech from the Throne. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to weigh in on the debate here this evening and address 

the 2012 Speech from the Throne. Just before getting into it, as 

many other members have taken the opportunity, I’d like to 

recognize my family and my wife, Stephanie, who is an 

incredibly hard-working schoolteacher in Regina but also 

someone who is totally involved in our life in the community, 

in our political life, and certainly extends her care and support 

throughout the community and throughout our province, and 

someone that I’m so lucky to have on this journey and involved 

in the political life as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d like to thank Gloria Patrick as well, our constituency 

community office assistant who serves our constituency with 

such sincerity, integrity, incredibly hard-working, is focused on 

finding solutions, putting forward the proper advocacy on 

behalf of our constituents, and really does do important work 

for the people of our constituency. It’s my pleasure to work 

with Gloria and to see in many ways how she goes over and 

above and beyond on so many different fronts, and to sit down 

with her and to go through the files on a daily basis or a weekly 

basis of the matters that are coming in through the office and 

her care to ensure that we’re finding the sorts of outcomes and 

solutions that need to be there. 

 

Also in many of those conversations and then many of the 

follow-up discussions with constituents, we’re often 

collectively frustrated by some of the hard and real 

circumstances that so many are facing that simply aren’t 

solutions that are going to be able to be brought forward in a 

timely fashion — changes that require some structural change 

and changes that require a change of priorities on behalf of a 

government. But I certainly would like to thank Gloria for her 

attention and her care both to constituents across our 

community and also her work directly with myself. 

 

My constituency is one of hard-working individuals and 

families, a diverse constituency that consists of young families 

and pockets of seniors in various different senior living 

facilities, Mr. Speaker, but incredibly hard-working people who 

I think embody and represent Saskatchewan people in a very 

strong way — that dedication to hard work, that spirit of 

co-operation, that sense of compassion that they have. And 

certainly it’s reflected throughout the community. And maybe 

just as a mention it’s, you know, our community associations 

take such a key role in guiding the activities of a community 

and focusing on common interests. And I’d like to extend my 

sincere appreciation to all of our community associations — 

whether it’s Prairie View or Normanview West or Dieppe or 

McNab or Mount Royal and Rosemont, Mr. Speaker — and the 

key people that come together at those tables and in many ways 

are conduits back to the community and have a real strong 

sense of community needs and a strong sense of how we must 

work together to address some of the challenges that we face. 

 

I would like to highlight maybe specifically the work of 

McNab’s Community Association who have taken on 

ambitious renewal within their community, and the renewal of 

the park which includes a significant tree planting program, a 

new walkway, new planters, and have had the whole 

community involved in this process. And it’s been wonderful 

both to watch the engagement of the community and many 

members that hadn’t come out and been engaged in these sorts 

of activities, but also the community pride that is put forward 

by such activities. And they just do such a fine job of coming 

together as an association and as a community and celebrating 

some of that success as well, and I was sure pleased to join 

them just a couple of weeks ago at their volunteer service 

awards. A very special group of people working to better their 

community. 

 

We have, of course, vibrant schools throughout the community, 

many of them growing. Certainly there was disappointment 

with the closure of Dieppe School in this last year for the 

community of Dieppe, a community going through some 

demographic changes and with some opportunities for renewal 

with the Global Transportation Hub just on its doorstep, and 

with quality infrastructure that existed there at Dieppe School. 

 

And I’ve stated repeatedly in this Assembly my frustration with 

the provincial government, the current provincial government 

in its constraint that they’ve placed on school boards, in many 

ways hamstringing school boards and forcing school boards to 

make some very difficult and tough decisions with limited 

resources at a time when we should be supporting and investing 

in education. And certainly I think Dieppe may be a hard reality 

or a hard example of that constraint. And disappointing, as I 

say, infrastructure that’s in good shape and that should have 

continued to serve our community into the future. 

 

When I’m looking at some of the other schools, we do see 

growth at Martin Collegiate; in fact we see growth in 

population this year and we see an incredibly diverse student 

body, new Canadians and newcomers to Saskatchewan that 

have chosen to build and better their lives here in 

Saskatchewan, a strong First Nations and Métis population, 

strong population from all across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

and a real special spirit within the halls of that school and some 

exceptional parents and community members that come 

together and work together to see great student success out of 



October 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1633 

Martin Collegiate, along with the exceptional educators that 

enrich the program there on a daily basis. And I would like to 

highlight Martin Collegiate as a very special institution, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

When I think of my constituency and I think of the stories and I 

think of whether it’s the outreach in the community or the door 

knocking or those that are contacting me with challenges and 

concerns, it’s in part utilizing that that I reflect on the Throne 

Speech. And I look at the demands and pressures and 

challenges for so many of those families, whether it’s access to 

adequate quality child care, whether it’s in access to housing 

and the pressures for so many, Mr. Speaker, the challenges of 

planning towards post-secondary education or trades or 

apprenticeship programs, or just a whole host of pressures that 

families are facing as they’re organizing, or individuals and 

seniors sometimes alone, Mr. Speaker, are facing, looking at 

making that step towards a dignified quality circumstance for 

living for many of our seniors across this province. 

 

And these sorts of examples that I review and draw upon when 

I’m analyzing how this Throne Speech meets the needs, the 

challenges, the opportunities of my constituents, Mr. Speaker, 

and when I look at that and I do a scan across the piece, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m challenged to find much that truly addresses those 

challenges and those opportunities — a Throne Speech in many 

ways that’s scant in addressing those challenges and in fact 

pursues agendas and priorities that are inconsistent with many 

in my constituency. 

 

You know, I think in many ways, and we believe on this side of 

the Assembly, that the foundation of a strong economy is 

education and a strong middle class, Mr. Speaker. And I know 

when I look at this Throne Speech put before us, there is very 

little to advance the position of the middle class. And in fact 

what we see is, in many ways, a government that’s actively 

working against building a stronger middle class, Mr. Speaker, 

working against the interests of working families and working 

against the economic interests of many in this province, 

including main street activity and local economies themselves, 

Mr. Speaker, across the province. 

 

[19:30] 

 

You know, I’ve also had the special opportunity, a special 

journey to be out all across the province listening and 

connecting and building relationships, Mr. Speaker. And so I 

not only look at this through the lens of just my constituency 

and through my perspectives and files as a critic, but also in the 

stories I’ve heard, the circumstances that I’ve witnessed all 

across this province. And it’s in analyzing both my own 

constituency and the challenges facing many, the opportunities 

present in the lives of so many and also in looking across our 

province, Mr. Speaker, that I can say that I’m disappointed with 

the Throne Speech. 

 

Now we have certain aspects in this Throne Speech that we can 

speak about, some of the changes that have been put forward, 

some of the commitments that have been made for which we 

can discuss. And there is some critique to be had on some of 

them. We can also talk a bit about what’s not in this Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker, and I intend to do just that here tonight. 

But we also, I think, some of the uncertainty that we feel on this 

side of the Assembly, but what we’re hearing from more so the 

uncertainty of Saskatchewan people, is very much the surprises 

that Saskatchewan people have been offered up by this 

government in their second term. 

 

Many are feeling in fact, Mr. Speaker, that it’s a changed 

approach by this government, one that’s sort of lost its connect 

to the realities of many families in this province, lost its connect 

to the realities of our economy, Mr. Speaker, on many fronts. 

And we see that, I think, in this Throne Speech once again. But 

it’s not, as I say, not just what’s in this Throne Speech and not 

just what’s not in this Thorne Speech, but also that sense of 

uncertainty and surprise that many are awaiting from a 

government that they’ve learned has been less than predictable 

and less than keeping its word on many fronts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we look at the Throne Speech, we’ve recognized that 

there’s a rehash of many ideas, not a lot of new and innovative 

approaches to address challenges and opportunities ahead of us. 

We see re-announcements, Mr. Speaker, in infrastructure, and 

infrastructure quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, that we have to do a 

better job of providing and keeping up with. 

 

These are some of the demands and pressures of growth. And 

we need to challenge what seems to be an appropriate 

governing philosophy for this current government, which is 

growth for the sake of growth alone, Mr. Speaker. And we need 

to push that and challenge this government to make sure that as 

we develop, as we progress, as we grow, that we’re in fact 

making those improvements in the lives of Saskatchewan 

people and communities. And certainly this Throne Speech 

doesn’t step up to the plate to address that in a meaningful way. 

 

We, in fact in many ways, see limited action or little action, 

little plans, and not enough straight talk coming from a 

government that many expected better of, Mr. Speaker. We see 

far too often this circumstance where ideology is trumping 

common sense. And if there’s one value or set of values that 

certainly extend across this province and in communities — 

whether it’s a First Nations community or a rural community or 

northern community or urban communities, Mr. Speaker — is 

that appreciation in this province for a common sense approach, 

one that reflects our co-operative spirit, our willingness to work 

together, and takes forward that community-minded approach, 

that sense of compassion that are binding values across this 

province. And certainly this government, by way of their 

actions, by way of this Throne Speech, have displayed 

themselves to be inconsistent with those values that I speak of. 

 

I’ve heard from many people that, you know, it’s been about a 

year now that this new government’s second term has been in 

place. And I’ve heard from many that they’ve, as stated to me, 

that this isn’t exactly what they voted for: some of the changed 

approaches, whether it’s killing the film industry and the 

investment that was flowing in this province as a result, driving 

away that investment and workers from this province; or the 

hikes for many seniors by way of the prescription drugs that we 

saw in the spring; or the very misplaced priorities that this 

government’s had by way of sort of playing games with our 

electoral system and our constituency boundaries and forcing 

ahead, adding three more MLAs when it’s only in their own 

political best interests, Mr. Speaker, and certainly not reflective 

of the best interests of Saskatchewan people. 



1634 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2012 

So as I say, when I look at this Throne Speech that will also 

direct the budget as we move forward, I see words and 

commitments that don’t address the real challenges and 

opportunities that I’m hearing all across this province. 

 

When I, you know, when I spoke before, I think that we need to 

do all we can to be supporting thriving main streets in 

Saskatchewan, thriving local economies, thriving small 

business, Mr. Speaker. And we need to be working with small 

business to ensure that’s happening. And we certainly don’t see 

. . . We see scant mention of working with small business to 

ensure the conditions are in place to see that success, Mr. 

Speaker, and we need to do a better job on that. 

 

And I guess hand in hand with that is what we see in many 

ways as the organized and coordinated and deliberate effort to 

in many ways attack the middle class here in this province and 

certainly not support the best interests of working families. And 

we know that this has a direct impact on that local economy and 

those small businesses that we speak of, Mr. Speaker. And I 

know that Saskatchewan people, whether they’re on the main 

street of Indian Head or whether they’re working within my 

constituency, expect better of their government. And that’s our 

role, to put forward some of the critique. 

 

I’d say that the Throne Speech itself fails to respond to the 

challenges and opportunities of today’s families, the real 

challenges that they’re facing. It misses the mark in 

understanding some of these realities. And in many ways, as I 

say, it works against building strong families, communities, and 

economies. And this is where I feel strongly that it’s important 

to place a critique on many fronts. 

 

It fails to make steps and ensure that we, you know, really that 

we can fully capture the generational opportunity that we’ve 

been presented by way of our resource economy and our place 

in the world. And we see too often, sort of, some of those 

opportunities slipping through our fingers, to ensure that what 

we take from today is the opportunity to build healthier, 

stronger, better communities for tomorrow. 

 

And this is something that is desired across this province, 

whether in the Southeast in Estevan, whether on the west side 

up in North Battleford, whether in the North through La Ronge 

and beyond, or in any of the rural communities and urban 

centres throughout this province. And this is something we 

need to work towards: how do we fully capture the generational 

opportunity that we have been presented here in Saskatchewan 

and not let that opportunity slip through our fingers and fritter 

away some of those opportunities? What seems disappointing is 

that we see deliberate actions of this government that seems 

willing to intervene to make sure that Saskatchewan families 

don’t capture that opportunity or aren’t able to share in some of 

that prosperity. And I speak specifically to some of the overhaul 

and aggressive changes to labour legislation that’s both 

occurred and that we’re anticipating. And I’ll speak a little bit 

more to that as I go into another aspect of my speech. 

 

Many of the actions that we see have been both short-sighted 

and ideological. And this is where we stand up strongly on 

matters of the privatization that makes no sense at all — of ISC, 

for example — or the continued rabid pursuit of purchase 

power agreements and private power in SaskPower, or the 

many other examples that are going to really put us in a 

difficult position down the road and will in fact limit our ability 

to control our own destiny, something that Saskatchewan 

people have been very proud of over the years, to work 

collectively to put some institutions, some mechanisms in place 

that will provide some certainty of that brighter future for 

which we all should aspire and work towards, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Saskatchewan people certainly deserve better than what we see 

in this document. Many were dismayed and disappointed, some 

in fact that have relayed to me a level of disgust that the 

Premier and the Sask Party found it fitting that, rather than 

coming forward in our democratic tradition to put forward a 

Throne Speech to the people of this Assembly and the people of 

this province, they chose to do it, Mr. Speaker, at a $100-a-plate 

dinner with a business crowd in Saskatoon. 

 

You know, it sort of speaks in many ways, Mr. Speaker, to 

what’s going on in this province: sort of a select few that maybe 

have close proximity to current government, that are 

participating in some of that prosperity, but that the many, Mr. 

Speaker, have been actively denied the ability to share in some 

of that prosperity. And Saskatchewan people deserve better. 

 

And I’m, you know, it’s strange I’m being heckled by the 

member from Moose Jaw North, Mr. Speaker. I was in Moose 

Jaw just last night, and quite a gathering and some new 

members, Mr. Speaker, members that would come out and join 

into that discussion and that dialogue, Mr. Speaker. And I know 

they expected better than what’s in the Throne Speech, and I’ll 

get to some of the specifics that they found specific challenge 

with. But when they’re looking at significant economic loss in 

their own city, Mr. Speaker, what I think they’re hoping for is 

for a member to do more than to shout across the floor in 

debate. What they’d like that member to do is to in fact take 

their feet and engage in discussion and put forward the 

priorities of Moose Jaw in a meaningful way, Mr. Speaker. And 

quite frankly they should expect nothing less; that’s the least a 

member could do. But we’ll leave that for the member opposite 

to consider. 

 

You know, Saskatchewan people quite simply deserve straight 

talk. They deserve common sense solutions and a common 

sense approach of government, one that reflects, as I said, those 

co-operative values of Saskatchewan people that desire to make 

those improvements in a community-oriented way, and to 

reflect the compassion that we all have, Mr. Speaker. And they 

deserve a government that’s willing to work together with 

Saskatchewan people to build a better, fairer, more prosperous 

Saskatchewan for all. And on too many fronts, Mr. Speaker, we 

don’t see that occurring with this government, a government 

that’s very much disconnected itself from the communities that 

it had once earned the respect to represent and disconnected in 

many ways from the realities of communities and families 

across this province. 

 

I’d like to highlight a couple of changes that we see in this 

Throne Speech that reflect some budgetary pressures. And you 

know, I look at this one aspect. I often watch, sort of, TV and I 

recall ads that are this no money down, no money down, no 

money down. And you know in that approach — those ads 

when you’re watching those on TV — is it’s appealing to 

individuals that are in tight financial circumstances. And 



October 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1635 

typically if you go back and look at the fine print, is that many 

of those individuals it’s appealing to, it’s putting them on the 

hook for a significantly larger cost through the long run, higher 

interest rates and long-term pain — sort of a short-sighted 

offering to many people. 

 

Unfortunately I see that same sort of bargain basement sort of 

appeal coming now from our Premier and from the Sask Party 

with its approach to building infrastructure in this province. 

This privatization approach that they’re putting forward, they 

call it P3s [public–private partnership], but it’s simply masking, 

I believe, the fact that they’re into budgetary pressures that they 

are unwilling to share with Saskatchewan people and unwilling 

to take the measures required to shore up our finances and make 

sure that we’re in a position to make those investments back 

into people, back into families, and back into communities. 

 

And when I see that approach of the P3s — the privatization, 

the no-money-down approach — it’s, you know, sort of this 

concept that they think they can build $100 million bridges with 

just $10 million upfront or no money down. But we know of 

course that they’re tying themself and tying the hands of 

residents and the taxpayer, and for many years forward, to 

higher costs by choosing the approach that they’re choosing, by 

choosing the approach that they’re choosing. And what we need 

to do is we need to address the priorities of communities, and 

we need to make sure that we’re addressing some of that 

infrastructure that’s so key. 

 

And I would highlight one piece of infrastructure that is such an 

artery both to a community but to a province, and that being the 

Prince Albert bridge and the second bridge that’s there. What 

that community and what all of Saskatchewan will be 

well-served by is a government that’s able to put forward a 

principled plan to make those improvements, to make sure that 

that safety and that connect for people and communities is in 

place, but also to make sure that economic artery is in place. 

 

And what I criticize, Mr. Speaker, is this approach of 

government that’s in fact tying our ability to do that effectively 

into the future — spending more than we need on private 

profits for those we’re entering into contracts with, paying more 

for higher interest rates, borrowing costs of the private sector 

for whom we’re entering into. And it very much reflects that 

bargain basement sort of pitch that we hear from, that no money 

down, that sort of trying to sell someone up front with no cost 

but the long-term pain is significantly higher. 

 

So these are the short-sighted sort of approaches that have 

long-term costs and impacts, and what they do is they’re going 

to tie the hands of the treasury from being able to do the 

meaningful work that it needs to down the road. So it’s 

preventing us from being as effective as we can, a year and 10 

years and 20 years down the road, tying ourselves into these 

long-term private agreements. 

 

When I look as well, I guess it’s . . . You know, I see this 

reflects to me some budgetary pressures. And, you know, going 

back to budget this year, we were pretty direct, Mr. Speaker. 

We had concerns with the revenue assumptions that were put 

forward by this government. It’s unfortunately been a pattern of 

this government to be overly optimistic on its resource revenue 

assumptions, and we were clear and we were specific on what 

we saw on potash and stated those concerns. 

 

[19:45] 

 

And sadly, Mr. Speaker, it seems to be bearing itself out and I 

know placing strain on our finances here in our province. At a 

time where we’re supposed to be prospering and booming, we 

in fact have a government that can’t get a handle on its 

finances, continues to put forward deficits to the people of 

Saskatchewan, and in fact, you know, in this plan here there’s 

not even any meaningful debt repayment that we see in this 

plan. 

 

And not only is it a concern because some of this was cautioned 

from day one, Mr. Speaker, at budget day, Mr. Speaker, and 

certainly in the subsequent days and weeks and months to 

come. So not only is it disappointing that the current 

government hadn’t listened closer to what was going on within 

the economy but hadn’t heeded some of that advice. But instead 

they pushed forward with an expensive spin and a boastful 

approach that stuck billboards all over the province, Mr. 

Speaker, stating a position, Mr. Speaker, that was likely 

precarious from day one and certainly not fact at this point in 

time, probably not fact at the time that those billboards were 

being placed up. And spending money on this boastful sort of 

spin, Mr. Speaker, is so inconsistent with the values of 

Saskatchewan people who would rather a government roll up its 

sleeves, do the hard work, be straight, be direct, and advance 

the priorities that are important to them. 

 

And I guess it gets me to one of the other pieces that we’ve 

heard out of this Throne Speech that was delivered at the 

$100-a-plate dinner up in Saskatoon, and this is this concept 

that we need to give away more dollars right now to the 

out-of-province corporations that are doing quite well in this 

province. 

 

Now don’t get me wrong, Mr. Speaker. We need to have a 

principled relationship with those corporations that are 

investing in this province, that are creating employment. And 

we do. We need to make sure a competitive employment 

environment is in place, and we certainly have that. In fact we 

can hold up our economy on some of these fronts as having 

strength and certainly those large, many out-of-province 

corporations are doing quite well in Saskatchewan. 

 

But I find it interesting that a Minister of Finance and a 

Premier, at a time where we know that they’re already under 

financial pressures and now finding ways to creatively finance 

infrastructure that’s going to cost us longer through the 

long-term, finds that is their number one priority to be reducing 

or to be giving more dollars back to those corporations, most of 

which will flow outside our jurisdiction. 

 

Quite frankly, I guess this reflects a difference in priorities and 

it reflects a difference in who we are as opposed to the current 

government governing party. It’s a, you know, a party that sort 

of serves the select few, Mr. Speaker, that seems to be 

disconnected with the realities of many families, many 

communities, and our economy, but also, Mr. Speaker, that sort 

of just pursues this agenda of growth for the sake of growth. 

And we believe in something different. We have a proud record 

and commitment to economic growth and development and 



1636 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2012 

progress, but progress being the key word, Mr. Speaker, making 

sure we’re making those meaningful investments and 

improvements in the lives of Saskatchewan people. 

 

So that’s something that we’re going to be focusing in on. We 

believe right now that it’s the wrong-headed approach to give 

hundreds, you know, hundreds of millions of dollars back to 

out-of-province corporations when we really need those dollars 

right now to be putting pavement on the ground, to be building 

our schools, to be investing in our classrooms, Mr. Speaker. 

And I’ll stand with the families and communities of 

Saskatchewan any day of the week on this one, Mr. Speaker. 

That being said, we’ll continue to have a respectful and 

principled relationship with the corporations of this province. 

 

When we talk about prosperity in this province, we talk about a 

middle class. We talk about the importance of that middle class 

and we believe very much that this current economic activity or 

current resource prosperity should be extended back to 

communities, back to main street, back to families. And instead 

we see a government that’s actively working against that 

happening. We see a government that’s denying the ability and 

the levers for many families across this province to share in 

some of that prosperity with the dismantling and the unilateral 

overhaul of labour laws in this province, working against the 

best interests of workers’ rights and of working families all 

through this province, and working against the best interests of 

our local economies, of our main street, of our small businesses, 

who depend on having a strong middle class, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, this is a government that has rammed forward 

unconstitutional labour legislation in the past, Mr. Speaker, 

without any consultation, and we see a government continuing 

that shameful approach with the workers and economy of this 

province, Mr. Speaker. And certainly we expect better. And 

there’s a huge surprise sort of looming for so many in this 

province as to what those labour law changes that are being 

intimated by government opposite are going to be. What we 

know is that government opposite didn’t sit down with 

Saskatchewan workers and have the conversation and have the 

dialogue that they’re deserved on this front, the basic 

consultation that should have occurred. 

 

Who I’d like to commend on this front is my good colleague, 

the member from Saskatoon Centre, our Labour critic, who led 

meetings for our caucus to lead that consultation all across this 

province, to hear from Saskatchewan people, to have that 

meaningful discussion that government failed to have. And 

quite simply, when you’re making changes that impact the lives 

and people in this province, you owe them the respect to sit 

down and to be a part of that consultation. 

 

You know, I went to all of those consultations but the one in La 

Ronge — I had a conflicting announcement at that point in time 

— but I went to all those other meetings up in North Battleford 

and in Humboldt, in Yorkton, all over the province, in Regina 

and Saskatoon. I found that if government would have come out 

and listened to what a family or a worker would’ve had to say 

in Yorkton or North Battleford, the common sense sort of ideas 

about how we strengthen our economy and protect the rights of 

workers, build a Saskatchewan for which prosperity is extended 

back to communities, families, and the middle class, Mr. 

Speaker, we would’ve been well-served by that sort of listening 

and that sort of approach. But I commend our Labour critic for 

his work on this front, for the ideas that he’s gathered for 

what’s been put forward, certainly on the public record as well. 

But I certainly scold government for their divisive approach and 

an approach that’s damaging for our economy and for families. 

 

You know, I see this approach where . . . We see this in our 

Crown sector. The facts are just adding up. The evidence is 

clear where we see this persistent and deliberate dismantling of 

our Crowns, the constraining of our Crown corporations. And 

now in fact this old, old idea of privatization that’s being 

pushed forward by the government opposite. And I don’t know 

if members opposite . . . I think this maybe reflects sort of that 

lack of connector, that change that I see in government opposite 

or that I’m hearing from Saskatchewan people all across this 

province in the fact that they feel this government’s changed in 

its second term and failing to understanding their priorities. 

 

And I see that reflected in its approach with our Crown sector, 

whether it’s the now very wrong-headed plan to sell ISC 

[Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan] which in 

fact will impact families and homeowners and businesses and 

corporations all across this province who are purchasing land, 

purchasing homes, staking claims, making investments. To pass 

off a monopoly of the nature of ISC to the private sector 

doesn’t make any sense at all, Mr. Speaker. In fact for a 

government that sometimes pretends that they’re sort of 

interested in ensuring there’s a competitive environment for 

business in this province, I question how this somehow serves 

ensuring that competitive environment. Right now we have the 

ability to make sure we’ve got a competitive environment for 

businesses and for families who are purchasing homes and 

businesses that are making land claims and purchases and 

registering corporations. And all of that’s going to be put at risk 

with the approach of this government; also putting at risk that 

sensitive private information that, you know, is in our best 

interest to contain in a Crown entity. 

 

I can go on with the attacks on the Crown sector, the raids of 

dividends that we’ve seen, the recent example we saw in 

SaskPower where they went directly and raided the dividends in 

the late hours of last year. And now we’re calling for families 

and businesses across Saskatchewan to step up and to backfill 

that by way of increased rates at a time where so many in this 

province quite frankly are challenged by affordability, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s simply the wrong approach. 

 

We see through SaskTel the continued contracting out that’s 

occurring, in many cases to out-of-province and out-of-country 

firms and in fact putting 8,000 rural customers all across this 

province in a very uncertain environment with looming rate 

hikes, Mr. Speaker, from a government that’s failed to stand up 

for the best interests of the people of this province on this file. 

 

And of course we’ve highlighted the fact that the Premier and 

this government was so willing to enter into a contract with the 

Chinese firm that’s been a stated security risk through both our 

intelligence bureau, through CSIS [Canadian Security 

Intelligence Service], but also through countries from around 

the world, the United States and from Australia. And I believe 

the United Kingdom has also actively done some analysis on 

this front that has put forward significant threats to our security, 

the integrity of our systems. And it seems to me, why is . . . 



October 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1637 

how is it worth that risk that government’s subjecting 

Saskatchewan people to, and our province? Because it’s not just 

the privacy of the emails and data, of the private, sensitive 

information of Saskatchewan people all across this province 

that’s been placed at risk, but also some of the competitive 

information and advantages that we have. The knowledge and 

understanding, the data that speaks to the competitive place that 

we have in the world, Mr. Speaker, by way of our resource 

activity, by way of our mineral wealth, by way of our oil and 

gas industries, Mr. Speaker, by way of our land, our agricultural 

land in this province. And what we should do is be proud of 

those assets and then act in a principled way, Mr. Speaker, to 

make sure that we’re able to capture the full benefit for 

Saskatchewan people. And certainly this was an unneeded risk 

that Saskatchewan people have been subjected to by a reckless 

move by this government. 

 

I highlight the Sask First policy which has collared our Crowns 

from being able to divest risk outside of our jurisdiction and to 

bring back benefits to Saskatchewan people. And, you know, 

it’s sort of the anything but a business-minded approach that we 

see on this front, and very much one that’s limiting our future. 

 

You know, I noticed with that $100-a-plate speech and booklet 

that was put forward, Mr. Speaker, I noticed that there was 

mention of a heritage fund, Mr. Speaker. And, you know, I 

thought this is interesting, because this is a principle that I 

support and something I call for, Mr. Speaker, and something 

we support. A principle that we need to take non-renewable 

resource revenue of today and put it to work and put it to the 

benefit of future generations. Not spend all of it now, Mr. 

Speaker, make sure we’re creating a legacy and ensuring that 

bright future that so many deserve. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, we did once have a Heritage Fund 

in this province that was in place back in the late 1970s, and of 

course that was sold in the early 1980s, Mr. Speaker, by another 

conservative government. I sometimes look back and think, 

boy, had we not had that government that went in and actively 

undid some of those institutions and structures that were there 

to make sure that we had the sort of economic strength for 

families and communities in the province that we should have, 

we’d be in such a better place. 

 

But I notice that the Heritage Fund was going to be something 

that was maybe now supported by this Premier and 

government, but when I got through some of the fine print I 

notice that they said that, you know, this is something that may 

begin or wouldn’t begin until debt’s repaid. Well sadly, I know, 

I was looking through the books with some of the private sector 

accountants here recently and going through some of the 

analysis that they were assisting to engage in, and what they 

were noticing was that in fact we’re not paying off debt at all, 

Mr. Speaker — but in fact it’s escalating, Mr. Speaker. That 

we’re, at a time of an apparent booming economy, we’re 

actually adding debt to the province. So I question when this 

Heritage Fund may begin because certainly we’re going in the 

wrong direction right now to ever get there. 

 

But I also noticed that even if we buy the plan put forward by 

the Premier on this front in his booklet is that this fund would, 

based on what he’s suggesting his debt repayment plan to be, is 

that we’d start funding this plan in 2060, Mr. Speaker, which I 

think the Leader of the Opposition aptly mentioned that he 

would be 110 years old at that point, Mr. Speaker. I’d be a few 

years younger than that, Mr. Speaker, but regardless, 2060 is far 

too late to be putting dollars away for future generations, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker is engaging in discussion or debate and I didn’t 

quite catch his message but . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, 

Mr. Speaker suggests that he’ll still be here in year 2060 and 

he’s, you know, he may have that sort of longevity, I’m sure. I 

certainly wish him good health and happiness, but hopefully by 

then he’s watching from the bleachers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[20:00] 

 

What we do see, you know, I thought it was, you know, when 

we look at some of these pressing and important issues, we see 

a government that’s just offside with really truly advancing the 

best interests of Saskatchewan people. We see an old approach 

in the privatization. Whether it’s ISC or the new approach to 

funding infrastructure, it’s going to cost us far more through the 

long term. We see it in health care. We see it in our power 

corporation. We see it in highways. And unfortunately what we 

see in this approach is giving away some of the control we have 

of our future, some of that certainty that Saskatchewan people 

deserve and have worked too hard, Mr. Speaker, to simply give 

away — giving away some of the competitive advantages and 

some of the certainty that we’re going to have a circumstance 

for the next generation that will be better than for the previous. 

 

So I touched on some of the pieces that were in the Throne 

Speech for which Saskatchewan people have concern over, Mr. 

Speaker. But it’s not just notable what’s in the Throne Speech; 

it’s also notable what isn’t. And I know I’m mindful of the time 

here, Mr. Speaker, so I don’t want to take too much time, but 

I’ll go through some of these pieces. 

 

We see no serious plan for housing, and quite frankly, Mr. 

Speaker, this is an issue that’s a common concern, a common 

cause across communities all across this province. Whether it’s 

Melfort, whether it’s Humboldt, whether it’s the North, whether 

it’s First Nations Saskatchewan, whether it’s urban 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, housing is a major challenge. And 

what we see a government doing is paying lip service and 

putting forward sort of plans that do nothing more than tinker 

around with the edges of what we might call market housing, or 

plans that do little more than support those that basically can 

already access housing, and we need much better, Mr. Speaker. 

We need a broader approach. We need a comprehensive 

approach that needs to include affordable housing, Mr. Speaker, 

true affordable housing — not the stuff that members opposite 

speak of — true affordable housing and true social housing, Mr. 

Speaker, to balance off the demands in our province. 

 

Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, without doing so we’re placing 

challenge and pressure on the quality of life for many. We’re 

placing stress on far too many, and we have too many families, 

Mr. Speaker, in communities all across this province in far too 

precarious of a circumstance with too much vulnerability in 

their own economic lives by way of housing, and we need to do 

better. And we should be proud of a growing population, of 

people moving into our province, but then we need to place that 

subsequent investment back into the places where pressure is 



1638 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2012 

created. Housing is one of these keys areas where we need to be 

balancing off that approach. And yes, quite frankly, as I’ve 

said, whether it’s renters or young families, we have far too 

many in this province without security and with too much 

vulnerability for far too many across this province. 

 

I would suggest as well that, you know, because I want to get 

into a little bit of discussion about education and health care, 

but without addressing housing in a meaningful way, we 

directly impact those outcomes in education and the classroom 

and in health care. And those are those factors that have a direct 

impact, whether it’s external to the classroom or external to the 

health system, and we need to be active in making the 

meaningful difference. And quite simply this isn’t just about 

building a better life for families, which should be enough 

motivation for us, but it’s also about good social policy and 

good economic policy, and we all need to work together on this 

front. We’re going to continue to stand strong as the New 

Democratic Party opposition. 

 

We see no commitment, you know, without . . . what else isn’t 

in this budget. We see no commitment to address or resolve the 

underfunding, unacceptable underfunding of Aboriginal First 

Nations on-reserve education, something that has harsh and 

direct consequences for all of us, Mr. Speaker. We see no 

compromise by way of the unilateral changes that were made 

without any consultation to the many newcomers and new 

Canadians who are building and bettering their lives here in 

Saskatchewan, and no addressing or putting forward fair 

immigration laws or no keeping of one’s word, Mr. Speaker, a 

word that was broken by this government when they 

unilaterally made changes that directly impact the lives of so 

many. 

 

Further to that, we see, at a time where we’re growing as a 

population, we see inadequate support back into settlement 

services and support back into the classroom for those very 

students. And without providing those supports, it impacts all 

of community, all of the community, and impacts all students, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see no plan in this Throne Speech to properly fund our 

classrooms. We see many classrooms, many teachers being 

starved of the resources required to address the challenges of 

today. And certainly the approach of this government, at a time 

where we need to be investing in education, is short-sighted. In 

fact what we see is this government, where they’re going to 

spend some new money, is to spend more money on testing, 

Mr. Speaker. We don’t need to spend more money on testing 

right now; we need to invest more in those very classrooms and 

in those students to provide the better outcome that we all 

should be working towards, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have opportunities to make improvements to the funding 

formula. Growing school divisions that we have that we should 

be excited about, but a government that’s dragging its heels to 

properly fund that population growth and make sure that school 

divisions and classrooms have the resources that they require. 

And the impacts are being felt. We see it by way of class size. 

We see it by way of pressures in the classroom. We hear the 

stories from parents and students that are bringing back the 

stories. We see the cuts in early learning and in full-day 

kindergarten, Mr. Speaker, that all the evidence would suggest 

is the kind of policies that we need to be pursuing as a province 

to bring us that stronger economic future and that stronger 

social position for families all across this province. Instead we 

see cuts. 

 

In fact I heard recently from a young student up in Saskatoon 

who conveyed that even their SRC [student representative 

council] budgets have been impacted of late, Mr. Speaker, and 

of course the kind of, you know, this is . . . some see as a 

smaller item, Mr. Speaker, but it’s just making clear the kinds 

of cuts that are occurring at a time where we need to be making 

education a priority and investing in Saskatchewan. And I know 

the members opposite, what they say is, well those are 

decisions of school division. Right, Mr. Speaker, but it’s 

basically what this government’s approach has been to do is to 

set the allocation, to take control of financing, to put forward a 

funding formula that has shortfalls, Mr. Speaker, and then to 

leave it to divisions and school board members that have been 

elected all across this province to make the tough decisions that 

this government isn’t willing to take responsibility for. 

 

We see barely a mention of the critical work needed to improve 

Aboriginal employment in this province, First Nations and 

Métis employment, and engagement in this province, something 

that we know to be so critical to the future of this province and 

something that we need to be working towards together as a 

province. 

 

No plan or commitment to reinstate the film industry, to 

recognize an error that’s been made, something that’s providing 

a cultural hit to this province and an economic hit to this 

province, and certainly a life-changing negative impact on 

many families, Mr. Speaker, that have been employed and 

worked in this creative industry. 

 

And I’d argue, Mr. Speaker, that this goes beyond, this goes 

beyond just the simple argument put forward by the Sask Party 

in their cutting of the film economy. In many ways, when we 

see people choosing to build their lives here in Saskatchewan, 

whether they’re moving from Ontario or from around the 

world, what they’re looking for isn’t a stripped down province 

or community. They’re looking for enriched communities with 

cultural offerings and quality of life that should be second to 

none, and instead we see a government that’s actively working 

to sort of eliminate and strip down some of those cultural 

offerings that offer us pride of place and creative outlets to 

engage as communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see a government that has put forward no plan in this 

Throne Speech to come into compliance with public sector 

accounting standards, to come in line with the rest of Canada in 

how we report our finances, and really digs their heels in deeper 

to continue to report our finances in a way that allows them to 

manipulate and manufacture outcomes that aren’t reflective of 

the realities of the true state of our finances, Mr. Speaker. And I 

guess I touched on some of that before when I talked about the 

approach to . . . the lack of plan to paying down debt and the 

fact we’re actually increasing debt year over year for a few 

consecutive years, Mr. Speaker, and the fact that we’re having a 

government that simply can’t get its head around how it’s going 

to leave some sort of legacy for the future by way of a heritage 

fund. One that they’re suggesting may start after 2060, Mr. 

Speaker, almost 50 years from now. 



October 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1639 

I touched on the labour laws. I’m not going to go back into 

much more right now, Mr. Speaker, other than to say that it’s 

shameful to see a government actively working against the 

interests of workers and families in this province, actively 

working against the long-term prosperity of our economy, Mr. 

Speaker, and unilaterally overhauling legislation — 15 pieces, 

Mr. Speaker — reviewing with an aim to overhaul legislation 

that was built, Mr. Speaker, out of the spirit of co-operation and 

through over 100 years. And Saskatchewan people, 

Saskatchewan employers, Saskatchewan organizations deserve 

better than that, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll be ready to stand up for 

Saskatchewan families, Saskatchewan workers, and the 

economy of this province when the presentation of labour law 

changes are put forward. 

 

We see in agriculture a lot of pressures and challenges in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. We see cuts that have come to 

AgriStability and AgriInvest, Mr. Speaker. We see the 

privatization of our tree nursery that started, at the turn of the 

century in fact, before we were a province and has supplied 

over 600 million trees all across Western Canada and has 

transformed our prairie landscape and played such a key role in 

agriculture and in habitat and conservation all across this 

province, eliminated or privatized by the federal government 

and a provincial government that’s sitting on its hands instead 

of working as an active partner to find solutions to ensure the 

viability of that tree nursery for many years into the future. 

 

We see a piecemeal approach from this government in stepping 

up to the challenge of the privatization of community pastures 

by the federal government, Mr. Speaker, leaving in limbo many 

producers, many patrons who simply aren’t in a position to 

acquire those lands, Mr. Speaker, and placing risk to many that 

have been patrons of those lands for generations, Mr. Speaker, 

and those lands playing, of course, that very important role in 

balancing off our agricultural economy for so many. 

 

And of course we see beef producers taking a real hit, Mr. 

Speaker, right now and a government that sits quietly as a result 

of a deregulation, reckless deregulation agenda of the federal 

government that has not only impacted and placed a hit on our 

beef producers, Mr. Speaker, but also our food safety. 

 

So there’s many challenges that need to be addressed. You 

know, I think as well, as we meet with so many of our 

producers and in rural Saskatchewan, a lot of pressures and 

challenges as it relates to transportation: the logistics but also 

the cost, the pressures of increasing inputs and lack of control 

or certainty on those fronts, and certainly eating many of the 

margins that hard-working producers in this province have 

worked hard to achieve. 

 

So we see quite a few areas, Mr. Speaker, that aren’t in the 

Throne Speech that are of concern, and that should be. A couple 

others that I might just want to address before I close and turn it 

over to someone opposite, Mr. Speaker. But we see nothing for 

northern Saskatchewan. And I talk about all of Saskatchewan. 

I’ve highlighted specifically rural Saskatchewan and urban 

Saskatchewan, First Nations Saskatchewan. But when I think of 

northern Saskatchewan and some of the requirements to 

improve safety and quality of highway infrastructure in through 

the North, the broken promises, Mr. Speaker — in fact raiding 

dollars that have been set aside and committed to the North, Mr. 

Speaker — is a shameful approach of this government. And we 

have northerners who deserve and expect better. 

 

We know we need to do such a better job by way of those 

educational and employment opportunities through the North. I 

see scant mention of any of that sort of initiative in this budget. 

I don’t see the sort of reinvestment back into the North that 

would be reflective of the wealth of the region and the role it 

plays economically, and providing it a level of fairness to the 

rest of the province, Mr. Speaker. Then I recognize the social 

conditions that in many cases are simply unacceptable, Mr. 

Speaker. And you know in many ways, for a Premier to boast 

about prosperity and to be dismissive of those circumstances 

that exist for many up in northern Saskatchewan is something 

that is not acceptable and not responsible to the people who live 

throughout that beautiful region. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I see the issue that is so critical for 

many in this province, I see no commitment, no plan, no 

protections by way of our environment — our land, our air, our 

water — for future generations. And quite simply, Mr. Speaker, 

we owe the next generation so much more on this front and 

something that we need to address. Something so critical to 

ensure any of the other plans that we’re able to achieve. 

 

And when we travel this province, we hear about the pressures 

to access health services. We see many, many doctors that are 

not in place in communities. We see emergency services that 

are less than adequate. We know how important that access to 

those health services are to Saskatchewan people and I see, I 

see no plan in this Throne Speech at all to be meaningfully 

addressing those challenges. And you know, when I think of so 

many young families, Mr. Speaker, that I chat with that are so 

concerned about the future of public medicare in this province 

and every part of this province, Mr. Speaker, I see nothing in 

this Throne Speech to make sure that we’re not only protecting 

but expanding public medicare and making sure that it’ll be 

there to serve their children’s children as we move forward, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[20:15] 

 

So what I see in this budget, as I’ve said, highlights some 

concerns. Certainly what isn’t in the budget is also of concern. 

And what is also of concern, as I’ve said, is the uncertainty that 

exists and looms for so many in this province from a 

government that they’ve learned they can’t quite trust what’s 

put and put forward to them as the plan. 

 

And when I say that, Mr. Speaker, what I’ve had shared with 

me as an example was this is the same government that ran on 

glossy brochures about a year ago about a booming 

Saskatchewan and then shortly thereafter put a Throne Speech 

that was inconsistent with that and then actively brought around 

surprises, Mr. Speaker, that weren’t in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people — killing a film industry, pushing 

forward an agenda to spend more money on politicians, Mr. 

Speaker, to hike the cost of prescription drugs for so many in 

this province. And it’s that sort of . . . To make cuts in our 

classrooms all across Saskatchewan at a time where we need to 

be investing in education, Mr. Speaker. Quite frankly, 

Saskatchewan people deserve better. 

 



1640 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2012 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’d argue there is a better way forward. I 

would argue we could work together with all Saskatchewan 

people. I would say that what I recognize when I have meetings 

all across this province is that there’s far more that unites this 

province than ever divides us. And we require a government 

that’s going to actively work together with all of Saskatchewan 

to make sure we’re building that better, fairer, more prosperous 

Saskatchewan for all Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With that being said, I have more to say at different times and 

questions to be asked, look forward to committee structures, but 

I won’t be supporting the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. I will be 

supporting the amendment put forward by the Leader of the 

Official Opposition. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, before I begin, I would ask 

permission to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Batoche has asked for a 

leave to introduce a guest. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Up in your gallery I 

would like to introduce Mr. Beryl Bauer, president of the 

Saskatchewan Federated Co-ops and one of the cornerstones of 

the mighty Lake Lenore Credit Union. Mr. Beryl Bauer, 

welcome to your House, and I’d ask all members to join me in 

welcoming him. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Cox, seconded by Mr. 

Docherty, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Nilson.] 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, the west coast is having 

earthquakes. The east coast is having hurricanes. And we sit 

here in Saskatchewan, the best place in the world to be, as 

compared to what the member on the other side said, but it’s 

still the best place ever. 

 

Before I begin my speech, there’s a few thanks I would like to 

make. First off, the people of Batoche for their support and their 

continued advice and wisdom. I would also like to thank my 

colleagues for their friendship and their advice and time. I’d 

also like to thank our Premier. His strong leadership and 

guidance is worthy of this great province. 

 

High on my list also is Team Telfer, Don and Mary Anne, who 

run my constituency office. And I thank them for their 

friendship, their hard work, their wisdom. Also my family for 

their years of support. November now, I’ll be completing nine 

years here, and I thank them for their support. But mostly, I 

would like to thank my friend, my partner, my wife, my 

Valerie. Valerie and I have entered in a new era in our life. We 

are now grandparents. And I am looking forward, Mr. Speaker, 

to some day introducing our grandson Carter to this House, and 

then we’ll enter his name in Hansard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was at a function in Prince Albert where the 

Honourable Governor General David Johnston was speaking. 

And he said there was a country in Africa — and I don’t 

remember the name — but he said in that country in the 

legislature, when you get up to speak, you stand on one leg. 

And when you play out and you end up putting that leg down 

and you stand on two legs, you’re done. You sit down. It would 

be good advice for our former speaker from the other side. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after hearing his comments, I will start off my 

speech by saying, I will be supporting the Throne Speech and 

rejecting the amendment totally. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the greatest indicator of success in any business is 

growth. The greatest indicator of success in any country, any 

province, any community, any town, any village, any hamlet is 

growth. Growth is a true indicator. They say numbers can be 

juggled but in this case, growth is the factor. 

 

There are only two alternatives towards small communities. 

They either have to grow or die. They cannot remain the same. 

And many of our small villages — of which Batoche is 

comprised of, villages and hamlets — if possible they find a 

way, an industry, whatever, to stimulate. And they must induce 

growth. This is the situation that Saskatchewan has been in for 

a number of generations: it has been dying. I was here in the 

House the day that Eldon Lautermilch got up and said, when 

answering to why people were leaving this constituency or 

leaving this province, he said, there was more for the rest of us. 

Yes — more taxes, more children leaving. It was a sad state of 

affairs. 

 

That is why on November 7th of 2007 and again even stronger 

in 2011, the people chose to grow. They wanted to see 

Saskatchewan grow. They are proud of the new Saskatchewan. 

They are no longer the wee province. We are the new 

Saskatchewan and some rightly say that it is our resources that 

are carrying us in this new future. Others say we were lucky 

that the boom happened at the same time as we were elected. 

They also say it would have happened if the NDP was still in 

power. Well, Mr. Speaker, was oil and potash first discovered 

in ’07? 

 

Mr. Speaker, opportunity has been knocking for years, even for 

generations. Opportunity knocks and our government has 

answered that knock. We have opened the doors wide. Mr. 

Speaker, nothing speaks louder than actions. Nothing speaks 

clearer than actions. 

 

K+S Potash of Germany are back. That’s a huge, huge feature. 

That is the company that was driven out by the former 

government. They had to pack their bags, salvage what they 

could and leave because the government took away their potash 

mines. They’ve got enough confidence in the new 

Saskatchewan, they’ve got enough faith, enough courage that 



October 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1641 

they are back. So nothing speaks louder than these actions. 

With the return of them it will be providing jobs and a future 

for our children. 

 

From this Throne Speech, the gem that I will take home, the 

gem that I will be repeating over and over, we are not seeking 

growth for growth’s sake but to achieve a better quality of life 

for our people. Mr. Speaker, we are the 58 chosen ones that are 

elected to better this province. Our decisions here guide the 

province’s direction. We struggle. We debate. We try to build 

this province for our children and for our future. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there is an eastern cancer coming our way if 

this false doctrine of the federal NDP and their theory of the 

Dutch disease is not stopped. Mr. Speaker, Bank of Canada 

Governor Mark Carney had these comments, and I would like 

to read his comments into Hansard. His comments were, “. . . 

higher commodity prices are unambiguously good for Canada.” 

He also said, “The strength of Canadian resource sector is a 

reflection of success, not a harbinger of failure.” That was a big 

word for a country boy. 

 

“Exports of oil and other commodities have brought greater 

wealth into this country, including generally higher income and 

economic activity.” He also said Dutch disease is “. . . a tidy 

argument that’s appealing . . . But in the view of the Bank of 

Canada, it’s an overly simplistic assessment and in the end it is 

dead wrong.” Dead wrong. “Our economy is much more 

diverse and better integrated than the Dutch disease caricature.” 

Those quotes were by Bank of Canada governor, Mark Carney. 

 

In 1974 the Canadian dollar was worth more than the American 

dollar, and the East — and more correctly — central Canada 

was thriving. Mulcair would sacrifice the West. He would 

sacrifice us on the political altar in order to maybe win an 

election. He views that if he can win Eastern Canada that he can 

win an election. 

 

The problem is, our people on that side of the House are 

supporting him. We, the people of Saskatchewan, need the 

provincial NDP to say no. No to Thomas Mulcair; no to their 

federal masters. The people of Saskatchewan will hold you 

accountable for deserting Saskatchewan. Stand up for 

Saskatchewan. Stand up for the people that elected you. Mr. 

Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition has said we need some 

good, old common sense. Mr. Speaker, good, old common 

sense is what carried us in the last five years and is what will 

carry us into the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we look with pride at how far we have come in 

the past five years. We also look to the future with common 

sense, courage, and faith. May God bless our province. Thank 

you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize Regina 

Douglas Park.  

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Just 

like the member from Saskatoon Southeast to take note that I’ll 

not be speaking out the clock tonight. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to rise in the House today 

and enter debate on the 2012-13 provincial Throne Speech. Mr. 

Speaker, this is the new Saskatchewan, a province full of 

opportunity and a province rich with people. Mr. Speaker, the 

Speech from the Throne sets out a plan: a plan with goals and a 

plan with targets, Mr. Speaker, a plan that lays out for the 

people of Saskatchewan their place and their role in this 

exciting and growing province. This plan is a plan of growth, 

Mr. Speaker, not decline; a plan going forward, not stagnant or 

backward. A realistic plan, Mr. Speaker, not rhetoric, and a plan 

of fiscal responsibility, not reckless debt spending. Mr. 

Speaker, a plan that will continue to position Saskatchewan as a 

leader in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I reflect on my first year as the MLA for 

Regina Douglas Park, I am in awe of the tremendous trust the 

constituents of Douglas Park have placed in me. It might be 

cliché, but I am truly humbled to have been elected. And as my 

colleagues before me have already articulated, I still find it 

inspiring, very inspiring to be able to enter this grand building, 

this edifice, this Legislative Building, a building that celebrates 

this year its 100th birthday. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I want to recognize the constituents of 

Douglas Park, those who this is all about, and I want to again 

thank them for the opportunity to serve them in their 

government. 

 

[20:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank my constituency assistant, Becky 

Mason. Becky’s hung in there with me as I learn the intricacies 

of being the MLA and the responsibilities of cabinet. Mr. 

Speaker, she has done yeowomen service, and my thanks to her, 

as well, Mr. Speaker, to my wife and family who have been so 

supportive and understanding throughout the most amazing 

year. Mr. Speaker, I want to say thanks to my colleagues in 

caucus. As you well know, Mr. Speaker, the work that is 

accomplished here happens only because there is a group, a 

team of like-minded, loyal, and committed individuals who 

look after each other and support each other as we discuss, 

debate, agree, disagree, cajole, and bother. And so on behalf of 

Regina Douglas Park, thank you to my colleagues. 

 

To our leader, to the Premier, and on behalf of Regina’s 

Douglas Park, I want to thank him for his leadership, for 

establishing the atmosphere in this province that is so 

conducive to growth, that atmosphere that has allowed the 

people of Saskatchewan to be the best that they can be and to 

challenge themselves and to grow personally. We have always 

known it was good to be from Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We 

were simply heads bowed, insecure to proclaim it and now we 

are not. We are confident. We do have a vision and, Mr. 

Speaker, we have a plan: a plan for growth complete with stated 

goals, targets to aim at; a plan and a leader that will sustain 

Saskatchewan and establish our province as the global leader it 

needs to be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is serious work, and all those mentioned 

deserve serious recognition for a job well done. Mr. Speaker, 

this plan is all about growth, economic growth on the one hand 

and social growth on the other. One happens because of the 

other. This plan is not about growth for growth’s sake. It is 

because of economic growth that we will become the best place 

in Canada to live, raise a family, and build a future. 



1642 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2012 

Mr. Speaker, I have seven grandchildren. I can think of nothing 

better than to have all of them here in Saskatchewan fulfilling 

their dreams and for me to be a part of their successes. I have 

never been more confident of that possibility than I am today. 

The purpose of growth is to secure a better future, a better 

quality of life for all Saskatchewan people. And in order to 

secure that goal, our plan articulates six core activities that the 

government of Saskatchewan will undertake to foster economic 

growth and address the challenges of that growth. 

 

When the Assembly broke for the summer, MLAs were 

charged to seek input from constituents about their ideas on 

what can be done in Saskatchewan to sustain growth and 

maintain the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

We sent out questionnaires. We talked to constituents, and we 

door knocked. And, Mr. Speaker, we listened. We were told 

that we needed to pay down the debt and balance the budget; 

that we needed to adjust infrastructure issues; that we needed to 

educate, train, and develop a skilled workforce; that we needed 

to engage in work with First Nations people so that they could 

take their place in this great Saskatchewan. And so, Mr. 

Speaker, the job begins. 

 

Mr. Speaker, two weeks ago I participated in several events 

during Education Week. “Learning Success Today . . . Leading 

Success Tomorrow,” what an absolutely perfect theme for our 

growth agenda. 

 

Since 2007 our government has tackled many aspects of life in 

Saskatchewan that were in a state of sorry decline, a legacy of 

affairs resulting from a lack of planning and the absence of 

growth. We can look to every sector and find examples of how 

our plan for growth has affected the lives of all the people. But, 

Mr. Speaker, I can’t think of a better example of how growth in 

Saskatchewan is not just about growth for growth’s sake, but 

how economic growth benefits all of the people than to look at 

our most precious resource, that of our children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was on hand with officials during Education 

Week to turn the sod on the new elementary school in White 

City, a rapidly expanding community just outside Regina. Mr. 

Speaker, in that group were two grade 8 students who spoke 

very eloquently about what this new facility means to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for me it’s always reassuring, as I know it is for 

every member of this Assembly, just how accomplished our 

young people are. Saskatchewan has some of the best and 

brightest minds in our country and, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 

let the country know that. 

 

I saw first-hand the impact the new school had. Mr. Speaker, I 

attended the grand opening of St. Michael elementary school in 

Weyburn. The community of Weyburn combined two schools 

to make one as a result of some very creative planning, but 

most importantly the students now have a performing arts stage. 

Think about that. Talk about the benefits of growth. 

 

We have turned the sod in Saskatoon in the Willowgrove 

community, a new joint-use school. A school built in 

partnership with the city of Saskatoon, the Saskatoon Public 

and Greater Saskatoon Roman Catholic Schools Divisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is more. I was on hand in Swift Current with 

our Premier who turned sod on the largest shared-use facility in 

the province, a unique complex of facilities including a 

hospital, communiplex, aquatic centre, and schools that will 

share a band room and a band instructor, practical and applied 

arts room, and a practical and applied arts instructor. A concept, 

Mr. Speaker, that exemplifies what can happen when people 

collaborate, co-operate, and challenge themselves to think 

outside the box for the benefits of their community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was in the sector when I had to close schools 

because of declining enrolments. That experience will stay with 

me forever. It’s not something that was a lot of fun. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that investing in school infrastructure 

improves the learning environment for our students. We know 

that it improves the working environment for our teachers and 

support workers. And above all, Mr. Speaker, we know that 

investing in school infrastructure provides a safe and nurturing 

environment for our students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since 2007 our government has invested a record 

$500 million in pre-K to 12 education facilities — a record high 

investment in school infrastructure, a record high investment in 

our children, and part of the plan for sustaining growth. Mr. 

Speaker, there is more to do and, Mr. Speaker, more is on the 

way. And as part of our growth plan, we will be asking our 

sector partners to be creative and collaborative in their planning 

so that we can sustain the growth we are experiencing and 

ensure our children’s future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I could I’d like to turn my attention to child 

care. Mr. Speaker, our government understands, and I 

understand all too well, just how important child care is in a 

growing economy. Child care helps to remove barriers that 

prevent parents from fully participating in this growing 

economy. Parents need to know and they need to feel confident 

that when they’re off to work or are furthering their education 

that their children are safe and being looked after in a nurturing 

environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll be blunt. Our government inherited an 

absolute child care disaster — a black hole, an embarrassing 

inventory of child care spaces. Mr. Speaker, when we took 

office in 2007, Saskatchewan had 8,850 child care spaces. Our 

neighbour to the East had 26,375 — three times as many as 

Saskatchewan. And our neighbour to the West had 71,000, 

almost 72,000 — almost nine times as many child care spaces. 

Mr. Speaker, tough to dig oneself out of that hole. But, Mr. 

Speaker, we have set a target, and to date we have increased 

child care spaces by 42 per cent. 

 

We had a promise, Mr. Speaker of 1,500 more spaces by the 

end of this term. We now have 13,240 licensed child care 

spaces operating in or in development in Saskatchewan. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we are not done. We have allocated funding to 

expand the total number of infant spaces by 53 per cent and 

toddler spaces by another 39 per cent. Mr. Speaker, we have 

also provided nearly $10 million for initiatives to improve the 

quality of licensed child care centres and homes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also know the importance of early intervention 

and the link between early learning and success later on in life. 



October 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1643 

And that’s why we have aggressively increased 

pre-kindergarten across the province. You know, Mr. Speaker, 

that student achievement is a priority of this government and 

access to high quality early learning opportunities supports just 

that. To that end, we now have over 4,500 of our province’s 

most vulnerable three and four-year-olds enrolled in this 

valuable program. 

 

I’ve had a chance, Mr. Speaker, to visit these pre-kindergarten 

classrooms, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve seen the impact it has. The 

bright, smiling faces of those children tells me that we are 

headed in the right direction. The dedicated teachers and 

educational assistants in our classrooms are role models and 

have learning at the top of their minds. Engaged students is a 

great thing to see, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as to the middle class, Mr. Speaker, in 2007 a family of 

four with $50,000 total income paid $3,382 in provincial taxes. 

Today that same family pays $744 in provincial taxes, down 

$2,638 or 78 per cent, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we did for the 

middle class. 

 

Today in Saskatchewan more people are working. They’re 

earning a lot more and they’re keeping more of the money they 

earn, thanks to lower taxes. That’s what growth has done for the 

people of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, there is more to do. 

We recognize that. We accept that and, Mr. Speaker, we’ll keep 

our promise. 

 

For me, Mr. Speaker, it’s all about credibility. We make a 

promise; we keep a promise — 100 made, 100 kept. Goals 

established, targets set. Plans made, plans articulated. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I ask, who would you want behind you as you charge 

up the hill? As I’ve stated previously, I am very confident with 

the direction our government is going and I’m very proud to be 

a part of a team of individuals who exude nothing but 

commitment and, above all, integrity. Mr. Speaker, I will be 

supporting the Speech from the Throne and I will not support 

the amendment. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Cypress Hills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to join the debate tonight and to welcome you to the 

Chair. I think this is your first experience presiding over this 

great House, and we wish you well in your new endeavours. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I look back over my time in this 

building, I think it’s probably pretty close to 13 and a half, 

maybe 14 years ago when I delivered my first response to the 

Speech from the Throne. Of course at that time I was a member 

of the opposition, and having looked at the words that I brought 

to that opportunity, I realize that we were fighting a government 

that really had lost track of rural Saskatchewan. And in the 

extreme southwest, the most common phrase I would hear 

among my citizens and my electors was, we’re the forgotten 

southwest. And in the interim years, I hope, Mr. Speaker, that 

not only have I made a difference in terms of whether or not 

they feel forgotten, but our government has actually made a real 

impact in the southwest and they realize that we haven’t 

forgotten them as part of our initiatives to provide better roads, 

to provide better schools, to provide new health care facilities 

and a variety of other initiatives. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s with real pleasure that I speak 

tonight on the Speech from the Throne 2012 because this 

particular document outlines very clearly a whole series of 

goals and objectives. It sets hard targets for where we want to 

be over the next number of years leading up to 2020. And, you 

know, having listened to some of the speeches from members 

of the opposition, I’m glad that I’m a person that can say my 

glass is half full, as opposed to what I’ve heard, a glass being 

half empty. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this province is enjoying economic and 

financial circumstances like it’s never enjoyed in its history. 

And we are on the cusp of something great in this province, and 

I think the people of Saskatchewan recognize that reality. This 

building is an indication of how great our founding fathers 

thought the potential was for the new province of 

Saskatchewan. And at that time, they thought that this building 

would house the entire complement of government employees, 

that no other building would be necessary than what they had 

developed in this particular edifice. And as it turned out, our 

population didn’t grow like had been envisioned; our fortunes 

weren’t realized as had been predicted. We had some very 

difficult circumstances in the ’30s where the economy fell flat 

and people left Saskatchewan in huge numbers. 

 

But nevertheless, in the intervening years from 1940 to the 

early 2000s, it was the longest, slowest, crawling effort to get 

out of the hole and back to some state of stability and growth. 

But more recently, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve seen that 

opportunity explode in the province of Saskatchewan. We’ve 

seen people coming back in great numbers. We’ve seen the 

growth of our economy, and opportunities in industries that 

have lain dormant almost for lack of attention. And I’m going 

to address some of those as I get into my speech. 

 

But before I get into the details of the speech, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the constituency of 

Cypress Hills. This is a part of the formalities, I suppose, at this 

particular time in speech making. But none of us get to this 

point where we’re able to represent our constituents without the 

help of some very important people. And I recognize my wife, 

who is watching tonight I think. She’s taking a break from the 

storm coverage I hope. But nevertheless she’s back in Eastend, 

and I’m grateful for her support over all these years. I really 

am. 

 

But more to the point, not only am I grateful for her support, I 

also want to recognize the sacrifice that our spouses and 

partners make when we enter public life. And the distance that 

we often experience apart is a challenge, and it can have an 

impact on families. And I want to acknowledge that reality for 

everybody that serves in this place. 

 

[20:45] 

 

I also want to acknowledge the dedication of the three people 

who work in my office. I have three constituency assistants who 

work tirelessly to make me look good. In fact when I hired 

them that’s what I told them their job description was. All you 

have to do is make me look good . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

And it takes a lot of work. It’s very hard, and thank you to my 



1644 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2012 

colleague. But I’d like to acknowledge Carol Miller, Beth 

Humphrey, and Glenna Gordon once again for all of their 

undertakings on my behalf. 

 

This was a wonderful summer in Cypress Hills. You can 

assume that just based on the reality of Cypress Hills, a great 

geographical gem in the southwest corner of the province. I’m 

told that there’s flora and fauna in Cypress Hills that you won’t 

find anywhere else in the world outside of Siberia. And 

everybody knows it’s the highest point between Banff and the 

Laurentians and so it’s got a magnetic attraction. Something 

very special about it. But the weather this summer was 

absolutely fabulous. And I remember when weather people 

used to say, it’s not going to rain, so the weather’s good. My 

farming constituents would say, so what’s so good about that? 

Well this year we had the advantage of bountiful rain early in 

the spring. The crops were seeded. They came up in a beautiful, 

even state and we had that warm summer weather that allowed 

crops to flourish. And so for that, we’re very grateful. 

 

But over and above that, I used the great weather this summer 

to travel around my constituency a lot. This was the summer of 

100th anniversaries in a number of communities and there were 

parades and special events and weekend long celebrations, 

homecomings, and all of the great things that go with those 

kind of events in several communities. I think we had parades 

in Eastend, although they weren’t celebrating their 100th 

anniversary this year. But we had parades in Leader and Cabri 

and Lancer and Piapot. I missed the parade in Maple Creek 

because I had another event elsewhere. But it was a summer of 

celebration in Cypress Hills, and it was great. The optimism 

and the enthusiasm for where we are as a province, where the 

agricultural sector was, how the economy is growing in the 

southwest, has all contributed to a real sense of optimism. 

 

And so when I came here 13 years ago and said, we aren’t 

going to take it anymore; we want to be heard — there’s a 

completely different mentality and attitude in the Cypress Hills 

constituency right now because people are enthused and excited 

about where they’re at today and what our prospects are for the 

future. 

 

We’ve seen tremendous growth in some communities. We’ve 

seen a little bit of loss in the few other communities, but overall 

I would say that our school numbers are stable and growing in 

some communities. 

 

We have new people moving in to service the oil industry in the 

Shaunavon area, which is just exploding right now. And we’ve 

seen growth in a number of other communities throughout the 

southwest. That in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that experience, 

that reality in southwest Saskatchewan is indicative of the 

reality for 80 per cent of the small towns around the province of 

Saskatchewan. We’ve had a new city arrive on the scene, the 

city of Warman, and we’d like to congratulate them. 

 

But you know, those 80 per cent of communities, those small 

communities that have been stabilized and have seen growth 

over the last number of years are equally excited about what’s 

happening in their communities, and we need to salute them 

and recognize that new reality for rural Saskatchewan. You 

know, train stations aren’t being closed. Tracks aren’t being 

ripped up. Elevators aren’t being pulled out. Schools aren’t 

closing in big numbers. There’s been quite a reversal in rural 

communities over the last few years and we’re very grateful for 

that reality. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, having talked about the population 

numbers, you know, we’ve got an all-time high in terms of 

employment in the province. We hit a record number of people 

employed in Saskatchewan — 550,000 people, and that’s more 

than 20,000 just in the last year. That’s never been achieved in 

this province before that I know of. I stand to be corrected by 

some detailed historian, but that is a very significant increase in 

people living and working in the province of Saskatchewan, 

and that’s something to celebrate. 

 

I think the opportunities with that kind of employment and 

population growth speak not just well to the reality of our 

current economic situation but the faith of these people in the 

future of this province. And not only are we getting people who 

are coming back from Alberta or maybe coming across from 

other provinces where employment opportunities are less, but 

we are experiencing international migration in big numbers. All 

you have to do is walk down the streets of any one of our 

communities, large or small, and you’ll see the reality of 

international immigration that is impacting and benefiting the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wanted to spend my 10 minutes telling 

you about what we anticipate will happen in the field of 

agriculture. This little booklet, as has been described by our 

friends in the opposition, contains hard goals and objectives. I 

can recall, I think our colleague from Dewdney referenced the 

NDP’s unwillingness to set goals and objectives — especially 

when it came to nursing — and said, well there’s no sense in 

setting a goal because you couldn’t reach it anyway. And of 

course population growth, it was statistically impossible to 

achieve 1 per cent growth. Well we far exceeded that. 

 

But nevertheless, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the goals and 

objectives I’m most pleased by in this particular document, the 

Speech from the Throne, is an indication that Saskatchewan hit 

$10 billion in agricultural exports last year, $10 billion. That’s a 

number that we only imagined a few years ago, and now we’ve 

set a target for increasing that by 50 per cent over the next 

number of years, just a short number of years. That offers an 

opportunity and a challenge to our rural producers like they’ve 

never seen before. And this government is committed to 

reaching those objectives, and we’re going to do whatever we 

can to help accomplish those particular goals. 

 

We have a huge potential for infrastructure development that 

I’m very pleased has been identified in this speech, that we 

have been in a desperate way for infrastructure support. And 

with the creation of SaskBuilds and a commitment of $150 

million to that enterprise, we’re going to see some interesting 

and creative things happen in the field of infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could probably spend the next half hour 

delineating some of the things that I find really important for 

the people of Saskatchewan in this particular document. The 

glass isn’t half empty. The glass is more than half full. It’s full 

and running over. And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to be 

pleased to support the Throne Speech and I will be voting 

against the amendment. Thank you. 



October 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1645 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Does the House agree? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — This House stands 

adjourned until 1:30 tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 20:54.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 1629 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1630 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1632 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1640 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1641 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1643 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1640 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


